making difficulties about the merest trifles. Of, if you feel no love
whatever for me, refuse, by all means. My fate hangs on a word from you.
Speak!--Father,” she said after a pause, “make him listen to reason. Can
he imagine that I am less nice than he is on the point of honor?”

Father Goriot was looking on and listening to this pretty quarrel with a
placid smile, as if he had found some balm for all the sorrows of life.

“Child that you are!” she cried again, catching Eugene’s hand. “You are
just beginning life; you find barriers at the outset that many a man
finds insurmountable; a woman’s hand opens the way and you shrink back!
Why, you are sure to succeed! You will have a brilliant future. Success
is written on that broad forehead of yours, and will you not be able to
repay me my loan of to-day? Did not a lady in olden times arm her knight
with sword and helmet and coat of mail, and find him a charger, so that
he might fight for her in the tournament? Well, then, Eugene, these
things that I offer you are the weapons of this age; every one who
means to be something must have such tools as these. A pretty place your
garret must be if it is like papa’s room! See, dinner is waiting all
this time. Do you want to make me unhappy?--Why don’t you answer?” she
said, shaking his hand. “_Mon Dieu!_ papa, make up his mind for him, or
I will go away and never see him any more.”

“I will make up your mind,” said Goriot, coming down from the clouds.
“Now, my dear M. Eugene, the next thing is to borrow money of the Jews,
isn’t it?”

“There is positively no help for it,” said Eugene.

“All right, I will give you credit,” said the other, drawing out a cheap
leather pocket-book, much the worse for wear. “I have turned Jew myself;
I paid for everything; here are the invoices. You do not owe a penny
for anything here. It did not come to very much--five thousand francs at
most, and I am going to lend you the money myself. I am not a woman--you
can refuse me. You shall give me a receipt on a scrap of paper, and you
can return it some time or other.”

Delphine and Eugene looked at each other in amazement, tears sprang to
their eyes. Rastignac held out his hand and grasped Goriot’s warmly.

“Well, what is all this about? Are you not my children?”

“Oh! my poor father,” said Mme. de Nucingen, “how did you do it?”

“Ah! now you ask me. When I made up my mind to move him nearer to you,
and saw you buying things as if they were wedding presents, I said to
myself, ‘She will never be able to pay for them.’ The attorney says that
those law proceedings will last quite six months before your husband can
be made to disgorge your fortune. Well and good. I sold out my property
in the funds that brought in thirteen hundred and fifty livres a year,
and bought a safe annuity of twelve hundred francs a year for fifteen
thousand francs. Then I paid your tradesmen out of the rest of the
capital. As for me, children, I have a room upstairs for which I pay
fifty crowns a year; I can live like a prince on two francs a day, and
still have something left over. I shall not have to spend anything much
on clothes, for I never wear anything out. This fortnight past I have
been laughing in my sleeve, thinking to myself, ‘How happy they are
going to be!’ and--well, now, are you not happy?”

“Oh papa! papa!” cried Mme. de Nucingen, springing to her father, who
took her on his knee. She covered him with kisses, her fair hair brushed
his cheek, her tears fell on the withered face that had grown so bright
and radiant.

“Dear father, what a father you are! No, there is not another father
like you under the sun. If Eugene loved you before, what must he feel
for you now?”

“Why, children, why Delphinette!” cried Goriot, who had not felt his
daughter’s heart beat against his breast for ten years, “do you want me
to die of joy? My poor heart will break! Come, Monsieur Eugene, we are
quits already.” And the old man strained her to his breast with such
fierce and passionate force that she cried out.

“Oh! you are hurting me!” she said.

“I am hurting you!” He grew pale at the words. The pain expressed in his
face seemed greater than it is given to humanity to know. The agony of
this Christ of paternity can only be compared with the masterpieces of
those princes of the palette who have left for us the record of their
visions of an agony suffered for a whole world by the Saviour of men.
Father Goriot pressed his lips very gently against the waist than his
fingers had grasped too roughly.

“Oh! no, no,” he cried. “I have not hurt you, have I?” and his smile
seemed to repeat the question. “YOU have hurt me with that cry just
now.--The things cost rather more than that,” he said in her ear, with
another gentle kiss, “but I had to deceive him about it, or he would
have been angry.”

Eugene sat dumb with amazement in the presence of this inexhaustible
love; he gazed at Goriot, and his face betrayed the artless admiration
which shapes the beliefs of youth.

“I will be worthy of all this,” he cried.

“Oh! my Eugene, that is nobly said,” and Mme. de Nucingen kissed the law
student on the forehead.

“He gave up Mlle. Taillefer and her millions for you,” said Father
Goriot. “Yes, the little thing was in love with you, and now that her
brother is dead she is as rich as Croesus.”

“Oh! why did you tell her?” cried Rastignac.

“Eugene,” Delphine said in his ear, “I have one regret now this evening.
Ah! how I will love you! and for ever!”

“This is the happiest day I have had since you two were married!” cried
Goriot. “God may send me any suffering, so long as I do not suffer
through you, and I can still say, ‘In this short month of February I had
more happiness than other men have in their whole lives.’--Look at me,
Fifine!” he said to his daughter. “She is very beautiful, is she not?
Tell me, now, have you seen many women with that pretty soft color--that
little dimple of hers? No, I thought not. Ah, well, and but for me this
lovely woman would never have been. And very soon happiness will make
her a thousand times lovelier, happiness through you. I could give up
my place in heaven to you, neighbor, if needs be, and go down to hell
instead. Come, let us have dinner,” he added, scarcely knowing what he
said, “everything is ours.”

“Poor dear father!”

He rose and went over to her, and took her face in his hands, and set a
kiss on the plaits of hair. “If you only knew, little one, how happy you
can make me--how little it takes to make me happy! Will you come and see
me sometimes? I shall be just above, so it is only a step. Promise me,
say that you will!”

“Yes, dear father.”

“Say it again.”

“Yes, I will, my kind father.”

“Hush! hush! I should make you say it a hundred times over if I followed
my own wishes. Let us have dinner.”

The three behaved like children that evening, and Father Goriot’s
spirits were certainly not the least wild. He lay at his daughter’s
feet, kissed them, gazed into her eyes, rubbed his head against her
dress; in short, no young lover could have been more extravagant or more
tender.

“You see!” Delphine said with a look at Eugene, “so long as my father is
with us, he monopolizes me. He will be rather in the way sometimes.”

Eugene had himself already felt certain twinges of jealousy, and could
not blame this speech that contained the germ of all ingratitude.

