call them concubines.”

“Then they all live in a state of concubinage?”

“Naturally.”

“Why, these are abominations that his Excellency ought not to allow.
Since you have the honor of seeing his Excellency, you, who seem to have
philanthropic ideas, ought really to enlighten him as to their immoral
conduct--they are setting a shocking example to the rest of society.”

“But the Government does not hold them up as models of all the virtues,
my dear sir----”

“Of course not, sir; but still----”

“Just let the gentleman say what he has to say, dearie,” said Mlle.
Michonneau.

“You see how it is, mademoiselle,” Gondureau continued. “The Government
may have the strongest reasons for getting this illicit hoard into its
hands; it mounts up to something considerable, by all that we can
make out. Trompe-la-Mort not only holds large sums for his friends the
convicts, but he has other amounts which are paid over to him by the
Society of the Ten Thousand----”

“Ten Thousand Thieves!” cried Pioret in alarm.

“No. The Society of the Ten Thousand is not an association of petty
offenders, but of people who set about their work on a large scale--they
won’t touch a matter unless there are ten thousand francs in it. It is
composed of the most distinguished of the men who are sent straight to
the Assize Courts when they come up for trial. They know the Code
too well to risk their necks when they are nabbed. Collin is their
confidential agent and legal adviser. By means of the large sums of
money at his disposal he has established a sort of detective system of
his own; it is widespread and mysterious in its workings. We have had
spies all about him for a twelvemonth, and yet we could not manage to
fathom his games. His capital and his cleverness are at the service of
vice and crime; this money furnishes the necessary funds for a regular
army of blackguards in his pay who wage incessant war against society.
If we can catch Trompe-la-Mort, and take possession of his funds,
we should strike at the root of this evil. So this job is a kind of
Government affair--a State secret--and likely to redound to the honor
of those who bring the thing to a successful conclusion. You, sir, for
instance, might very well be taken into a Government department again;
they might make you secretary to a Commissary of Police; you could
accept that post without prejudice to your retiring pension.”

Mlle. Michonneau interposed at this point with, “What is there to hinder
Trompe-la-Mort from making off with the money?”

“Oh!” said the detective, “a man is told off to follow him everywhere he
goes, with orders to kill him if he were to rob the convicts. Then it is
not quite as easy to make off with a lot of money as it is to run away
with a young lady of family. Besides, Collin is not the sort of fellow
to play such a trick; he would be disgraced, according to his notions.”

“You are quite right, sir,” said Poiret, “utterly disgraced he would
be.”

“But none of all this explains why you do not come and take him without
more ado,” remarked Mlle. Michonneau.

“Very well, mademoiselle, I will explain--but,” he added in her ear,
“keep your companion quiet, or I shall never have done. The old boy
ought to pay people handsomely for listening to him.--Trompe-la-Mort,
when he came back here,” he went on aloud “slipped into the skin of an
honest man; he turned up disguised as a decent Parisian citizen, and
took up his quarters in an unpretending lodging-house. He is cunning,
that he is! You don’t catch him napping. Then M. Vautrin is a man of
consequence, who transacts a good deal of business.”

“Naturally,” said Poiret to himself.

“And suppose that the Minister were to make a mistake and get hold of
the real Vautrin, he would put every one’s back up among the business
men in Paris, and public opinion would be against him. M. le Prefet de
Police is on slippery ground; he has enemies. They would take advantage
of any mistake. There would be a fine outcry and fuss made by the
Opposition, and he would be sent packing. We must set about this just as
we did about the Coignard affair, the sham Comte de Sainte-Helene; if
he had been the real Comte de Sainte-Helene, we should have been in the
wrong box. We want to be quite sure what we are about.”

“Yes, but what you want is a pretty woman,” said Mlle. Michonneau
briskly.

“Trompe-la-Mort would not let a woman come near him,” said the
detective. “I will tell you a secret--he does not like them.”

“Still, I do not see what I can do, supposing that I did agree to
identify him for two thousand francs.”

“Nothing simpler,” said the stranger. “I will send you a little bottle
containing a dose that will send a rush of blood to the head; it will do
him no harm whatever, but he will fall down as if he were in a fit. The
drug can be put into wine or coffee; either will do equally well. You
carry your man to bed at once, and undress him to see that he is not
dying. As soon as you are alone, you give him a slap on the shoulder,
and _presto!_ the letters will appear.”

“Why, that is just nothing at all,” said Poiret.

“Well, do you agree?” said Gondureau, addressing the old maid.

“But, my dear sir, suppose there are no letters at all,” said Mlle.
Michonneau; “am I to have the two thousand francs all the same?”

“No.”

“What will you give me then?”

“Five hundred francs.”

“It is such a thing to do for so little! It lies on your conscience just
the same, and I must quiet my conscience, sir.”

“I assure you,” said Poiret, “that mademoiselle has a great deal of
conscience, and not only so, she is a very amiable person, and very
intelligent.”

“Well, now,” Mlle. Michonneau went on, “make it three thousand francs if
he is Trompe-la-Mort, and nothing at all if he is an ordinary man.”

“Done!” said Gondureau, “but on the condition that the thing is settled
to-morrow.”

“Not quite so soon, my dear sir; I must consult my confessor first.”

“You are a sly one,” said the detective as he rose to his feet.
“Good-bye till to-morrow, then. And if you should want to see me in a
hurry, go to the Petite Rue Saint-Anne at the bottom of the Cour de la
Sainte-Chapelle. There is one door under the archway. Ask there for M.
Gondureau.”

Bianchon, on his way back from Cuvier’s lecture, overheard the
sufficiently striking nickname of _Trompe-la-Mort_, and caught the
celebrated chief detective’s “_Done!_”

“Why didn’t you close with him? It would be three hundred francs a
year,” said Poiret to Mlle. Michonneau.

“Why didn’t I?” she asked. “Why, it wants thinking over. Suppose that M.
Vautrin is this Trompe-la-Mort, perhaps we might do better for ourselves
with him. Still, on the other hand, if you ask him for money, it would
put him on his guard, and he is just the man to clear out without
paying, and that would be an abominable sell.”

“And suppose you did warn him,” Poiret went on, “didn’t that gentleman
