after her. Eugene, in a fury, followed Maxime and the Countess, and
the three stood once more face to face by the hearth in the large
drawing-room. The law student felt quite sure that the odious Maxime
found him in the way, and even at the risk of displeasing Mme. de
Restaud, he meant to annoy the dandy. It had struck him all at once that
he had seen the young man before at Mme. de Beauseant’s ball; he guessed
the relation between Maxime and Mme. de Restaud; and with the youthful
audacity that commits prodigious blunders or achieves signal success, he
said to himself, “This is my rival; I mean to cut him out.”

Rash resolve! He did not know that M. le Comte Maxime de Trailles would
wait till he was insulted, so as to fire first and kill his man. Eugene
was a sportsman and a good shot, but he had not yet hit the bulls’s eye
twenty times out of twenty-two. The young Count dropped into a low chair
by the hearth, took up the tongs, and made up the fire so violently and
so sulkily, that Anastasie’s fair face suddenly clouded over. She turned
to Eugene, with a cool, questioning glance that asked plainly, “Why do
you not go?” a glance which well-bred people regard as a cue to make
their exit.

Eugene assumed an amiable expression.

“Madame,” he began, “I hastened to call upon you----”

He stopped short. The door opened, and the owner of the tilbury suddenly
appeared. He had left his hat outside, and did not greet the Countess;
he looked meditatively at Rastignac, and held out his hand to Maxime
with a cordial “Good morning,” that astonished Eugene not a little. The
young provincial did not understand the amenities of a triple alliance.

“M. de Restaud,” said the Countess, introducing her husband to the law
student.

Eugene bowed profoundly.

“This gentleman,” she continued, presenting Eugene to her husband,
“is M. de Rastignac; he is related to Mme. la Vicomtesse de Beauseant
through the Marcillacs; I had the pleasure of meeting him at her last
ball.”

_Related to Mme. la Vicomtesse de Beauseant through the Marcillacs!_
These words, on which the countess threw ever so slight an emphasis, by
reason of the pride that the mistress of a house takes in showing
that she only receives people of distinction as visitors in her house,
produced a magical effect. The Count’s stiff manner relaxed at once as
he returned the student’s bow.

“Delighted to have an opportunity of making your acquaintance,” he said.

Maxime de Trailles himself gave Eugene an uneasy glance, and suddenly
dropped his insolent manner. The mighty name had all the power of a
fairy’s wand; those closed compartments in the southern brain flew open
again; Rastignac’s carefully drilled faculties returned. It was as if a
sudden light had pierced the obscurity of this upper world of Paris, and
he began to see, though everything was indistinct as yet. Mme. Vauquer’s
lodging-house and Father Goriot were very far remote from his thoughts.

“I thought that the Marcillacs were extinct,” the Comte de Restaud said,
addressing Eugene.

“Yes, they are extinct,” answered the law student. “My great-uncle, the
Chevalier de Rastignac, married the heiress of the Marcillac family.
They had only one daughter, who married the Marechal de Clarimbault,
Mme. de Beauseant’s grandfather on the mother’s side. We are the younger
branch of the family, and the younger branch is all the poorer because
my great-uncle, the Vice-Admiral, lost all that he had in the King’s
service. The Government during the Revolution refused to admit our
claims when the Compagnie des Indes was liquidated.”

“Was not your great-uncle in command of the _Vengeur_ before ?”

“Yes.”

“Then he would be acquainted with my grandfather, who commanded the
_Warwick_.”

Maxime looked at Mme. de Restaud and shrugged his shoulders, as who
should say, “If he is going to discuss nautical matters with that
fellow, it is all over with us.” Anastasie understood the glance that M.
de Trailles gave her. With a woman’s admirable tact, she began to smile
and said:

“Come with me, Maxime; I have something to say to you. We will leave
you two gentlemen to sail in company on board the _Warwick_ and the
_Vengeur_.”

She rose to her feet and signed to Maxime to follow her, mirth and
mischief in her whole attitude, and the two went in the direction of the
boudoir. The _morganatic_ couple (to use a convenient German expression
which has no exact equivalent) had reached the door, when the Count
interrupted himself in his talk with Eugene.

“Anastasie!” he cried pettishly, “just stay a moment, dear; you know
very well that----”

“I am coming back in a minute,” she interrupted; “I have a commission
for Maxime to execute, and I want to tell him about it.”

She came back almost immediately. She had noticed the inflection in her
husband’s voice, and knew that it would not be safe to retire to the
boudoir; like all women who are compelled to study their husbands’
characters in order to have their own way, and whose business it is
to know exactly how far they can go without endangering a good
understanding, she was very careful to avoid petty collisions in
domestic life. It was Eugene who had brought about this untoward
incident; so the Countess looked at Maxime and indicated the law student
with an air of exasperation. M. de Trailles addressed the Count, the
Countess, and Eugene with the pointed remark, “You are busy, I do not
want to interrupt you; good-day,” and he went.

“Just wait a moment, Maxime!” the Count called after him.

“Come and dine with us,” said the Countess, leaving Eugene and her
husband together once more. She followed Maxime into the little
drawing-room, where they sat together sufficiently long to feel sure
that Rastignac had taken his leave.

The law student heard their laughter, and their voices, and the pauses
in their talk; he grew malicious, exerted his conversational powers for
M. de Restaud, flattered him, and drew him into discussions, to the
end that he might see the Countess again and discover the nature of her
relations with Father Goriot. This Countess with a husband and a lover,
for Maxime clearly was her lover, was a mystery. What was the secret tie
that bound her to the old tradesman? This mystery he meant to penetrate,
hoping by its means to gain a sovereign ascendency over this fair
typical Parisian.

“Anastasie!” the Count called again to his wife.

“Poor Maxime!” she said, addressing the young man. “Come, we must resign
ourselves. This evening----”

“I hope, Nasie,” he said in her ear, “that you will give orders not to
admit that youngster, whose eyes light up like live coals when he looks
at you. He will make you a declaration, and compromise you, and then you
will compel me to kill him.”

“Are you mad, Maxime?” she said. “A young lad of a student is, on the
contrary, a capital lightning-conductor; is not that so? Of course, I
mean to make Restaud furiously jealous of him.”

Maxime burst out laughing, and went out, followed by the Countess, who
stood at the window to watch him into his carriage; he shook his whip,
and made his horse prance. She only returned when the great gate had
been closed after him.

“What do you think, dear?” cried the Count, her husband, “this
gentleman’s family estate is not far from Verteuil, on the Charente; his
great-uncle and my grandfather were acquainted.”

