Next day, Goriot and Rastignac were ready to leave the lodging-house,
and only awaited the good pleasure of a porter to move out of it;
but towards noon there was a sound of wheels in the Rue
Neuve-Sainte-Genevieve, and a carriage stopped before the door of the
Maison Vauquer. Mme. de Nucingen alighted, and asked if her father was
still in the house, and, receiving an affirmative reply from Sylvie, ran
lightly upstairs.

It so happened that Eugene was at home all unknown to his neighbor. At
breakfast time he had asked Goriot to superintend the removal of
his goods, saying that he would meet him in the Rue d’Artois at four
o’clock; but Rastignac’s name had been called early on the list at
the Ecole de Droit, and he had gone back at once to the Rue
Nueve-Sainte-Genevieve. No one had seen him come in, for Goriot had gone
to find a porter, and the mistress of the house was likewise out. Eugene
had thought to pay her himself, for it struck him that if he left this,
Goriot in his zeal would probably pay for him. As it was, Eugene went
up to his room to see that nothing had been forgotten, and blessed his
foresight when he saw the blank bill bearing Vautrin’s signature lying
in the drawer where he had carelessly thrown it on the day when he had
repaid the amount. There was no fire in the grate, so he was about to
tear it into little pieces, when he heard a voice speaking in Goriot’s
room, and the speaker was Delphine! He made no more noise, and stood
still to listen, thinking that she should have no secrets from him;
but after the first few words, the conversation between the father
and daughter was so strange and interesting that it absorbed all his
attention.

“Ah! thank heaven that you thought of asking him to give an account of
the money settled on me before I was utterly ruined, father. Is it safe
to talk?” she added.

“Yes, there is no one in the house,” said her father faintly.

“What is the matter with you?” asked Mme. de Nucingen.

“God forgive you! you have just dealt me a staggering blow, child!” said
the old man. “You cannot know how much I love you, or you would not have
burst in upon me like this, with such news, especially if all is not
lost. Has something so important happened that you must come here about
it? In a few minutes we should have been in the Rue d’Artois.”

“Eh! does one think what one is doing after a catastrophe? It has turned
my head. Your attorney has found out the state of things now, but it
was bound to come out sooner or later. We shall want your long business
experience; and I come to you like a drowning man who catches at a
branch. When M. Derville found that Nucingen was throwing all sorts of
difficulties in his way, he threatened him with proceedings, and told
him plainly that he would soon obtain an order from the President of the
Tribunal. So Nucingen came to my room this morning, and asked if I meant
to ruin us both. I told him that I knew nothing whatever about it, that
I had a fortune, and ought to be put into possession of my fortune, and
that my attorney was acting for me in the matter; I said again that I
knew absolutely nothing about it, and could not possibly go into the
subject with him. Wasn’t that what you told me to tell him?”

“Yes, quite right,” answered Goriot.

“Well, then,” Delphine continued, “he told me all about his affairs.
He had just invested all his capital and mine in business speculations;
they have only just been started, and very large sums of money are
locked up. If I were to compel him to refund my dowry now, he would be
forced to file his petition; but if I will wait a year, he undertakes,
on his honor, to double or treble my fortune, by investing it in
building land, and I shall be mistress at last of the whole of my
property. He was speaking the truth, father dear; he frightened me! He
asked my pardon for his conduct; he has given me my liberty; I am free
to act as I please on condition that I leave him to carry on my business
in my name. To prove his sincerity, he promised that M. Derville might
inspect the accounts as often as I pleased, so that I might be assured
that everything was being conducted properly. In short, he put himself
in my power, bound hand and foot. He wishes the present arrangements
as to the expenses of housekeeping to continue for two more years, and
entreated me not to exceed my allowance. He showed me plainly that it
was all that he could do to keep up appearances; he has broken with his
opera dancer; he will be compelled to practise the most strict economy
(in secret) if he is to bide his time with unshaken credit. I scolded, I
did all I could to drive him to desperation, so as to find out more. He
showed me his ledgers--he broke down and cried at last. I never saw
a man in such a state. He lost his head completely, talked of killing
himself, and raved till I felt quite sorry for him.”

“Do you really believe that silly rubbish?”... cried her father. “It was
all got up for your benefit! I have had to do with Germans in the way
of business, honest and straightforward they are pretty sure to be, but
when with their simplicity and frankness they are sharpers and humbugs
as well, they are the worst rogues of all. Your husband is taking
advantage of you. As soon as pressure is brought to bear on him he shams
dead; he means to be more the master under your name than in his own. He
will take advantage of the position to secure himself against the risks
of business. He is as sharp as he is treacherous; he is a bad lot! No,
no; I am not going to leave my girls behind me without a penny when I go
to Pere-Lachaise. I know something about business still. He has sunk
his money in speculation, he says; very well then, there is something to
show for it--bills, receipts, papers of some sort. Let him produce them,
and come to an arrangement with you. We will choose the most promising
of his speculations, take them over at our own risk, and have the
securities transferred into your name; they shall represent the separate
estate of Delphine Goriot, wife of the Baron de Nucingen. Does that
fellow really take us for idiots? Does he imagine that I could stand
the idea of your being without fortune, without bread, for forty-eight
hours? I would not stand it a day--no, not a night, not a couple of
hours! If there had been any foundation for the idea, I should never get
over it. What! I have worked hard for forty years, carried sacks on
my back, and sweated and pinched and saved all my life for you, my
darlings, for you who made the toil and every burden borne for you seem
light; and now, my fortune, my whole life, is to vanish in smoke! I
should die raving mad if I believed a word of it. By all that’s holiest
in heaven and earth, we will have this cleared up at once; go through
the books, have the whole business looked thoroughly into! I will not
sleep, nor rest, nor eat until I have satisfied myself that all your
fortune is in existence. Your money is settled upon you, God be thanked!
and, luckily, your attorney, Maitre Derville, is an honest man. Good
Lord! you shall have your snug little million, your fifty thousand
francs a year, as long as you live, or I will raise a racket in Paris, I
will so! If the Tribunals put upon us, I will appeal to the Chambers.
If I knew that you were well and comfortably off as far as money is
concerned, that thought would keep me easy in spite of bad health and
troubles. Money? why, it is life! Money does everything. That great dolt
of an Alsatian shall sing to another tune! Look here, Delphine, don’t
give way, don’t make a concession of half a quarter of a farthing to
that fathead, who has ground you down and made you miserable. If he
can’t do without you, we will give him a good cudgeling, and keep him
in order. Great heavens! my brain is on fire; it is as if there were
something redhot inside my head. My Delphine lying on straw! You! my
Fifine! Good gracious! Where are my gloves? Come, let us go at once;
I mean to see everything with my own eyes--books, cash, and
correspondence, the whole business. I shall have no peace until I know
for certain that your fortune is secure.”

“Oh! father dear, be careful how you set about it! If there is the least
hint of vengeance in the business, if you show yourself openly hostile,
it will be all over with me. He knows whom he has to deal with; he
thinks it quite natural that if you put the idea into my head, I should
be uneasy about my money; but I swear to you that he has it in his own
hands, and that he had meant to keep it. He is just the man to abscond
with all the money and leave us in the lurch, the scoundrel! He knows
quite well that I will not dishonor the name I bear by bringing him into
a court of law. His position is strong and weak at the same time. If we
drive him to despair, I am lost.”

“Why, then, the man is a rogue?”

“Well, yes, father,” she said, flinging herself into a chair, “I wanted
to keep it from you to spare your feelings,” and she burst into tears;
“I did not want you to know that you had married me to such a man as
he is. He is just the same in private life--body and soul and
conscience--the same through and through--hideous! I hate him; I despise
him! Yes, after all that that despicable Nucingen has told me, I cannot
respect him any longer. A man capable of mixing himself up in such
