“And when will the rooms be ready?” asked Eugene, looking round. “We
must all leave them this evening, I suppose.”

“Yes, but to-morrow you must come and dine with me,” she answered, with
an eloquent glance. “It is our night at the Italiens.”

“I shall go to the pit,” said her father.

It was midnight. Mme. de Nucingen’s carriage was waiting for her, and
Father Goriot and the student walked back to the Maison Vauquer, talking
of Delphine, and warming over their talk till there grew up a curious
rivalry between the two violent passions. Eugene could not help seeing
that the father’s self-less love was deeper and more steadfast than
his own. For this worshiper Delphine was always pure and fair, and her
father’s adoration drew its fervor from a whole past as well as a future
of love.

They found Mme. Vauquer by the stove, with Sylvie and Christophe to keep
her company; the old landlady, sitting like Marius among the ruins of
Carthage, was waiting for the two lodgers that yet remained to her, and
bemoaning her lot with the sympathetic Sylvie. Tasso’s lamentations as
recorded in Byron’s poem are undoubtedly eloquent, but for sheer force
of truth they fall far short of the widow’s cry from the depths.

“Only three cups of coffee in the morning, Sylvie! Oh dear! to have your
house emptied in this way is enough to break your heart. What is life,
now my lodgers are gone? Nothing at all. Just think of it! It is just as
if all the furniture had been taken out of the house, and your furniture
is your life. How have I offended heaven to draw down all this trouble
upon me? And haricot beans and potatoes laid in for twenty people!
The police in my house too! We shall have to live on potatoes now, and
Christophe will have to go!”

The Savoyard, who was fast asleep, suddenly woke up at this, and said,
“Madame,” questioningly.

“Poor fellow!” said Sylvie, “he is like a dog.”

“In the dead season, too! Nobody is moving now. I would like to know
where the lodgers are to drop down from. It drives me distracted. And
that old witch of a Michonneau goes and takes Poiret with her! What can
she have done to make him so fond of her? He runs about after her like a
little dog.”

“Lord!” said Sylvie, flinging up her head, “those old maids are up to
all sorts of tricks.”

“There’s that poor M. Vautrin that they made out to be a convict,” the
widow went on. “Well, you know that is too much for me, Sylvie; I
can’t bring myself to believe it. Such a lively man as he was, and paid
fifteen francs a month for his coffee of an evening, paid you very penny
on the nail too.”

“And open-handed he was!” said Christophe.

“There is some mistake,” said Sylvie.

“Why, no there isn’t! he said so himself!” said Mme. Vauquer. “And to
think that all these things have happened in my house, and in a quarter
where you never see a cat go by. On my word as an honest woman, it’s
like a dream. For, look here, we saw Louis XVI. meet with his mishap;
we saw the fall of the Emperor; and we saw him come back and fall again;
there was nothing out of the way in all that, but lodging-houses are not
liable to revolutions. You can do without a king, but you must eat all
the same; and so long as a decent woman, a de Conflans born and bred,
will give you all sorts of good things for dinner, nothing short of the
end of the world ought to--but there, it is the end of the world, that
is just what it is!”

“And to think that Mlle. Michonneau who made all this mischief is to
have a thousand crowns a year for it, so I hear,” cried Sylvie.

“Don’t speak of her, she is a wicked woman!” said Mme. Vauquer. “She
is going to the Buneaud, who charges less than cost. But the Buneaud
is capable of anything; she must have done frightful things, robbed
and murdered people in her time. _She_ ought to be put in jail for life
instead of that poor dear----”

Eugene and Goriot rang the door-bell at that moment.

“Ah! here are my two faithful lodgers,” said the widow, sighing.

But the two faithful lodgers, who retained but shadowy recollections
of the misfortunes of their lodging-house, announced to their hostess
without more ado that they were about to remove to the Chaussee d’Antin.

“Sylvie!” cried the widow, “this is the last straw.--Gentlemen, this
will be the death of me! It has quite upset me! There’s a weight on my
chest! I am ten years older for this day! Upon my word, I shall go out
of my senses! And what is to be done with the haricots!--Oh, well, if
I am to be left here all by myself, you shall go to-morrow,
Christophe.--Good-night, gentlemen,” and she went.

“What is the matter now?” Eugene inquired of Sylvie.

“Lord! everybody is going about his business, and that has addled her
wits. There! she is crying upstairs. It will do her good to snivel a
bit. It’s the first time she has cried since I’ve been with her.”

By the morning, Mme. Vauquer, to use her own expression, had “made up
her mind to it.” True, she still wore a doleful countenance, as might
be expected of a woman who had lost all her lodgers, and whose manner
of life had been suddenly revolutionized, but she had all her wits about
her. Her grief was genuine and profound; it was real pain of mind, for
her purse had suffered, the routine of her existence had been broken. A
lover’s farewell glance at his lady-love’s window is not more mournful
than Mme. Vauquer’s survey of the empty places round her table. Eugene
administered comfort, telling the widow that Bianchon, whose term of
residence at the hospital was about to expire, would doubtless take
his (Rastignac’s) place; that the official from the Museum had often
expressed a desire to have Mme. Couture’s rooms; and that in a very few
days her household would be on the old footing.

“God send it may, my dear sir! but bad luck has come to lodge here.
There’ll be a death in the house before ten days are out, you’ll see,”
 and she gave a lugubrious look round the dining-room. “Whose turn will
it be, I wonder?”

“It is just as well that we are moving out,” said Eugene to Father
Goriot in a low voice.

“Madame,” said Sylvie, running in with a scared face, “I have not seen
Mistigris these three days.”

“Ah! well, if my cat is dead, if _he_ has gone and left us, I----”

The poor woman could not finish her sentence; she clasped her hands
and hid her face on the back of her armchair, quite overcome by this
dreadful portent.

By twelve o’clock, when the postman reaches that quarter, Eugene
received a letter. The dainty envelope bore the Beauseant arms on the
seal, and contained an invitation to the Vicomtesse’s great ball, which
had been talked of in Paris for a month. A little note for Eugene was
slipped in with the card.


 “I think, monsieur, that you will undertake with pleasure to
  interpret my sentiments to Mme. de Nucingen, so I am sending the
  card for which you asked me to you. I shall be delighted to make
  the acquaintance of Mme. de Restaud’s sister. Pray introduce that
  charming lady to me, and do not let her monopolize all your
  affection, for you owe me not a little in return for mine.

                                         “VICOMTESSE DE BEAUSEANT.”


“Well,” said Eugene to himself, as he read the note a second time, “Mme.
de Beauseant says pretty plainly that she does not want the Baron de
Nucingen.”
