and feeble.

“How are you, papa?” he said, bending over the pallet-bed. Goriot
turned his dull eyes upon Eugene, looked at him attentively, and did not
recognize him. It was more than the student could bear; the tears came
into his eyes.

“Bianchon, ought we to have the curtains put up in the windows?”

“No, the temperature and the light do not affect him now. It would be a
good thing for him if he felt heat or cold; but we must have a fire in
any case to make tisanes and heat the other things. I will send round a
few sticks; they will last till we can have in some firewood. I burned
all the bark fuel you had left, as well as his, poor man, yesterday and
during the night. The place is so damp that the water stood in drops on
the walls; I could hardly get the room dry. Christophe came in and swept
the floor, but the place is like a stable; I had to burn juniper, the
smell was something horrible.

“_Mon Dieu!_” said Rastignac. “To think of those daughters of his.”

“One moment, if he asks for something to drink, give him this,” said the
house student, pointing to a large white jar. “If he begins to groan,
and the belly feels hot and hard to the touch, you know what to do; get
Christophe to help you. If he should happen to grow much excited, and
begin to talk a good deal and even to ramble in his talk, do not be
alarmed. It would not be a bad symptom. But send Christophe to the
Hospice Cochin. Our doctor, my chum, or I will come and apply moxas. We
had a great consultation this morning while you were asleep. A surgeon,
a pupil of Gall’s came, and our house surgeon, and the head physician
from the Hotel-Dieu. Those gentlemen considered that the symptoms were
very unusual and interesting; the case must be carefully watched, for
it throws a light on several obscure and rather important scientific
problems. One of the authorities says that if there is more pressure of
serum on one or other portion of the brain, it should affect his mental
capacities in such and such directions. So if he should talk, notice
very carefully what kind of ideas his mind seems to run on; whether
memory, or penetration, or the reasoning faculties are exercised;
whether sentiments or practical questions fill his thoughts; whether he
makes forecasts or dwells on the past; in fact; you must be prepared
to give an accurate report of him. It is quite likely that the
extravasation fills the whole brain, in which case he will die in the
imbecile state in which he is lying now. You cannot tell anything about
these mysterious nervous diseases. Suppose the crash came here,” said
Bianchon, touching the back of the head, “very strange things have been
known to happen; the brain sometimes partially recovers, and death is
delayed. Or the congested matter may pass out of the brain altogether
through channels which can only be determined by a post-mortem
examination. There is an old man at the Hospital for Incurables, an
imbecile patient, in his case the effusion has followed the direction of
the spinal cord; he suffers horrid agonies, but he lives.”

“Did they enjoy themselves?” It was Father Goriot who spoke. He had
recognized Eugene.

“Oh! he thinks of nothing but his daughters,” said Bianchon. “Scores
of times last night he said to me, ‘They are dancing now! She has her
dress.’ He called them by their names. He made me cry, the devil take
it, calling with that tone in his voice, for ‘Delphine! my little
Delphine! and Nasie!’ Upon my word,” said the medical student, “it was
enough to make any one burst out crying.”

“Delphine,” said the old man, “she is there, isn’t she? I knew she was
there,” and his eyes sought the door.

“I am going down now to tell Sylvie to get the poultices ready,” said
Bianchon. “They ought to go on at once.”

Rastignac was left alone with the old man. He sat at the foot of the
bed, and gazed at the face before him, so horribly changed that it was
shocking to see.

“Noble natures cannot dwell in this world,” he said; “Mme de Beauseant
has fled from it, and there he lies dying. What place indeed is there in
the shallow petty frivolous thing called society for noble thoughts and
feelings?”

Pictures of yesterday’s ball rose up in his memory, in strange contrast
to the deathbed before him. Bianchon suddenly appeared.

“I say, Eugene, I have just seen our head surgeon at the hospital, and I
ran all the way back here. If the old man shows any signs of reason, if
he begins to talk, cover him with a mustard poultice from the neck to
the base of the spine, and send round for us.”

“Dear Bianchon,” exclaimed Eugene.

“Oh! it is an interesting case from a scientific point of view,” said
the medical student, with all the enthusiasm of a neophyte.

“So!” said Eugene. “Am I really the only one who cares for the poor old
man for his own sake?”

“You would not have said so if you had seen me this morning,” returned
Bianchon, who did not take offence at this speech. “Doctors who have
seen a good deal of practice never see anything but the disease, but, my
dear fellow, I can see the patient still.”

He went. Eugene was left alone with the old man, and with an
apprehension of a crisis that set in, in fact, before very long.

“Ah! dear boy, is that you?” said Father Goriot, recognizing Eugene.

“Do you feel better?” asked the law student, taking his hand.

“Yes. My head felt as if it were being screwed up in a vise, but now it
is set free again. Did you see my girls? They will be here directly; as
soon as they know that I am ill they will hurry here at once; they used
to take such care of me in the Rue de la Jussienne! Great Heavens! if
only my room was fit for them to come into! There has been a young man
here, who has burned up all my bark fuel.”

“I can hear Christophe coming upstairs,” Eugene answered. “He is
bringing up some firewood that that young man has sent you.”

“Good, but how am I to pay for the wood. I have not a penny left, dear
boy. I have given everything, everything. I am a pauper now. Well, at
least the golden gown was grand, was it not? (Ah! what pain this is!)
Thanks, Christophe! God will reward you, my boy; I have nothing left
now.”

Eugene went over to Christophe and whispered in the man’s ear, “I will
pay you well, and Sylvie too, for your trouble.”

“My daughters told you that they were coming, didn’t they, Christophe?
Go again to them, and I will give you five francs. Tell them that I am
not feeling well, that I should like to kiss them both and see them once
again before I die. Tell them that, but don’t alarm them more than you
can help.”

Rastignac signed to Christophe to go, and the man went.

“They will come before long,” the old man went on. “I know them so well.
My tender-hearted Delphine! If I am going to die, she will feel it so
much! And so will Nasie. I do not want to die; they will cry if I die;
and if I die, dear Eugene, I shall not see them any more. It will
be very dreary there where I am going. For a father it is hell to be
without your children; I have served my apprenticeship already since
they married. My heaven was in the Rue de la Jussienne. Eugene, do you
think that if I go to heaven I can come back to earth, and be near them
in spirit? I have heard some such things said. It is true? It is as if
I could see them at this moment as they used to be when we all lived
in the Rue de la Jussienne. They used to come downstairs of a morning.
‘Good-morning, papa!’ they used to say, and I would take them on my
knees; we had all sorts of little games of play together, and they had
such pretty coaxing ways. We always had breakfast together, too, every
morning, and they had dinner with me--in fact, I was a father then. I
enjoyed my children. They did not think for themselves so long as they
lived in the Rue de la Jussienne; they knew nothing of the world; they
loved me with all their hearts. _Mon Dieu!_ why could they not always
