She broke off.

“He was sure to be...”

Again she broke off; the weight of her sorrow was more than she could
bear. In such moments as these everything is agony, and some words are
impossible to utter.

“And so I counted upon you to do me this last piece of service
this evening,” she said. “I should like to give you some pledge of
friendship. I shall often think of you. You have seemed to me to be kind
and noble, fresh-hearted and true, in this world where such qualities
are seldom found. I should like you to think sometimes of me. Stay,” she
said, glancing about her, “there is this box that has held my gloves.
Every time I opened it before going to a ball or to the theatre, I used
to feel that I must be beautiful, because I was so happy; and I never
touched it except to lay some gracious memory in it: there is so much
of my old self in it, of a Madame de Beauseant who now lives no longer.
Will you take it? I will leave directions that it is to be sent to
you in the Rue d’Artois.--Mme. de Nucingen looked very charming this
evening. Eugene, you must love her. Perhaps we may never see each other
again, my friend; but be sure of this, that I shall pray for you who
have been kind to me.--Now, let us go downstairs. People shall not think
that I am weeping. I have all time and eternity before me, and where
I am going I shall be alone, and no one will ask me the reason of my
tears. One last look round first.”

She stood for a moment. Then she covered her eyes with her hands for
an instant, dashed away the tears, bathed her face with cold water, and
took the student’s arm.

“Let us go!” she said.

This suffering, endured with such noble fortitude, shook Eugene with
a more violent emotion than he had felt before. They went back to the
ballroom, and Mme. de Beauseant went through the rooms on Eugene’s
arm--the last delicately gracious act of a gracious woman. In another
moment he saw the sisters, Mme. de Restaud and Mme. de Nucingen. The
Countess shone in all the glory of her magnificent diamonds; every stone
must have scorched like fire, she was never to wear them again. Strong
as love and pride might be in her, she found it difficult to meet her
husband’s eyes. The sight of her was scarcely calculated to lighten
Rastignac’s sad thoughts; through the blaze of those diamonds he seemed
to see the wretched pallet-bed on which Father Goriot was lying. The
Vicomtesse misread his melancholy; she withdrew her hand from his arm.

“Come,” she said, “I must not deprive you of a pleasure.”

Eugene was soon claimed by Delphine. She was delighted by the impression
that she had made, and eager to lay at her lover’s feet the homage
she had received in this new world in which she hoped to live and move
henceforth.

“What do you think of Nasie?” she asked him.

“She has discounted everything, even her own father’s death,” said
Rastignac.

Towards four o’clock in the morning the rooms began to empty. A little
later the music ceased, and the Duchesse de Langeais and Rastignac were
left in the great ballroom. The Vicomtesse, who thought to find the
student there alone, came back there at last. She had taken leave of M.
de Beauseant, who had gone off to bed, saying again as he went, “It is
a great pity, my dear, to shut yourself up at your age! Pray stay among
us.”

Mme. de Beauseant saw the Duchesse, and, in spite of herself, an
exclamation broke from her.

“I saw how it was, Clara,” said Mme. de Langeais. “You are going from
among us, and you will never come back. But you must not go until you
have heard me, until we have understood each other.”

She took her friend’s arm, and they went together into the next room.
There the Duchess looked at her with tears in her eyes; she held her
friend in close embrace and kissed her cheek.

“I could not let you go without a word, dearest; the remorse would have
been too hard to bear. You can count upon me as surely as upon yourself.
You have shown yourself great this evening; I feel that I am worthy
of our friendship, and I mean to prove myself worthy of it. I have not
always been kind; I was in the wrong; forgive me, dearest; I wish I
could unsay anything that may have hurt you; I take back those words.
One common sorrow has brought us together again, for I do not know which
of us is the more miserable. M. de Montriveau was not here to-night;
do you understand what that means?--None of those who saw you to-night,
Clara, will ever forget you. I mean to make one last effort. If I fail,
I shall go into a convent. Clara, where are you going?”

“Into Normandy, to Courcelles. I shall love and pray there until the day
when God shall take me from this world.--M. de Rastignac!” called the
Vicomtesse, in a tremulous voice, remembering that the young man was
waiting there.

The student knelt to kiss his cousin’s hand.

“Good-bye, Antoinette!” said Mme. de Beauseant. “May you be happy.”--She
turned to the student. “You are young,” she said; “you have some beliefs
still left. I have been privileged, like some dying people, to find
sincere and reverent feeling in those about me as I take my leave of
this world.”

It was nearly five o’clock that morning when Rastignac came away. He had
put Mme. de Beauseant into her traveling carriage, and received her last
farewells, spoken amid fast-falling tears; for no greatness is so great
that it can rise above the laws of human affection, or live beyond
the jurisdiction of pain, as certain demagogues would have the people
believe. Eugene returned on foot to the Maison Vauquer through the cold
and darkness. His education was nearly complete.

“There is no hope for poor Father Goriot,” said Bianchon, as Rastignac
came into the room. Eugene looked for a while at the sleeping man, then
he turned to his friend. “Dear fellow, you are content with the modest
career you have marked out for yourself; keep to it. I am in hell, and
I must stay there. Believe everything that you hear said of the world,
nothing is too impossibly bad. No Juvenal could paint the horrors hidden
away under the covering of gems and gold.”

At two o’clock in the afternoon Bianchon came to wake Rastignac, and
begged him to take charge of Goriot, who had grown worse as the day wore
on. The medical student was obliged to go out.

“Poor old man, he has not two days to live, maybe not many hours,” he
said; “but we must do our utmost, all the same, to fight the disease. It
will be a very troublesome case, and we shall want money. We can nurse
him between us, of course, but, for my own part, I have not a penny. I
have turned out his pockets, and rummaged through his drawers--result,
nix. I asked him about it while his mind was clear, and he told me he
had not a farthing of his own. What have you?”

“I have twenty francs left,” said Rastignac; “but I will take them to
the roulette table, I shall be sure to win.”

“And if you lose?”

“Then I shall go to his sons-in-law and his daughters and ask them for
money.”

“And suppose they refuse?” Bianchon retorted. “The most pressing thing
just now is not really money; we must put mustard poultices, as hot as
they can be made, on his feet and legs. If he calls out, there is still
some hope for him. You know how to set about doing it, and besides,
Christophe will help you. I am going round to the dispensary to persuade
them to let us have the things we want on credit. It is a pity that
we could not move him to the hospital; poor fellow, he would be better
there. Well, come along, I leave you in charge; you must stay with him
till I come back.”

The two young men went back to the room where the old man was lying.
Eugene was startled at the change in Goriot’s face, so livid, distorted,
