the Baronne de Nucingen, interred at the expense of two students_.’”

Eugene took part of his friend’s advice, but only after he had gone
in person first to M. and Mme. de Nucingen, and then to M. and Mme. de
Restaud--a fruitless errand. He went no further than the doorstep in
either house. The servants had received strict orders to admit no one.

“Monsieur and Madame can see no visitors. They have just lost their
father, and are in deep grief over their loss.”

Eugene’s Parisian experience told him that it was idle to press the
point. Something clutched strangely at his heart when he saw that it was
impossible to reach Delphine.

“Sell some of your ornaments,” he wrote hastily in the porter’s room,
“so that your father may be decently laid in his last resting-place.”

He sealed the note, and begged the porter to give it to Therese for her
mistress; but the man took it to the Baron de Nucingen, who flung the
note into the fire. Eugene, having finished his errands, returned to the
lodging-house about three o’clock. In spite of himself, the tears came
into his eyes. The coffin, in its scanty covering of black cloth,
was standing there on the pavement before the gate, on two chairs.
A withered sprig of hyssop was soaking in the holy water bowl of
silver-plated copper; there was not a soul in the street, not a
passer-by had stopped to sprinkle the coffin; there was not even an
attempt at a black drapery over the wicket. It was a pauper who lay
there; no one made a pretence of mourning for him; he had neither
friends nor kindred--there was no one to follow him to the grave.

Bianchon’s duties compelled him to be at the hospital, but he had left
a few lines for Eugene, telling his friend about the arrangements he
had made for the burial service. The house student’s note told Rastignac
that a mass was beyond their means, that the ordinary office for the
dead was cheaper, and must suffice, and that he had sent word to
the undertaker by Christophe. Eugene had scarcely finished reading
Bianchon’s scrawl, when he looked up and saw the little circular
gold locket that contained the hair of Goriot’s two daughters in Mme.
Vauquer’s hands.

“How dared you take it?” he asked.

“Good Lord! is that to be buried along with him?” retorted Sylvie. “It
is gold.”

“Of course it shall!” Eugene answered indignantly; “he shall at any
rate take one thing that may represent his daughters into the grave with
him.”

When the hearse came, Eugene had the coffin carried into the house
again, unscrewed the lid, and reverently laid on the old man’s breast
the token that recalled the days when Delphine and Anastasie were
innocent little maidens, before they began “to think for themselves,” as
he had moaned out in his agony.

Rastignac and Christophe and the two undertaker’s men were the only
followers of the funeral. The Church of Saint-Etienne du Mont was only a
little distance from the Rue Nueve-Sainte-Genevieve. When the coffin
had been deposited in a low, dark, little chapel, the law student looked
round in vain for Goriot’s two daughters or their husbands. Christophe
was his only fellow-mourner; Christophe, who appeared to think it was
his duty to attend the funeral of the man who had put him in the way
of such handsome tips. As they waited there in the chapel for the two
priests, the chorister, and the beadle, Rastignac grasped Christophe’s
hand. He could not utter a word just then.

“Yes, Monsieur Eugene,” said Christophe, “he was a good and worthy man,
who never said one word louder than another; he never did any one any
harm, and gave nobody any trouble.”

The two priests, the chorister, and the beadle came, and said and did
as much as could be expected for seventy francs in an age when religion
cannot afford to say prayers for nothing.

The ecclesiatics chanted a psalm, the _Libera nos_ and the _De
profundis_. The whole service lasted about twenty minutes. There was but
one mourning coach, which the priest and chorister agreed to share with
Eugene and Christophe.

“There is no one else to follow us,” remarked the priest, “so we may as
well go quickly, and so save time; it is half-past five.”

But just as the coffin was put in the hearse, two empty carriages, with
the armorial bearings of the Comte de Restaud and the Baron de Nucingen,
arrived and followed in the procession to Pere-Lachaise. At six o’clock
Goriot’s coffin was lowered into the grave, his daughters’ servants
standing round the while. The ecclesiastic recited the short prayer that
the students could afford to pay for, and then both priest and lackeys
disappeared at once. The two grave diggers flung in several spadefuls of
earth, and then stopped and asked Rastignac for their fee. Eugene
felt in vain in his pocket, and was obliged to borrow five francs of
Christophe. This thing, so trifling in itself, gave Rastignac a terrible
pang of distress. It was growing dusk, the damp twilight fretted his
nerves; he gazed down into the grave and the tears he shed were drawn
from him by the sacred emotion, a single-hearted sorrow. When such tears
fall on earth, their radiance reaches heaven. And with that tear that
fell on Father Goriot’s grave, Eugene Rastignac’s youth ended. He folded
his arms and gazed at the clouded sky; and Christophe, after a glance at
him, turned and went--Rastignac was left alone.

He went a few paces further, to the highest point of the cemetery, and
looked out over Paris and the windings of the Seine; the lamps were
beginning to shine on either side of the river. His eyes turned almost
eagerly to the space between the column of the Place Vendome and the
cupola of the Invalides; there lay the shining world that he had wished
to reach. He glanced over that humming hive, seeming to draw a foretaste
of its honey, and said magniloquently:

“Henceforth there is war between us.”

And by way of throwing down the glove to Society, Rastignac went to dine
with Mme. de Nucingen.
