what it means to trample on a father’s corpse? There is a God in heaven
who avenges us fathers whether we will or no.

“Oh! they will come! Come to me, darlings, and give me one more kiss;
one last kiss, the Viaticum for your father, who will pray God for you
in heaven. I will tell Him that you have been good children to your
father, and plead your cause with God! After all, it is not their fault.
I tell you they are innocent, my friend. Tell every one that it is not
their fault, and no one need be distressed on my account. It is all my
own fault, I taught them to trample upon me. I loved to have it so.
It is no one’s affair but mine; man’s justice and God’s justice have
nothing to do in it. God would be unjust if He condemned them for
anything they may have done to me. I did not behave to them properly;
I was stupid enough to resign my rights. I would have humbled myself in
the dust for them. What could you expect? The most beautiful nature, the
noblest soul, would have been spoiled by such indulgence. I am a wretch,
I am justly punished. I, and I only, am to blame for all their sins; I
spoiled them. To-day they are as eager for pleasure as they used to be
for sugar-plums. When they were little girls I indulged them in every
whim. They had a carriage of their own when they were fifteen. They
have never been crossed. I am guilty, and not they--but I sinned through
love.

“My heart would open at the sound of their voices. I can hear them; they
are coming. Yes! yes! they are coming. The law demands that they should
be present at their father’s deathbed; the law is on my side. It would
only cost them the hire of a cab. I would pay that. Write to them, tell
them that I have millions to leave to them! On my word of honor, yes. I
am going to manufacture Italian paste foods at Odessa. I understand the
trade. There are millions to be made in it. Nobody has thought of the
scheme as yet. You see, there will be no waste, no damage in transit,
as there always is with wheat and flour. Hey! hey! and starch too; there
are millions to be made in the starch trade! You will not be telling
a lie. Millions, tell them; and even if they really come because they
covet the money, I would rather let them deceive me; and I shall see
them in any case. I want my children! I gave them life; they are mine,
mine!” and he sat upright. The head thus raised, with its scanty white
hair, seemed to Eugene like a threat; every line that could still speak
spoke of menace.

“There, there, dear father,” said Eugene, “lie down again; I will write
to them at once. As soon as Bianchon comes back I will go for them
myself, if they do not come before.”

“If they do not come?” repeated the old man, sobbing. “Why, I shall
be dead before then; I shall die in a fit of rage, of rage! Anger is
getting the better of me. I can see my whole life at this minute. I have
been cheated! They do not love me--they have never loved me all their
lives! It is all clear to me. They have not come, and they will not
come. The longer they put off their coming, the less they are likely
to give me this joy. I know them. They have never cared to guess my
disappointments, my sorrows, my wants; they never cared to know my life;
they will have no presentiment of my death; they do not even know the
secret of my tenderness for them. Yes, I see it all now. I have laid my
heart open so often, that they take everything I do for them as a matter
of course. They might have asked me for the very eyes out of my head and
I would have bidden them to pluck them out. They think that all fathers
are like theirs. You should always make your value felt. Their own
children will avenge me. Why, for their own sakes they should come to
me! Make them understand that they are laying up retribution for their
own deathbeds. All crimes are summed up in this one.... Go to them; just
tell them that if they stay away it will be parricide! There is enough
laid to their charge already without adding that to the list. Cry aloud
as I do now, ‘Nasie! Delphine! here! Come to your father; the father who
has been so kind to you is lying ill!’--Not a sound; no one comes! Then
am I to die like a dog? This is to be my reward--I am forsaken at the
last. They are wicked, heartless women; curses on them, I loathe them.
I shall rise at night from my grave to curse them again; for, after all,
my friends, have I done wrong? They are behaving very badly to me, eh?
... What am I saying? Did you not tell me just now that Delphine is in
the room? She is more tender-hearted than her sister.... Eugene, you are
my son, you know. You will love her; be a father to her! Her sister is
very unhappy. And there are their fortunes! Ah, God! I am dying, this
anguish is almost more than I can bear! Cut off my head; leave me
nothing but my heart.”

“Christophe!” shouted Eugene, alarmed by the way in which the old man
moaned, and by his cries, “go for M. Bianchon, and send a cab here for
me.--I am going to fetch them, dear father; I will bring them back to
you.”

“Make them come! Compel them to come! Call out the Guard, the military,
anything and everything, but make them come!” He looked at Eugene, and a
last gleam of intelligence shone in his eyes. “Go to the authorities, to
the Public Prosecutor, let them bring them here; come they shall!”

“But you have cursed them.”

“Who said that!” said the old man in dull amazement. “You know quite
well that I love them, I adore them! I shall be quite well again if I
can see them.... Go for them, my good neighbor, my dear boy, you are
kind-hearted; I wish I could repay you for your kindness, but I have
nothing to give you now, save the blessing of a dying man. Ah! if I
could only see Delphine, to tell her to pay my debt to you. If the other
cannot come, bring Delphine to me at any rate. Tell her that unless she
comes, you will not love her any more. She is so fond of you that she
will come to me then. Give me something to drink! There is a fire in my
bowels. Press something against my forehead! If my daughters would lay
their hands there, I think I should get better. ... _Mon Dieu!_ who
will recover their money for them when I am gone?... I will manufacture
vermicelli out in Odessa; I will go to Odessa for their sakes.”

“Here is something to drink,” said Eugene, supporting the dying man on
his left arm, while he held a cup of tisane to Goriot’s lips.

“How you must love your own father and mother!” said the old man, and
grasped the student’s hand in both of his. It was a feeble, trembling
grasp. “I am going to die; I shall die without seeing my daughters; do
you understand? To be always thirsting, and never to drink; that
has been my life for the last ten years.... I have no daughters, my
sons-in-law killed them. No, since their marriages they have been
dead to me. Fathers should petition the Chambers to pass a law
against marriage. If you love your daughters, do not let them marry. A
son-in-law is a rascal who poisons a girl’s mind and contaminates
her whole nature. Let us have no more marriages! It robs us of our
daughters; we are left alone upon our deathbeds, and they are not with
us then. They ought to pass a law for dying fathers. This is awful! It
cries for vengeance! They cannot come, because my sons-in-law forbid
them!... Kill them!... Restaud and the Alsatian, kill them both! They
have murdered me between them!... Death or my daughters!... Ah! it is
too late, I am dying, and they are not here!... Dying without them!...
Nasie! Fifine! Why do you not come to me? Your papa is going----”

“Dear Father Goriot, calm yourself. There, there, lie quietly and rest;
don’t worry yourself, don’t think.”

“I shall not see them. Oh! the agony of it!”

“You _shall_ see them.”

“Really?” cried the old man, still wandering. “Oh! shall I see them; I
shall see them and hear their voices. I shall die happy. Ah! well, after
all, I do not wish to live; I cannot stand this much longer; this
pain that grows worse and worse. But, oh! to see them, to touch their
dresses--ah! nothing but their dresses, that is very little; still, to
feel something that belongs to them. Let me touch their hair with my
fingers... their hair...”

His head fell back on the pillow, as if a sudden heavy blow had struck
him down, but his hands groped feebly over the quilt, as if to find his
daughters’ hair.

“My blessing on them...” he said, making an effort, “my blessing...”

His voice died away. Just at that moment Bianchon came into the room.

“I met Christophe,” he said; “he is gone for your cab.”

Then he looked at the patient, and raised the closed eyelids with his
fingers. The two students saw how dead and lustreless the eyes beneath
