Vautrin, Father Goriot, and Rastignac came downstairs in company, and,
all three of them being late, were obliged to sit together.

Eugene was as distant as possible in his manner to Vautrin during
dinner; but the other, so charming in Mme. Vauquer’s opinion, had never
been so witty. His lively sallies and sparkling talk put the whole
table in good humor. His assurance and coolness filled Eugene with
consternation.

“Why, what has come to you to-day?” inquired Mme. Vauquer. “You are as
merry as a skylark.”

“I am always in spirits after I have made a good bargain.”

“Bargain?” said Eugene.

“Well, yes, bargain. I have just delivered a lot of goods, and I shall
be paid a handsome commission on them--Mlle. Michonneau,” he went on,
seeing that the elderly spinster was scrutinizing him intently, “have
you any objection to some feature in my face, that you are making those
lynx eyes at me? Just let me know, and I will have it changed to oblige
you... We shall not fall out about it, Poiret, I dare say?” he added,
winking at the superannuated clerk.

“Bless my soul, you ought to stand as model for a burlesque Hercules,”
 said the young painter.

“I will, upon my word! if Mlle. Michonneau will consent to sit as the
Venus of Pere-Lachaise,” replied Vautrin.

“There’s Poiret,” suggested Bianchon.

“Oh! Poiret shall pose as Poiret. He can be a garden god!” cried
Vautrin; “his name means a pear----”

“A sleepy pear!” Bianchon put in. “You will come in between the pear and
the cheese.”

“What stuff are you all talking!” said Mme. Vauquer; “you would do
better to treat us to your Bordeaux; I see a glimpse of a bottle there.
It would keep us all in a good humor, and it is good for the stomach
besides.”

“Gentlemen,” said Vautrin, “the Lady President calls us to order. Mme.
Couture and Mlle. Victorine will take your jokes in good part, but
respect the innocence of the aged Goriot. I propose a glass or two of
Bordeauxrama, rendered twice illustrious by the name of Laffite, no
political allusions intended.--Come, you Turk!” he added, looking at
Christophe, who did not offer to stir. “Christophe! Here! What, you
don’t answer to your own name? Bring us some liquor, Turk!”

“Here it is, sir,” said Christophe, holding out the bottle.

Vautrin filled Eugene’s glass and Goriot’s likewise, then he
deliberately poured out a few drops into his own glass, and sipped it
while his two neighbors drank their wine. All at once he made a grimace.

“Corked!” he cried. “The devil! You can drink the rest of this,
Christophe, and go and find another bottle; take from the right-hand
side, you know. There are sixteen of us; take down eight bottles.”

“If you are going to stand treat,” said the painter, “I will pay for a
hundred chestnuts.”

“Oh! oh!”

“Booououh!”

“Prrr!”

These exclamations came from all parts of the table like squibs from a
set firework.

“Come, now, Mama Vauquer, a couple of bottles of champagne,” called
Vautrin.

“_Quien!_ just like you! Why not ask for the whole house at once. A
couple of bottles of champagne; that means twelve francs! I shall never
see the money back again, I know! But if M. Eugene has a mind to pay for
it, I have some currant cordial.”

“That currant cordial of hers is as bad as a black draught,” muttered
the medical student.

“Shut up, Bianchon,” exclaimed Rastignac; “the very mention of black
draught makes me feel----. Yes, champagne, by all means; I will pay for
it,” he added.

“Sylvie,” called Mme. Vauquer, “bring in some biscuits, and the little
cakes.”

“Those little cakes are mouldy graybeards,” said Vautrin. “But trot out
the biscuits.”

The Bordeaux wine circulated; the dinner table became a livelier scene
than ever, and the fun grew fast and furious. Imitations of the cries
of various animals mingled with the loud laughter; the Museum official
having taken it into his head to mimic a cat-call rather like the
caterwauling of the animal in question, eight voices simultaneously
struck up with the following variations:

“Scissors to grind!”

“Chick-weeds for singing bir-ds!”

“Brandy-snaps, ladies!”

“China to mend!”

“Boat ahoy!”

“Sticks to beat your wives or your clothes!”

“Old clo’!”

“Cherries all ripe!”

But the palm was awarded to Bianchon for the nasal accent with which he
rendered the cry of “Umbrellas to me-end!”

A few seconds later, and there was a head-splitting racket in the
room, a storm of tomfoolery, a sort of cats’ concert, with Vautrin
as conductor of the orchestra, the latter keeping an eye the while on
Eugene and Father Goriot. The wine seemed to have gone to their heads
already. They leaned back in their chairs, looking at the general
confusion with an air of gravity, and drank but little; both of them
were absorbed in the thought of what lay before them to do that evening,
and yet neither of them felt able to rise and go. Vautrin gave a side
glance at them from time to time, and watched the change that came over
their faces, choosing the moment when their eyes drooped and seemed
about to close, to bend over Rastignac and to say in his ear:--

“My little lad, you are not quite shrewd enough to outwit Papa Vautrin
yet, and he is too fond of you to let you make a mess of your affairs.
When I have made up my mind to do a thing, no one short of Providence
can put me off. Aha! we were for going round to warn old Taillefer,
telling tales out of school! The oven is hot, the dough is kneaded, the
bread is ready for the oven; to-morrow we will eat it up and whisk away
the crumbs; and we are not going to spoil the baking? ... No, no, it is
all as good as done! We may suffer from a few conscientious scruples,
but they will be digested along with the bread. While we are having our
forty winks, Colonel Count Franchessini will clear the way to Michel
Taillefer’s inheritance with the point of his sword. Victorine will come
in for her brother’s money, a snug fifteen thousand francs a year. I
have made inquiries already, and I know that her late mother’s property
amounts to more than three hundred thousand----”

Eugene heard all this, and could not answer a word; his tongue seemed
to be glued to the roof of his mouth, an irresistible drowsiness was
creeping over him. He still saw the table and the faces round it, but it
