affairs, and of talking about them to me as he did, without the
slightest scruple,--it is because I have read him through and through
that I am afraid of him. He, my husband, frankly proposed to give me my
liberty, and do you know what that means? It means that if things
turn out badly for him, I am to play into his hands, and be his
stalking-horse.”

“But there is law to be had! There is a Place de Greve for sons-in-law
of that sort,” cried her father; “why, I would guillotine him myself if
there was no headsman to do it.”

“No, father, the law cannot touch him. Listen, this is what he says,
stripped of all his circumlocutions--‘Take your choice, you and no one
else can be my accomplice; either everything is lost, you are ruined
and have not a farthing, or you will let me carry this business through
myself.’ Is that plain speaking? He _must_ have my assistance. He is
assured that his wife will deal fairly by him; he knows that I shall
leave his money to him and be content with my own. It is an unholy and
dishonest compact, and he holds out threats of ruin to compel me to
consent to it. He is buying my conscience, and the price is liberty to
be Eugene’s wife in all but name. ‘I connive at your errors, and you
allow me to commit crimes and ruin poor families!’ Is that sufficiently
explicit? Do you know what he means by speculations? He buys up land in
his own name, then he finds men of straw to run up houses upon it. These
men make a bargain with a contractor to build the houses, paying them by
bills at long dates; then in consideration of a small sum they leave
my husband in possession of the houses, and finally slip through the
fingers of the deluded contractors by going into bankruptcy. The name of
the firm of Nucingen has been used to dazzle the poor contractors. I saw
that. I noticed, too, that Nucingen had sent bills for large amounts to
Amsterdam, London, Naples, and Vienna, in order to prove if necessary
that large sums had been paid away by the firm. How could we get
possession of those bills?”

Eugene heard a dull thud on the floor; Father Goriot must have fallen on
his knees.

“Great heavens! what have I done to you? Bound my daughter to this
scoundrel who does as he likes with her!--Oh! my child, my child!
forgive me!” cried the old man.

“Yes, if I am in the depths of despair, perhaps you are to blame,” said
Delphine. “We have so little sense when we marry! What do we know of the
world, of business, or men, or life? Our fathers should think for us!
Father dear, I am not blaming you in the least, forgive me for what
I said. This is all my own fault. Nay, do not cry, papa,” she said,
kissing him.

“Do not cry either, my little Delphine. Look up and let me kiss away
the tears. There! I shall find my wits and unravel this skein of your
husband’s winding.”

“No, let me do that; I shall be able to manage him. He is fond of me,
well and good; I shall use my influence to make him invest my money as
soon as possible in landed property in my own name. Very likely I could
get him to buy back Nucingen in Alsace in my name; that has always been
a pet idea of his. Still, come to-morrow and go through the books, and
look into the business. M. Derville knows little of mercantile matters.
No, not to-morrow though. I do not want to be upset. Mme. de Beauseant’s
ball will be the day after to-morrow, and I must keep quiet, so as to
look my best and freshest, and do honor to my dear Eugene!... Come, let
us see his room.”

But as she spoke a carriage stopped in the Rue Nueve-Sainte-Genevieve,
and the sound of Mme. de Restaud’s voice came from the staircase. “Is my
father in?” she asked of Sylvie.

This accident was luckily timed for Eugene, whose one idea had been to
throw himself down on the bed and pretend to be asleep.

“Oh, father, have you heard about Anastasie?” said Delphine, when she
heard her sister speak. “It looks as though some strange things had
happened in that family.”

“What sort of things?” asked Goriot. “This is like to be the death of
me. My poor head will not stand a double misfortune.”

“Good-morning, father,” said the Countess from the threshold. “Oh!
Delphine, are you here?”

Mme. de Restaud seemed taken aback by her sister’s presence.

“Good-morning, Nasie,” said the Baroness. “What is there so
extraordinary in my being here? _I_ see our father every day.”

“Since when?”

“If you came yourself you would know.”

“Don’t tease, Delphine,” said the Countess fretfully. “I am very
miserable, I am lost. Oh! my poor father, it is hopeless this time!”

“What is it, Nasie?” cried Goriot. “Tell us all about it, child! How
white she is! Quick, do something, Delphine; be kind to her, and I will
love you even better, if that were possible.”

“Poor Nasie!” said Mme. de Nucingen, drawing her sister to a chair. “We
are the only two people in the world whose love is always sufficient to
forgive you everything. Family affection is the surest, you see.”

The Countess inhaled the salts and revived.

“This will kill me!” said their father. “There,” he went on, stirring
the smouldering fire, “come nearer, both of you. It is cold. What is it,
Nasie? Be quick and tell me, this is enough to----”

“Well, then, my husband knows everything,” said the Countess. “Just
imagine it; do you remember, father, that bill of Maxime’s some time
ago? Well, that was not the first. I had paid ever so many before that.
About the beginning of January M. de Trailles seemed very much troubled.
He said nothing to me; but it is so easy to read the hearts of those you
love, a mere trifle is enough; and then you feel things instinctively.
Indeed, he was more tender and affectionate than ever, and I was happier
than I had ever been before. Poor Maxime! in himself he was really
saying good-bye to me, so he has told me since; he meant to blow his
brains out! At last I worried him so, and begged and implored so hard;
for two hours I knelt at his knees and prayed and entreated, and at last
he told me--that he owed a hundred thousand francs. Oh! papa! a hundred
thousand francs! I was beside myself! You had not the money, I knew, I
had eaten up all that you had----”

“No,” said Goriot; “I could not have got it for you unless I had stolen
it. But I would have done that for you, Nasie! I will do it yet.”

The words came from him like a sob, a hoarse sound like the death
rattle of a dying man; it seemed indeed like the agony of death when
the father’s love was powerless. There was a pause, and neither of the
sisters spoke. It must have been selfishness indeed that could hear
unmoved that cry of anguish that, like a pebble thrown over a precipice,
revealed the depths of his despair.

“I found the money, father, by selling what was not mine to sell,” and
the Countess burst into tears.

Delphine was touched; she laid her head on her sister’s shoulder, and
cried too.

“Then it is all true,” she said.

Anastasie bowed her head, Mme. de Nucingen flung her arms about her,
kissed her tenderly, and held her sister to her heart.

“I shall always love you and never judge you, Nasie,” she said.

“My angels,” murmured Goriot faintly. “Oh, why should it be trouble that
draws you together?”

This warm and palpitating affection seemed to give the Countess courage.

“To save Maxime’s life,” she said, “to save all my own happiness, I
