breaking in upon her. “So that is how you are, is it? In a few days’
time I will look into your affairs, and it will be all right, you shall
see.”

“Oh! sir,” said Victorine, with a tearful but eager glance at Vautrin,
who showed no sign of being touched by it, “if you know of any way
of communicating with my father, please be sure and tell him that his
affection and my mother’s honor are more to me than all the money in the
world. If you can induce him to relent a little towards me, I will pray
to God for you. You may be sure of my gratitude----”

“_The same old story everywhere_,” sang Vautrin, with a satirical
intonation. At this juncture, Goriot, Mlle. Michonneau, and Poiret came
downstairs together; possibly the scent of the gravy which Sylvie was
making to serve with the mutton had announced breakfast. The seven
people thus assembled bade each other good-morning, and took their
places at the table; the clock struck ten, and the student’s footstep
was heard outside.

“Ah! here you are, M. Eugene,” said Sylvie; “every one is breakfasting
at home to-day.”

The student exchanged greetings with the lodgers, and sat down beside
Goriot.

“I have just met with a queer adventure,” he said, as he helped himself
abundantly to the mutton, and cut a slice of bread, which Mme. Vauquer’s
eyes gauged as usual.

“An adventure?” queried Poiret.

“Well, and what is there to astonish you in that, old boy?” Vautrin
asked of Poiret. “M. Eugene is cut out for that kind of thing.”

Mlle. Taillefer stole a timid glance at the young student.

“Tell us about your adventure!” demanded M. Vautrin.

“Yesterday evening I went to a ball given by a cousin of mine, the
Vicomtesse de Beauseant. She has a magnificent house; the rooms are hung
with silk--in short, it was a splendid affair, and I was as happy as a
king---”

“Fisher,” put in Vautrin, interrupting.

“What do you mean, sir?” said Eugene sharply.

“I said ‘fisher,’ because kingfishers see a good deal more fun than
kings.”

“Quite true; I would much rather be the little careless bird than a
king,” said Poiret the ditto-ist, “because----”

“In fact”--the law-student cut him short--“I danced with one of the
handsomest women in the room, a charming countess, the most exquisite
creature I have ever seen. There was peach blossom in her hair, and she
had the loveliest bouquet of flowers--real flowers, that scented the
air----but there! it is no use trying to describe a woman glowing with
the dance. You ought to have seen her! Well, and this morning I met this
divine countess about nine o’clock, on foot in the Rue de Gres. Oh! how
my heart beat! I began to think----”

“That she was coming here,” said Vautrin, with a keen look at the
student. “I expect that she was going to call on old Gobseck, a
money-lender. If ever you explore a Parisian woman’s heart, you will
find the money-lender first, and the lover afterwards. Your countess is
called Anastasie de Restaud, and she lives in the Rue du Helder.”

The student stared hard at Vautrin. Father Goriot raised his head at the
words, and gave the two speakers a glance so full of intelligence and
uneasiness that the lodgers beheld him with astonishment.

“Then Christophe was too late, and she must have gone to him!” cried
Goriot, with anguish in his voice.

“It is just as I guessed,” said Vautrin, leaning over to whisper in Mme.
Vauquer’s ear.

Goriot went on with his breakfast, but seemed unconscious of what he was
doing. He had never looked more stupid nor more taken up with his own
thoughts than he did at that moment.

“Who the devil could have told you her name, M. Vautrin?” asked Eugene.

“Aha! there you are!” answered Vautrin. “Old Father Goriot there knew it
quite well! and why should I not know it too?”

“M. Goriot?” the student cried.

“What is it?” asked the old man. “So she was very beautiful, was she,
yesterday night?”

“Who?”

“Mme. de Restaud.”

“Look at the old wretch,” said Mme. Vauquer, speaking to Vautrin; “how
his eyes light up!”

“Then does he really keep her?” said Mlle. Michonneau, in a whisper to
the student.

“Oh! yes, she was tremendously pretty,” Eugene answered. Father Goriot
watched him with eager eyes. “If Mme. de Beauseant had not been there,
my divine countess would have been the queen of the ball; none of the
younger men had eyes for any one else. I was the twelfth on her list,
and she danced every quadrille. The other women were furious. She must
have enjoyed herself, if ever creature did! It is a true saying
that there is no more beautiful sight than a frigate in full sail, a
galloping horse, or a woman dancing.”

“So the wheel turns,” said Vautrin; “yesterday night at a duchess’
ball, this morning in a money-lender’s office, on the lowest rung of the
ladder--just like a Parisienne! If their husbands cannot afford to pay
for their frantic extravagance, they will sell themselves. Or if
they cannot do that, they will tear out their mothers’ hearts to find
something to pay for their splendor. They will turn the world upside
down. Just a Parisienne through and through!”

Father Goriot’s face, which had shone at the student’s words like the
sun on a bright day, clouded over all at once at this cruel speech of
Vautrin’s.

“Well,” said Mme. Vauquer, “but where is your adventure? Did you speak
to her? Did you ask her if she wanted to study law?”

“She did not see me,” said Eugene. “But only think of meeting one of the
prettiest women in Paris in the Rue des Gres at nine o’clock! She could
not have reached home after the ball till two o’clock this morning.
Wasn’t it queer? There is no place like Paris for this sort of
adventures.”

“Pshaw! much funnier things than _that_ happen here!” exclaimed Vautrin.

Mlle. Taillefer had scarcely heeded the talk, she was so absorbed by the
thought of the new attempt that she was about to make. Mme. Couture made
a sign that it was time to go upstairs and dress; the two ladies went
out, and Father Goriot followed their example.

“Well, did you see?” said Mme. Vauquer, addressing Vautrin and the rest
of the circle. “He is ruining himself for those women, that is plain.”

“Nothing will ever make me believe that that beautiful Comtesse de
Restaud is anything to Father Goriot,” cried the student.

“Well, and if you don’t,” broke in Vautrin, “we are not set on
convincing you. You are too young to know Paris thoroughly yet; later on
you will find out that there are what we call men with a passion----”

Mlle. Michonneau gave Vautrin a quick glance at these words. They seemed
