the middle, with a purplish-red marble top, on which there stands, by
way of ornament, the inevitable white china tea-service, covered with
a half-effaced gilt network. The floor is sufficiently uneven, the
wainscot rises to elbow height, and the rest of the wall space is
decorated with a varnished paper, on which the principal scenes from
_Telemaque_ are depicted, the various classical personages being
colored. The subject between the two windows is the banquet given by
Calypso to the son of Ulysses, displayed thereon for the admiration of
the boarders, and has furnished jokes these forty years to the young
men who show themselves superior to their position by making fun of the
dinners to which poverty condemns them. The hearth is always so clean
and neat that it is evident that a fire is only kindled there on great
occasions; the stone chimney-piece is adorned by a couple of vases
filled with faded artificial flowers imprisoned under glass shades, on
either side of a bluish marble clock in the very worst taste.

The first room exhales an odor for which there is no name in the
language, and which should be called the _odeur de pension_. The damp
atmosphere sends a chill through you as you breathe it; it has a stuffy,
musty, and rancid quality; it permeates your clothing; after-dinner
scents seem to be mingled in it with smells from the kitchen and
scullery and the reek of a hospital. It might be possible to describe
it if some one should discover a process by which to distil from the
atmosphere all the nauseating elements with which it is charged by the
catarrhal exhalations of every individual lodger, young or old. Yet,
in spite of these stale horrors, the sitting-room is as charming and
as delicately perfumed as a boudoir, when compared with the adjoining
dining-room.

The paneled walls of that apartment were once painted some color, now
a matter of conjecture, for the surface is incrusted with accumulated
layers of grimy deposit, which cover it with fantastic outlines. A
collection of dim-ribbed glass decanters, metal discs with a satin sheen
on them, and piles of blue-edged earthenware plates of Touraine ware
cover the sticky surfaces of the sideboards that line the room. In a
corner stands a box containing a set of numbered pigeon-holes, in which
the lodgers’ table napkins, more or less soiled and stained with wine,
are kept. Here you see that indestructible furniture never met with
elsewhere, which finds its way into lodging-houses much as the wrecks of
our civilization drift into hospitals for incurables. You expect in such
places as these to find the weather-house whence a Capuchin issues on
wet days; you look to find the execrable engravings which spoil your
appetite, framed every one in a black varnished frame, with a gilt
beading round it; you know the sort of tortoise-shell clock-case, inlaid
with brass; the green stove, the Argand lamps, covered with oil and
dust, have met your eyes before. The oilcloth which covers the long
table is so greasy that a waggish _externe_ will write his name on the
surface, using his thumb-nail as a style. The chairs are broken-down
invalids; the wretched little hempen mats slip away from under your
feet without slipping away for good; and finally, the foot-warmers are
miserable wrecks, hingeless, charred, broken away about the holes. It
would be impossible to give an idea of the old, rotten, shaky, cranky,
worm-eaten, halt, maimed, one-eyed, rickety, and ramshackle condition of
the furniture without an exhaustive description, which would delay
the progress of the story to an extent that impatient people would not
pardon. The red tiles of the floor are full of depressions brought about
by scouring and periodical renewings of color. In short, there is
no illusory grace left to the poverty that reigns here; it is dire,
parsimonious, concentrated, threadbare poverty; as yet it has not sunk
into the mire, it is only splashed by it, and though not in rags as yet,
its clothing is ready to drop to pieces.

This apartment is in all its glory at seven o’clock in the morning,
when Mme. Vauquer’s cat appears, announcing the near approach of his
mistress, and jumps upon the sideboards to sniff at the milk in the
bowls, each protected by a plate, while he purrs his morning greeting to
the world. A moment later the widow shows her face; she is tricked out
in a net cap attached to a false front set on awry, and shuffles into
the room in her slipshod fashion. She is an oldish woman, with a bloated
countenance, and a nose like a parrot’s beak set in the middle of
it; her fat little hands (she is as sleek as a church rat) and her
shapeless, slouching figure are in keeping with the room that reeks of
misfortune, where hope is reduced to speculate for the meanest
stakes. Mme. Vauquer alone can breathe that tainted air without being
disheartened by it. Her face is as fresh as a frosty morning in autumn;
there are wrinkles about the eyes that vary in their expression from
the set smile of a ballet-dancer to the dark, suspicious scowl of
a discounter of bills; in short, she is at once the embodiment and
interpretation of her lodging-house, as surely as her lodging-house
implies the existence of its mistress. You can no more imagine the one
without the other, than you can think of a jail without a turnkey. The
unwholesome corpulence of the little woman is produced by the life she
leads, just as typhus fever is bred in the tainted air of a hospital.
The very knitted woolen petticoat that she wears beneath a skirt made
of an old gown, with the wadding protruding through the rents in the
material, is a sort of epitome of the sitting-room, the dining-room,
and the little garden; it discovers the cook, it foreshadows the
lodgers--the picture of the house is completed by the portrait of its
mistress.

Mme. Vauquer at the age of fifty is like all women who “have seen a deal
of trouble.” She has the glassy eyes and innocent air of a trafficker
in flesh and blood, who will wax virtuously indignant to obtain a higher
price for her services, but who is quite ready to betray a Georges or
a Pichegru, if a Georges or a Pichegru were in hiding and still to be
betrayed, or for any other expedient that may alleviate her lot. Still,
“she is a good woman at bottom,” said the lodgers who believed that
the widow was wholly dependent upon the money that they paid her, and
sympathized when they heard her cough and groan like one of themselves.

What had M. Vauquer been? The lady was never very explicit on this head.
How had she lost her money? “Through trouble,” was her answer. He had
treated her badly, had left her nothing but her eyes to cry over his
cruelty, the house she lived in, and the privilege of pitying nobody,
because, so she was wont to say, she herself had been through every
possible misfortune.

Sylvie, the stout cook, hearing her mistress’ shuffling footsteps,
hastened to serve the lodgers’ breakfasts. Beside those who lived in the
house, Mme. Vauquer took boarders who came for their meals; but these
_externes_ usually only came to dinner, for which they paid thirty
francs a month.

At the time when this story begins, the lodging-house contained seven
inmates. The best rooms in the house were on the first story, Mme.
Vauquer herself occupying the least important, while the rest were let
to a Mme. Couture, the widow of a commissary-general in the service of
the Republic. With her lived Victorine Taillefer, a schoolgirl, to whom
she filled the place of mother. These two ladies paid eighteen hundred
francs a year.

The two sets of rooms on the second floor were respectively occupied by
an old man named Poiret and a man of forty or thereabouts, the wearer
of a black wig and dyed whiskers, who gave out that he was a retired
merchant, and was addressed as M. Vautrin. Two of the four rooms on
the third floor were also let--one to an elderly spinster, a Mlle.
Michonneau, and the other to a retired manufacturer of vermicelli,
Italian paste and starch, who allowed the others to address him as
“Father Goriot.” The remaining rooms were allotted to various birds of
passage, to impecunious students, who like “Father Goriot” and Mlle.
Michonneau, could only muster forty-five francs a month to pay for their
board and lodging. Mme. Vauquer had little desire for lodgers of this
sort; they ate too much bread, and she only took them in default of
better.

At that time one of the rooms was tenanted by a law student, a young man
from the neighborhood of Angouleme, one of a large family who pinched
and starved themselves to spare twelve hundred francs a year for him.
Misfortune had accustomed Eugene de Rastignac, for that was his name, to
work. He belonged to the number of young men who know as children that
their parents’ hopes are centered on them, and deliberately prepare
themselves for a great career, subordinating their studies from the
first to this end, carefully watching the indications of the course of
events, calculating the probable turn that affairs will take, that they
may be the first to profit by them. But for his observant curiosity, and
the skill with which he managed to introduce himself into the salons
of Paris, this story would not have been colored by the tones of
truth which it certainly owes to him, for they are entirely due to his
penetrating sagacity and desire to fathom the mysteries of an appalling
condition of things, which was concealed as carefully by the victim as
