
“Yes,” said Eugene, “Delphine is coming.”

“Oh! that is nothing!” said Bianchon; “he has been talking about his
daughters all the time. He calls for them as a man impaled calls for
water, they say----”

“We may as well give up,” said the physician, addressing the surgeon.
“Nothing more can be done now; the case is hopeless.”

Bianchon and the house surgeon stretched the dying man out again on his
loathsome bed.

“But the sheets ought to be changed,” added the physician. “Even if
there is no hope left, something is due to human nature. I shall come
back again, Bianchon,” he said, turning to the medical student. “If he
complains again, rub some laudanum over the diaphragm.”

He went, and the house surgeon went with him.

“Come, Eugene, pluck up heart, my boy,” said Bianchon, as soon as they
were alone; “we must set about changing his sheets, and put him into a
clean shirt. Go and tell Sylvie to bring some sheets and come and help
us to make the bed.”

Eugene went downstairs, and found Mme. Vauquer engaged in setting the
table; Sylvie was helping her. Eugene had scarcely opened his mouth
before the widow walked up to him with the acidulous sweet smile of a
cautious shopkeeper who is anxious neither to lose money nor to offend a
customer.

“My dear Monsieur Eugene,” she said, when he had spoken, “you know quite
as well as I do that Father Goriot has not a brass farthing left. If you
give out clean linen for a man who is just going to turn up his eyes,
you are not likely to see your sheets again, for one is sure to be
wanted to wrap him in. Now, you owe me a hundred and forty-four francs
as it is, add forty francs for the pair of sheets, and then there are
several little things, besides the candle that Sylvie will give you;
altogether it will all mount up to at least two hundred francs, which is
more than a poor widow like me can afford to lose. Lord! now, Monsieur
Eugene, look at it fairly. I have lost quite enough in these five days
since this run of ill-luck set in for me. I would rather than ten crowns
that the old gentlemen had moved out as you said. It sets the other
lodgers against the house. It would not take much to make me send him to
the workhouse. In short, just put yourself in my place. I have to think
of my establishment first, for I have my own living to make.”

Eugene hurried up to Goriot’s room.

“Bianchon,” he cried, “the money for the watch?”

“There it is on the table, or the three hundred and sixty odd francs
that are left of it. I paid up all the old scores out of it before they
let me have the things. The pawn ticket lies there under the money.”

Rastignac hurried downstairs.

“Here, madame” he said in disgust, “let us square accounts. M. Goriot
will not stay much longer in your house, nor shall I----”

“Yes, he will go out feet foremost, poor old gentleman,” she said,
counting the francs with a half-facetious, half-lugubrious expression.

“Let us get this over,” said Rastignac.

“Sylvie, look out some sheets, and go upstairs to help the gentlemen.”

“You won’t forget Sylvie,” said Mme. Vauquer in Eugene’s ear; “she has
been sitting up these two nights.”

As soon as Eugene’s back was turned, the old woman hurried after her
handmaid.

“Take the sheets that have had the sides turned into the middle, number
. Lord! they are plenty good enough for a corpse,” she said in Sylvie’s
ear.

Eugene, by this time, was part of the way upstairs, and did not overhear
the elderly economist.

“Quick,” said Bianchon, “let us change his shirt. Hold him upright.”

Eugene went to the head of the bed and supported the dying man, while
Bianchon drew off his shirt; and then Goriot made a movement as if he
tried to clutch something to his breast, uttering a low inarticulate
moaning the while, like some dumb animal in mortal pain.

“Ah! yes!” cried Bianchon. “It is the little locket and the chain
made of hair that he wants; we took it off a while ago when we put the
blisters on him. Poor fellow! he must have it again. There it lies on
the chimney-piece.”

Eugene went to the chimney-piece and found the little plait of faded
golden hair--Mme. Goriot’s hair, no doubt. He read the name on the
little round locket, ANASTASIE on the one side, DELPHINE on the other.
It was the symbol of his own heart that the father always wore on his
breast. The curls of hair inside the locket were so fine and soft that
is was plain they had been taken from two childish heads. When the old
man felt the locket once more, his chest heaved with a long deep sigh
of satisfaction, like a groan. It was something terrible to see, for it
seemed as if the last quiver of the nerves were laid bare to their eyes,
the last communication of sense to the mysterious point within whence
our sympathies come and whither they go. A delirious joy lighted up the
distorted face. The terrific and vivid force of the feeling that had
survived the power of thought made such an impression on the students,
that the dying man felt their hot tears falling on him, and gave a
shrill cry of delight.

“Nasie! Fifine!”

“There is life in him yet,” said Bianchon.

“What does he go on living for?” said Sylvie.

“To suffer,” answered Rastignac.

Bianchon made a sign to his friend to follow his example, knelt down and
pressed his arms under the sick man, and Rastignac on the other side did
the same, so that Sylvie, standing in readiness, might draw the sheet
from beneath and replace it with the one that she had brought. Those
tears, no doubt, had misled Goriot; for he gathered up all his remaining
strength in a last effort, stretched out his hands, groped for the
students’ heads, and as his fingers caught convulsively at their hair,
they heard a faint whisper:

“Ah! my angels!”

Two words, two inarticulate murmurs, shaped into words by the soul which
fled forth with them as they left his lips.

“Poor dear!” cried Sylvie, melted by that exclamation; the expression of
the great love raised for the last time to a sublime height by that most
ghastly and involuntary of lies.

The father’s last breath must have been a sigh of joy, and in that sigh
his whole life was summed up; he was cheated even at the last. They laid
Father Goriot upon his wretched bed with reverent hands. Thenceforward
there was no expression on his face, only the painful traces of the
struggle between life and death that was going on in the machine; for
that kind of cerebral consciousness that distinguishes between pleasure
and pain in a human being was extinguished; it was only a question of
time--and the mechanism itself would be destroyed.

“He will lie like this for several hours, and die so quietly at last,
that we shall not know when he goes; there will be no rattle in the
throat. The brain must be completely suffused.”

As he spoke there was a footstep on the staircase, and a young woman
hastened up, panting for breath.

