say that he was closely watched? You would spoil everything.”

“Anyhow,” thought Mlle. Michonneau, “I can’t abide him. He says nothing
but disagreeable things to me.”

“But you can do better than that,” Poiret resumed. “As that gentleman
said (and he seemed to me to be a very good sort of man, besides being
very well got up), it is an act of obedience to the laws to rid society
of a criminal, however virtuous he may be. Once a thief, always a thief.
Suppose he were to take it into his head to murder us all? The deuce! We
should be guilty of manslaughter, and be the first to fall victims into
the bargain!”

Mlle. Michonneau’s musings did not permit her to listen very closely to
the remarks that fell one by one from Poiret’s lips like water dripping
from a leaky tap. When once this elderly babbler began to talk, he would
go on like clockwork unless Mlle. Michonneau stopped him. He started
on some subject or other, and wandered on through parenthesis after
parenthesis, till he came to regions as remote as possible from his
premises without coming to any conclusions by the way.

By the time they reached the Maison Vauquer he had tacked together a
whole string of examples and quotations more or less irrelevant to
the subject in hand, which led him to give a full account of his own
deposition in the case of the Sieur Ragoulleau _versus_ Dame Morin, when
he had been summoned as a witness for the defence.

As they entered the dining-room, Eugene de Rastignac was talking apart
with Mlle. Taillefer; the conversation appeared to be of such thrilling
interest that the pair never noticed the two older lodgers as they
passed through the room. None of this was thrown away on Mlle.
Michonneau.

“I knew how it would end,” remarked that lady, addressing Poiret. “They
have been making eyes at each other in a heartrending way for a week
past.”

“Yes,” he answered. “So she was found guilty.”

“Who?”

“Mme. Morin.”

“I am talking about Mlle. Victorine,” said Mlle, Michonneau, as she
entered Poiret’s room with an absent air, “and you answer, ‘Mme. Morin.’
Who may Mme. Morin be?”

“What can Mlle. Victorine be guilty of?” demanded Poiret.

“Guilty of falling in love with M. Eugene de Rastignac and going further
and further without knowing exactly where she is going, poor innocent!”



That morning Mme. de Nucingen had driven Eugene to despair. In his own
mind he had completely surrendered himself to Vautrin, and deliberately
shut his eyes to the motive for the friendship which that extraordinary
man professed for him, nor would he look to the consequences of such an
alliance. Nothing short of a miracle could extricate him now out of the
gulf into which he had walked an hour ago, when he exchanged vows in the
softest whispers with Mlle. Taillefer. To Victorine it seemed as if she
heard an angel’s voice, that heaven was opening above her; the Maison
Vauquer took strange and wonderful hues, like a stage fairy-palace. She
loved and she was loved; at any rate, she believed that she was loved;
and what woman would not likewise have believed after seeing Rastignac’s
face and listening to the tones of his voice during that hour snatched
under the Argus eyes of the Maison Vauquer? He had trampled on his
conscience; he knew that he was doing wrong, and did it deliberately;
he had said to himself that a woman’s happiness should atone for this
venial sin. The energy of desperation had lent new beauty to his face;
the lurid fire that burned in his heart shone from his eyes. Luckily
for him, the miracle took place. Vautrin came in in high spirits, and
at once read the hearts of these two young creatures whom he had brought
together by the combinations of his infernal genius, but his deep voice
broke in upon their bliss.

     “A charming girl is my Fanchette
      In her simplicity,”

he sang mockingly.

Victorine fled. Her heart was more full than it had ever been, but it
was full of joy, and not of sorrow. Poor child! A pressure of the hand,
the light touch of Rastignac’s hair against her cheek, a word whispered
in her ear so closely that she felt the student’s warm breath on
her, the pressure of a trembling arm about her waist, a kiss upon her
throat--such had been her betrothal. The near neighborhood of the stout
Sylvie, who might invade that glorified room at any moment, only made
these first tokens of love more ardent, more eloquent, more entrancing
than the noblest deeds done for love’s sake in the most famous
romances. This _plain-song_ of love, to use the pretty expression of our
forefathers, seemed almost criminal to the devout young girl who went to
confession every fortnight. In that one hour she had poured out more of
the treasures of her soul than she could give in later days of wealth
and happiness, when her whole self followed the gift.

“The thing is arranged,” Vautrin said to Eugene, who remained. “Our two
dandies have fallen out. Everything was done in proper form. It is
a matter of opinion. Our pigeon has insulted my hawk. They will meet
to-morrow in the redoubt at Clignancourt. By half-past eight in the
morning Mlle. Taillefer, calmly dipping her bread and butter in her
coffee cup, will be sole heiress of her father’s fortune and affections.
A funny way of putting it, isn’t it? Taillefer’s youngster is an expert
swordsman, and quite cocksure about it, but he will be bled; I have just
invented a thrust for his benefit, a way of raising your sword point
and driving it at the forehead. I must show you that thrust; it is an
uncommonly handy thing to know.”

Rastignac heard him in dazed bewilderment; he could not find a word in
reply. Just then Goriot came in, and Bianchon and a few of the boarders
likewise appeared.

“That is just as I intended.” Vautrin said. “You know quite well what
you are about. Good, my little eaglet! You are born to command, you are
strong, you stand firm on your feet, you are game! I respect you.”

He made as though he would take Eugene’s hand, but Rastignac hastily
withdrew it, sank into a chair, and turned ghastly pale; it seemed to
him that there was a sea of blood before his eyes.

“Oh! so we still have a few dubious tatters of the swaddling clothes
of virtue about us!” murmured Vautrin. “But Papa Doliban has three
millions; I know the amount of his fortune. Once have her dowry in your
hands, and your character will be as white as the bride’s white dress,
even in your own eyes.”

Rastignac hesitated no longer. He made up his mind that he would go that
evening to warn the Taillefers, father and son. But just as Vautrin left
him, Father Goriot came up and said in his ear, “You look melancholy, my
boy; I will cheer you up. Come with me.”

The old vermicelli dealer lighted his dip at one of the lamps as he
spoke. Eugene went with him, his curiosity had been aroused.

“Let us go up to your room,” the worthy soul remarked, when he had
asked Sylvie for the law student’s key. “This morning,” he resumed, “you
thought that _she_ did not care about you, did you not? Eh? She would
have nothing to say to you, and you went away out of humor and out of
heart. Stuff and rubbish! She wanted you to go because she was expecting
_me_! Now do you understand? We were to complete the arrangements for
taking some chambers for you, a jewel of a place, you are to move
into it in three days’ time. Don’t split upon me. She wants it to be a
surprise; but I couldn’t bear to keep the secret from you. You will be
in the Rue d’Artois, only a step or two from the Rue Saint-Lazare, and
you are to be housed like a prince! Any one might have thought we were
furnishing the house for a bride. Oh! we have done a lot of things in
the last month, and you knew nothing about it. My attorney has appeared
on the scene, and my daughter is to have thirty-six thousand francs a
year, the interest on her money, and I shall insist on having her eight
hundred thousand invested in sound securities, landed property that
