
“It was you, old cat!” he said. “That sham stroke of apoplexy was your
doing, lynx eyes!... Two words from me, and your throat would be cut in
less than a week, but I forgive you, I am a Christian. You did not sell
me either. But who did?----Aha! you may rummage upstairs,” he shouted,
hearing the police officers opening his cupboards and taking possession
of his effects. “The nest is empty, the birds flew away yesterday, and
you will be none the wiser. My ledgers are here,” he said tapping his
forehead. “Now I know who sold me! It could only be that blackguard
Fil-de-Soie. That is who it was, old catchpoll, eh?” he said, turning to
the chief. “It was timed so neatly to get the banknotes up above there.
There is nothing left for you--spies! As for Fil-de-Soie, he will be
under the daisies in less than a fortnight, even if you were to tell off
the whole force to protect him. How much did you give the Michonnette?”
 he asked of the police officers. “A thousand crowns? Oh you Ninon in
decay, Pompadour in tatters, Venus of the graveyard, I was worth more
than that! If you had given me warning, you should have had six thousand
francs. Ah! you had no suspicion of that, old trafficker in flesh and
blood, or I should have had the preference. Yes, I would have given six
thousand francs to save myself an inconvenient journey and some loss of
money,” he said, as they fastened the handcuffs on his wrists. “These
folks will amuse themselves by dragging out this business till the end
of time to keep me idle. If they were to send me straight to jail, I
should soon be back at my old tricks in spite of the duffers at the Quai
des Orfevres. Down yonder they will all turn themselves inside out to
help their general--their good Trompe-la-Mort--to get clear away. Is
there a single one among you that can say, as I can, that he has ten
thousand brothers ready to do anything for him?” he asked proudly.
“There is some good there,” he said tapping his heart; “I have never
betrayed any one!--Look you here, you slut,” he said to the old maid,
“they are all afraid of me, do you see? but the sight of you turns them
sick. Rake in your gains.”

He was silent for a moment, and looked round at the lodgers’ faces.

“What dolts you are, all of you! Have you never seen a convict before?
A convict of Collin’s stamp, whom you see before you, is a man less
weak-kneed than others; he lifts up his voice against the colossal fraud
of the Social Contract, as Jean Jacques did, whose pupil he is proud
to declare himself. In short, I stand here single-handed against a
Government and a whole subsidized machinery of tribunals and police, and
I am a match for them all.”

“Ye gods!” cried the painter, “what a magnificent sketch one might make
of him!”

“Look here, you gentlemen-in-waiting to his highness the gibbet, master
of ceremonies to the widow” (a nickname full of sombre poetry, given
by prisoners to the guillotine), “be a good fellow, and tell me if it
really was Fil-de-Soie who sold me. I don’t want him to suffer for some
one else, that would not be fair.”

But before the chief had time to answer, the rest of the party returned
from making their investigations upstairs. Everything had been opened
and inventoried. A few words passed between them and the chief, and the
official preliminaries were complete.

“Gentlemen,” said Collin, addressing the lodgers, “they will take me
away directly. You have all made my stay among you very agreeable, and I
shall look back upon it with gratitude. Receive my adieux, and permit me
to send you figs from Provence.”

He advanced a step or two, and then turned to look once more at
Rastignac.

“Good-bye, Eugene,” he said, in a sad and gentle tone, a strange
transition from his previous rough and stern manner. “If you should
be hard up, I have left you a devoted friend,” and, in spite of his
shackles, he managed to assume a posture of defence, called, “One, two!”
 like a fencing-master, and lunged. “If anything goes wrong, apply in
that quarter. Man and money, all at your service.”

The strange speaker’s manner was sufficiently burlesque, so that no
one but Rastignac knew that there was a serious meaning underlying the
pantomime.

As soon as the police, soldiers, and detectives had left the house,
Sylvie, who was rubbing her mistress’ temples with vinegar, looked round
at the bewildered lodgers.

“Well,” said she, “he was a man, he was, for all that.”

Her words broke the spell. Every one had been too much excited, too much
moved by very various feelings to speak. But now the lodgers began
to look at each other, and then all eyes were turned at once on Mlle.
Michonneau, a thin, shriveled, dead-alive, mummy-like figure, crouching
by the stove; her eyes were downcast, as if she feared that the green
eye-shade could not shut out the expression of those faces from her.
This figure and the feeling of repulsion she had so long excited were
explained all at once. A smothered murmur filled the room; it was so
unanimous, that it seemed as if the same feeling of loathing had pitched
all the voices in one key. Mlle. Michonneau heard it, and did not stir.
It was Bianchon who was the first to move; he bent over his neighbor,
and said in a low voice, “If that creature is going to stop here, and
have dinner with us, I shall clear out.”

In the twinkling of an eye it was clear that every one in the room, save
Poiret, was of the medical student’s opinion, so that the latter, strong
in the support of the majority, went up to that elderly person.

“You are more intimate with Mlle. Michonneau than the rest of us,” he
said; “speak to her, make her understand that she must go, and go at
once.”

“At once!” echoed Poiret in amazement.

Then he went across to the crouching figure, and spoke a few words in
her ear.

“I have paid beforehand for the quarter; I have as much right to be here
as any one else,” she said, with a viperous look at the boarders.

“Never mind that! we will club together and pay you the money back,”
 said Rastignac.

“Monsieur is taking Collin’s part” she said, with a questioning,
malignant glance at the law student; “it is not difficult to guess why.”

Eugene started forward at the words, as if he meant to spring upon her
and wring her neck. That glance, and the depths of treachery that it
revealed, had been a hideous enlightenment.

“Let her alone!” cried the boarders.

Rastignac folded his arms and was silent.

“Let us have no more of Mlle. Judas,” said the painter, turning to Mme.
Vauquer. “If you don’t show the Michonneau the door, madame, we shall
all leave your shop, and wherever we go we shall say that there are only
convicts and spies left there. If you do the other thing, we will hold
our tongues about the business; for when all is said and done, it might
happen in the best society until they brand them on the forehead, when
they send them to the hulks. They ought not to let convicts go about
Paris disguised like decent citizens, so as to carry on their antics
like a set of rascally humbugs, which they are.”

At this Mme. Vauquer recovered miraculously. She sat up and folded her
arms; her eyes were wide open now, and there was no sign of tears in
them.

“Why, do you really mean to be the ruin of my establishment, my dear
sir? There is M. Vautrin----Goodness,” she cried, interrupting herself,
“I can’t help calling him by the name he passed himself off by for an
honest man! There is one room to let already, and you want me to
turn out two more lodgers in the middle of the season, when no one is
moving----”

“Gentlemen, let us take our hats and go and dine at Flicoteaux’s in the
Place Sorbonne,” cried Bianchon.

