
“Father Goriot, just help us to get him upstairs.”

Vautrin was taken up among them, carried carefully up the narrow
staircase, and laid upon his bed.

“I can do no good here, so I shall go to see my daughter,” said M.
Goriot.

“Selfish old thing!” cried Mme. Vauquer. “Yes, go; I wish you may die
like a dog.”

“Just go and see if you can find some ether,” said Mlle. Michonneau to
Mme. Vauquer; the former, with some help from Poiret, had unfastened the
sick man’s clothes.

Mme. Vauquer went down to her room, and left Mlle. Michonneau mistress
of the situation.

“Now! just pull down his shirt and turn him over, quick! You might be
of some use in sparing my modesty,” she said to Poiret, “instead of
standing there like a stock.”

Vautrin was turned over; Mlle. Michonneau gave his shoulder a sharp
slap, and the two portentous letters appeared, white against the red.

“There, you have earned your three thousand francs very easily,”
 exclaimed Poiret, supporting Vautrin while Mlle. Michonneau slipped
on the shirt again.--“Ouf! How heavy he is,” he added, as he laid the
convict down.

“Hush! Suppose there is a strong-box here!” said the old maid briskly;
her glances seemed to pierce the walls, she scrutinized every article of
the furniture with greedy eyes. “Could we find some excuse for opening
that desk?”

“It mightn’t be quite right,” responded Poiret to this.

“Where is the harm? It is money stolen from all sorts of people, so
it doesn’t belong to any one now. But we haven’t time, there is the
Vauquer.”

“Here is the ether,” said that lady. “I must say that this is an
eventful day. Lord! that man can’t have had a stroke; he is as white as
curds.”

“White as curds?” echoed Poiret.

“And his pulse is steady,” said the widow, laying her hand on his
breast.

“Steady?” said the astonished Poiret.

“He is all right.”

“Do you think so?” asked Poiret.

“Lord! Yes, he looks as if he were sleeping. Sylvie has gone for a
doctor. I say, Mlle. Michonneau, he is sniffing the ether. Pooh! it is
only a spasm. His pulse is good. He is as strong as a Turk. Just look,
mademoiselle, what a fur tippet he has on his chest; that is the sort
of man to live till he is a hundred. His wig holds on tightly, however.
Dear me! it is glued on, and his own hair is red; that is why he wears
a wig. They say that red-haired people are either the worst or the best.
Is he one of the good ones, I wonder?”

“Good to hang,” said Poiret.

“Round a pretty woman’s neck, you mean,” said Mlle Michonneau, hastily.
“Just go away, M. Poiret. It is a woman’s duty to nurse you men when you
are ill. Besides, for all the good you are doing, you may as well take
yourself off,” she added. “Mme. Vauquer and I will take great care of
dear M. Vautrin.”

Poiret went out on tiptoe without a murmur, like a dog kicked out of the
room by his master.

Rastignac had gone out for the sake of physical exertion; he wanted
to breathe the air, he felt stifled. Yesterday evening he had meant to
prevent the murder arranged for half-past eight that morning. What had
happened? What ought he to do now? He trembled to think that he himself
might be implicated. Vautrin’s coolness still further dismayed him.

“Yet, how if Vautrin should die without saying a word?” Rastignac asked
himself.

He hurried along the alleys of the Luxembourg Gardens as if the hounds
of justice were after him, and he already heard the baying of the pack.

“Well?” shouted Bianchon, “you have seen the _Pilote_?”

The _Pilote_ was a Radical sheet, edited by M. Tissot. It came out
several hours later than the morning papers, and was meant for the
benefit of country subscribers; for it brought the morning news into
provincial districts twenty-four hours sooner than the ordinary local
journals.

“There is a wonderful history in it,” said the house student of the
Hopital Cochin. “Young Taillefer called out Count Franchessini, of
the Old Guard, and the Count put a couple of inches of steel into his
forehead. And here is little Victorine one of the richest heiresses in
Paris! If we had known that, eh? What a game of chance death is! They
say Victorine was sweet on you; was there any truth in it?”

“Shut up, Bianchon; I shall never marry her. I am in love with a
charming woman, and she is in love with me, so----”

“You said that as if you were screwing yourself up to be faithful
to her. I should like to see the woman worth the sacrifice of Master
Taillefer’s money!”

“Are all the devils of hell at my heels?” cried Rastignac.

“What is the matter with you? Are you mad? Give us your hand,” said
Bianchon, “and let me feel your pulse. You are feverish.”

“Just go to Mother Vauquer’s,” said Rastignac; “that scoundrel Vautrin
has dropped down like one dead.”

“Aha!” said Bianchon, leaving Rastignac to his reflections, “you confirm
my suspicions, and now I mean to make sure for myself.”

The law student’s long walk was a memorable one for him. He made in
some sort a survey of his conscience. After a close scrutiny, after
hesitation and self-examination, his honor at any rate came out
scatheless from this sharp and terrible ordeal, like a bar of iron
tested in the English fashion. He remembered Father Goriot’s confidences
of the evening before; he recollected the rooms taken for him in the Rue
d’Artois, so that he might be near Delphine; and then he thought of his
letter, and read it again and kissed it.

“Such a love is my anchor of safety,” he said to himself. “How the old
man’s heart must have been wrung! He says nothing about all that he has
been through; but who could not guess? Well, then, I will be like a
son to him; his life shall be made happy. If she cares for me, she will
often come to spend the day with him. That grand Comtesse de Restaud is
a heartless thing; she would make her father into her hall porter. Dear
Delphine! she is kinder to the old man; she is worthy to be loved. Ah!
this evening I shall be very happy!”

He took out his watch and admired it.

“I have had nothing but success! If two people mean to love each other
for ever, they may help each other, and I can take this. Besides,
I shall succeed, and I will pay her a hundredfold. There is nothing
criminal in this _liaison_; nothing that could cause the most austere
moralist to frown. How many respectable people contract similar unions!
We deceive nobody; it is deception that makes a position humiliating.
If you lie, you lower yourself at once. She and her husband have lived
apart for a long while. Besides, how if I called upon that Alsatian to
