
“Dear angels,” cried Goriot, “it is as if a dark curtain over my eyes
had been raised; your voices have called me back to life. Kiss each
other once more. Well, now, Nasie, that bill will save you, won’t it?”

“I hope so. I say, papa, will you write your name on it?”

“There! how stupid of me to forget that! But I am not feeling at all
well, Nasie, so you must not remember it against me. Send and let me
know as soon as you are out of your strait. No, I will go to you. No,
after all, I will not go; I might meet your husband, and I should kill
him on the spot. And as for signing away your property, I shall have
a word to say about that. Quick, my child, and keep Maxime in order in
future.”

Eugene was too bewildered to speak.

“Poor Anastasie, she always had a violent temper,” said Mme. de
Nucingen, “but she has a good heart.”

“She came back for the endorsement,” said Eugene in Delphine’s ear.

“Do you think so?”

“I only wish I could think otherwise. Do not trust her,” he answered,
raising his eyes as if he confided to heaven the thoughts that he did
not venture to express.

“Yes. She is always acting a part to some extent.”

“How do you feel now, dear Father Goriot?” asked Rastignac.

“I should like to go to sleep,” he replied.

Eugene helped him to bed, and Delphine sat by the bedside, holding his
hand until he fell asleep. Then she went.

“This evening at the Italiens,” she said to Eugene, “and you can let me
know how he is. To-morrow you will leave this place, monsieur. Let us go
into your room.--Oh! how frightful!” she cried on the threshold. “Why,
you are even worse lodged than our father. Eugene, you have behaved
well. I would love you more if that were possible; but, dear boy, if you
are to succeed in life, you must not begin by flinging twelve thousand
francs out of the windows like that. The Comte de Trailles is a
confirmed gambler. My sister shuts her eyes to it. He would have made
the twelve thousand francs in the same way that he wins and loses heaps
of gold.”

A groan from the next room brought them back to Goriot’s bedside; to all
appearances he was asleep, but the two lovers caught the words, “They
are not happy!” Whether he was awake or sleeping, the tone in which they
were spoken went to his daughter’s heart. She stole up to the pallet-bed
on which her father lay, and kissed his forehead. He opened his eyes.

“Ah! Delphine!” he said.

“How are you now?” she asked.

“Quite comfortable. Do not worry about me; I shall get up presently.
Don’t stay with me, children; go, go and be happy.”

Eugene went back with Delphine as far as her door; but he was not easy
about Goriot, and would not stay to dinner, as she proposed. He wanted
to be back at the Maison Vauquer. Father Goriot had left his room,
and was just sitting down to dinner as he came in. Bianchon had placed
himself where he could watch the old man carefully; and when the old
vermicelli maker took up his square of bread and smelled it to find out
the quality of the flour, the medical student, studying him closely, saw
that the action was purely mechanical, and shook his head.

“Just come and sit over here, hospitaller of Cochin,” said Eugene.

Bianchon went the more willingly because his change of place brought him
next to the old lodger.

“What is wrong with him?” asked Rastignac.

“It is all up with him, or I am much mistaken! Something very
extraordinary must have taken place; he looks to me as if he were
in imminent danger of serous apoplexy. The lower part of his face is
composed enough, but the upper part is drawn and distorted. Then there
is that peculiar look about the eyes that indicates an effusion of serum
in the brain; they look as though they were covered with a film of fine
dust, do you notice? I shall know more about it by to-morrow morning.”

“Is there any cure for it?”

“None. It might be possible to stave death off for a time if a way could
be found of setting up a reaction in the lower extremities; but if the
symptoms do not abate by to-morrow evening, it will be all over with
him, poor old fellow! Do you know what has happened to bring this on?
There must have been some violent shock, and his mind has given way.”

“Yes, there was,” said Rastignac, remembering how the two daughters had
struck blow on blow at their father’s heart.

“But Delphine at any rate loves her father,” he said to himself.

That evening at the opera Rastignac chose his words carefully, lest he
should give Mme. de Nucingen needless alarm.

“Do not be anxious about him,” she said, however, as soon as Eugene
began, “our father has really a strong constitution, but this morning
we gave him a shock. Our whole fortunes were in peril, so the thing was
serious, you see. I could not live if your affection did not make me
insensible to troubles that I should once have thought too hard to bear.
At this moment I have but one fear left, but one misery to dread--to
lose the love that has made me feel glad to live. Everything else is as
nothing to me compared with our love; I care for nothing else, for you
are all the world to me. If I feel glad to be rich, it is for your sake.
To my shame be it said, I think of my lover before my father. Do you ask
why? I cannot tell you, but all my life is in you. My father gave me a
heart, but you have taught it to beat. The whole world may condemn me;
what does it matter if I stand acquitted in your eyes, for you have
no right to think ill of me for the faults which a tyrannous love has
forced me to commit for you! Do you think me an unnatural daughter? Oh!
no, no one could help loving such a dear kind father as ours. But how
could I hide the inevitable consequences of our miserable marriages from
him? Why did he allow us to marry when we did? Was it not his duty to
think for us and foresee for us? To-day I know he suffers as much as we
do, but how can it be helped? And as for comforting him, we could not
comfort him in the least. Our resignation would give him more pain and
hurt him far more than complaints and upbraidings. There are times in
life when everything turns to bitterness.”

Eugene was silent, the artless and sincere outpouring made an impression
on him.

Parisian women are often false, intoxicated with vanity, selfish and
self-absorbed, frivolous and shallow; yet of all women, when they love,
they sacrifice their personal feelings to their passion; they rise but
so much the higher for all the pettiness overcome in their nature, and
become sublime. Then Eugene was struck by the profound discernment and
insight displayed by this woman in judging of natural affection, when a
privileged affection had separated and set her at a distance apart. Mme.
de Nucingen was piqued by the silence,

“What are you thinking about?” she asked.

“I am thinking about what you said just now. Hitherto I have always felt
sure that I cared far more for you than you did for me.”

She smiled, and would not give way to the happiness she felt, lest their
talk should exceed the conventional limits of propriety. She had never
heard the vibrating tones of a sincere and youthful love; a few more
words, and she feared for her self-control.

“Eugene,” she said, changing the conversation, “I wonder whether you
know what has been happening? All Paris will go to Mme. de Beauseant’s
to-morrow. The Rochefides and the Marquis d’Ajuda have agreed to keep
