won’t run away.”

Eugene was dumb. He folded his arms and paced up and down in his
cheerless, untidy room. Father Goriot waited till the student’s back was
turned, and seized the opportunity to go to the chimney-piece and set
upon it a little red morocco case with Rastignac’s arms stamped in gold
on the leather.

“My dear boy,” said the kind soul, “I have been up to the eyes in this
business. You see, there was plenty of selfishness on my part; I have an
interested motive in helping you to change lodgings. You will not refuse
me if I ask you something; will you, eh?”

“What is it?”

“There is a room on the fifth floor, up above your rooms, that is to let
along with them; that is where I am going to live, isn’t that so? I am
getting old: I am too far from my girls. I shall not be in the way, but
I shall be there, that is all. You will come and talk to me about her
every evening. It will not put you about, will it? I shall have gone to
bed before you come in, but I shall hear you come up, and I shall say
to myself, ‘He has just seen my little Delphine. He has been to a dance
with her, and she is happy, thanks to him.’ If I were ill, it would do
my heart good to hear you moving about below, to know when you leave
the house and when you come in. It is only a step to the Champs-Elysees,
where they go every day, so I shall be sure of seeing them, whereas now
I am sometimes too late. And then--perhaps she may come to see you! I
shall hear her, I shall see her in her soft quilted pelisse tripping
about as daintily as a kitten. In this one month she has become my
little girl again, so light-hearted and gay. Her soul is recovering, and
her happiness is owing to you! Oh! I would do impossibilities for you.
Only just now she said to me, ‘I am very happy, papa!’ When they say
‘father’ stiffly, it sends a chill through me; but when they call me
‘papa,’ it brings all the old memories back. I feel most their father
then; I even believe that they belong to me, and to no one else.”

The good man wiped his eyes, he was crying.

“It is a long while since I have heard them talk like that, a long, long
time since she took my arm as she did to-day. Yes, indeed, it must be
quite ten years since I walked side by side with one of my girls. How
pleasant it was to keep step with her, to feel the touch of her gown,
the warmth of her arm! Well, I took Delphine everywhere this morning; I
went shopping with her, and I brought her home again. Oh! you must let
me live near you. You may want some one to do you a service some of
these days, and I shall be on the spot to do it. Oh! if only that great
dolt of an Alsatian would die, if his gout would have the sense to
attack his stomach, how happy my poor child would be! You would be my
son-in-law; you would be her husband in the eyes of the world. Bah! she
has known no happiness, that excuses everything. Our Father in heaven is
surely on the side of fathers on earth who love their children. How fond
of you she is!” he said, raising his head after a pause. “All the time
we were going about together she chatted away about you. ‘He is so
nice-looking, papa; isn’t he? He is kind-hearted! Does he talk to you
about me?’ Pshaw! she said enough about you to fill whole volumes;
between the Rue d’Artois and the Passage des Panoramas she poured her
heart out into mine. I did not feel old once during that delightful
morning; I felt as light as a feather. I told her how you had given the
banknote to me; it moved my darling to tears. But what can this be on
your chimney-piece?” said Father Goriot at last. Rastignac had showed no
sign, and he was dying of impatience.

Eugene stared at his neighbor in dumb and dazed bewilderment. He thought
of Vautrin, of that duel to be fought to-morrow morning, and of this
realization of his dearest hopes, and the violent contrast between the
two sets of ideas gave him all the sensations of nightmare. He went to
the chimney-piece, saw the little square case, opened it, and found
a watch of Breguet’s make wrapped in paper, on which these words were
written:


  “I want you to think of me every hour, _because_...

                                          “DELPHINE.”


That last word doubtless contained an allusion to some scene that
had taken place between them. Eugene felt touched. Inside the gold
watch-case his arms had been wrought in enamel. The chain, the key, the
workmanship and design of the trinket were all such as he had imagined,
for he had long coveted such a possession. Father Goriot was radiant. Of
course he had promised to tell his daughter every little detail of the
scene and of the effect produced upon Eugene by her present; he shared
in the pleasure and excitement of the young people, and seemed to be not
the least happy of the three. He loved Rastignac already for his own as
well as for his daughter’s sake.

“You must go and see her; she is expecting you this evening. That great
lout of an Alsatian is going to have supper with his opera-dancer. Aha!
he looked very foolish when my attorney let him know where he was. He
says he idolizes my daughter, does he? He had better let her alone, or I
will kill him. To think that my Delphine is his”--he heaved a sigh--“it
is enough to make me murder him, but it would not be manslaughter to
kill that animal; he is a pig with a calf’s brains.--You will take me
with you, will you not?”

“Yes, dear Father Goriot; you know very well how fond I am of you----”

“Yes, I do know very well. You are not ashamed of me, are you? Not you!
Let me embrace you,” and he flung his arms around the student’s neck.

“You will make her very happy; promise me that you will! You will go to
her this evening, will you not?”

“Oh! yes. I must go out; I have some urgent business on hand.”

“Can I be of any use?”

“My word, yes! Will you go to old Taillefer’s while I go to Mme. de
Nucingen? Ask him to make an appointment with me some time this evening;
it is a matter of life and death.”

“Really, young man!” cried Father Goriot, with a change of countenance;
“are you really paying court to his daughter, as those simpletons were
saying down below?... _Tonnerre de dieu!_ you have no notion what a tap
_a la Goriot_ is like, and if you are playing a double game, I shall put
a stop to it by one blow of the fist... Oh! the thing is impossible!”

“I swear to you that I love but one woman in the world,” said the
student. “I only knew it a moment ago.”

“Oh! what happiness!” cried Goriot.

“But young Taillefer has been called out; the duel comes off to-morrow
morning, and I have heard it said that he may lose his life in it.”

“But what business is it of yours?” said Goriot.

“Why, I ought to tell him so, that he may prevent his son from putting
in an appearance----”

Just at that moment Vautrin’s voice broke in upon them; he was standing
at the threshold of his door and singing:

     “Oh! Richard, oh my king!
      All the world abandons thee!
      Broum! broum! broum! broum! broum!

      The same old story everywhere,
      A roving heart and a... tra la la.”

“Gentlemen!” shouted Christophe, “the soup is ready, and every one is
waiting for you.”

“Here,” Vautrin called down to him, “come and take a bottle of my
Bordeaux.”

“Do you think your watch is pretty?” asked Goriot. “She has good taste,
hasn’t she? Eh?”

