had grown.

“He will not get over this, I am sure,” said Bianchon. He felt the old
man’s pulse, and laid a hand over his heart.

“The machinery works still; more is the pity, in his state it would be
better for him to die.”

“Ah! my word, it would!”

“What is the matter with you? You are as pale as death.”

“Dear fellow, the moans and cries that I have just heard.... There is
a God! Ah! yes, yes, there is a God, and He has made a better world for
us, or this world of ours would be a nightmare. I could have cried like
a child; but this is too tragical, and I am sick at heart.

“We want a lot of things, you know; and where is the money to come
from?”

Rastignac took out his watch.

“There, be quick and pawn it. I do not want to stop on the way to the
Rue du Helder; there is not a moment to lose, I am afraid, and I must
wait here till Christophe comes back. I have not a farthing; I shall
have to pay the cabman when I get home again.”

Rastignac rushed down the stairs, and drove off to the Rue du Helder.
The awful scene through which he had just passed quickened his
imagination, and he grew fiercely indignant. He reached Mme. de
Restaud’s house only to be told by the servant that his mistress could
see no one.

“But I have brought a message from her father, who is dying,” Rastignac
told the man.

“The Count has given us the strictest orders, sir----”

“If it is M. de Restaud who has given the orders, tell him that his
father-in-law is dying, and that I am here, and must speak with him at
once.”

The man went out.

Eugene waited for a long while. “Perhaps her father is dying at this
moment,” he thought.

Then the man came back, and Eugene followed him to the little
drawing-room. M. de Restaud was standing before the fireless grate, and
did not ask his visitor to seat himself.

“Monsieur le Comte,” said Rastignac, “M. Goriot, your father-in-law, is
lying at the point of death in a squalid den in the Latin Quarter.
He has not a penny to pay for firewood; he is expected to die at any
moment, and keeps calling for his daughter----”

“I feel very little affection for M. Goriot, sir, as you probably are
aware,” the Count answered coolly. “His character has been compromised
in connection with Mme. de Restaud; he is the author of the misfortunes
that have embittered my life and troubled my peace of mind. It is a
matter of perfect indifference to me if he lives or dies. Now you know
my feelings with regard to him. Public opinion may blame me, but I
care nothing for public opinion. Just now I have other and much
more important matters to think about than the things that fools and
chatterers may say about me. As for Mme. de Restaud, she cannot leave
the house; she is in no condition to do so. And, besides, I shall not
allow her to leave it. Tell her father that as soon as she has done her
duty by her husband and child she shall go to see him. If she has any
love for her father, she can be free to go to him, if she chooses, in a
few seconds; it lies entirely with her----”

“Monsieur le Comte, it is no business of mine to criticise your conduct;
you can do as you please with your wife, but may I count upon your
keeping your word with me? Well, then, promise me to tell her that her
father has not twenty-four hours to live; that he looks in vain for her,
and has cursed her already as he lies on his deathbed,--that is all I
ask.”

“You can tell her yourself,” the Count answered, impressed by the thrill
of indignation in Eugene’s voice.

The Count led the way to the room where his wife usually sat. She was
drowned in tears, and lay crouching in the depths of an armchair, as
if she were tired of life and longed to die. It was piteous to see her.
Before venturing to look at Rastignac, she glanced at her husband in
evident and abject terror that spoke of complete prostration of body
and mind; she seemed crushed by a tyranny both mental and physical. The
Count jerked his head towards her; she construed this as a permission to
speak.

“I heard all that you said, monsieur. Tell my father that if he knew all
he would forgive me.... I did not think there was such torture in the
world as this; it is more than I can endure, monsieur!--But I will not
give way as long as I live,” she said, turning to her husband. “I am a
mother.--Tell my father that I have never sinned against him in spite of
appearances!” she cried aloud in her despair.

Eugene bowed to the husband and wife; he guessed the meaning of the
scene, and that this was a terrible crisis in the Countess’ life. M. de
Restaud’s manner had told him that his errand was a fruitless one; he
saw that Anastasie had no longer any liberty of action. He came away
mazed and bewildered, and hurried to Mme. de Nucingen. Delphine was in
bed.

“Poor dear Eugene, I am ill,” she said. “I caught cold after the ball,
and I am afraid of pneumonia. I am waiting for the doctor to come.”

“If you were at death’s door,” Eugene broke in, “you must be carried
somehow to your father. He is calling for you. If you could hear the
faintest of those cries, you would not feel ill any longer.”

“Eugene, I dare say my father is not quite so ill as you say; but I
cannot bear to do anything that you do not approve, so I will do just
as you wish. As for _him_, he would die of grief I know if I went out to
see him and brought on a dangerous illness. Well, I will go as soon as
I have seen the doctor.--Ah!” she cried out, “you are not wearing your
watch, how is that?”

Eugene reddened.

“Eugene, Eugene! if you have sold it already or lost it.... Oh! it would
be very wrong of you!”

The student bent over Delphine and said in her ear, “Do you want to
know? Very well, then, you shall know. Your father has nothing left to
pay for the shroud that they will lay him in this evening. Your watch
has been pawned, for I had nothing either.”

Delphine sprang out of bed, ran to her desk, and took out her purse. She
gave it to Eugene, and rang the bell, crying:

“I will go, I will go at once, Eugene. Leave me, I will dress. Why,
I should be an unnatural daughter! Go back; I will be there before
you.--Therese,” she called to the waiting-woman, “ask M. de Nucingen to
come upstairs at once and speak to me.”

Eugene was almost happy when he reached the Rue Nueve-Sainte-Genevieve;
he was so glad to bring the news to the dying man that one of his
daughters was coming. He fumbled in Delphine’s purse for money, so as to
dismiss the cab at once; and discovered that the young, beautiful, and
wealthy woman of fashion had only seventy francs in her private purse.
He climbed the stairs and found Bianchon supporting Goriot, while the
house surgeon from the hospital was applying moxas to the patient’s
back--under the direction of the physician, it was the last expedient of
science, and it was tried in vain.

“Can you feel them?” asked the physician. But Goriot had caught sight of
Rastignac, and answered, “They are coming, are they not?”

“There is hope yet,” said the surgeon; “he can speak.”
