
He went to Delphine at once in his joy. He had procured this pleasure
for her, and doubtless he would receive the price of it. Mme. de
Nucingen was dressing. Rastignac waited in her boudoir, enduring as best
he might the natural impatience of an eager temperament for the reward
desired and withheld for a year. Such sensations are only known once
in a life. The first woman to whom a man is drawn, if she is really
a woman--that is to say, if she appears to him amid the splendid
accessories that form a necessary background to life in the world of
Paris--will never have a rival.

Love in Paris is a thing distinct and apart; for in Paris neither men
nor women are the dupes of the commonplaces by which people seek to
throw a veil over their motives, or to parade a fine affectation of
disinterestedness in their sentiments. In this country within a country,
it is not merely required of a woman that she should satisfy the senses
and the soul; she knows perfectly well that she has still greater
obligations to discharge, that she must fulfil the countless demands
of a vanity that enters into every fibre of that living organism called
society. Love, for her, is above all things, and by its very nature, a
vainglorious, brazen-fronted, ostentatious, thriftless charlatan. If
at the Court of Louis XIV. there was not a woman but envied Mlle. de la
Valliere the reckless devotion of passion that led the grand monarch to
tear the priceless ruffles at his wrists in order to assist the entry of
a Duc de Vermandois into the world--what can you expect of the rest
of society? You must have youth and wealth and rank; nay, you must, if
possible, have more than these, for the more incense you bring with you
to burn at the shrine of the god, the more favorably will he regard the
worshiper. Love is a religion, and his cult must in the nature of things
be more costly than those of all other deities; Love the Spoiler stays
for a moment, and then passes on; like the urchin of the streets, his
course may be traced by the ravages that he has made. The wealth of
feeling and imagination is the poetry of the garret; how should love
exist there without that wealth?

If there are exceptions who do not subscribe to these Draconian laws of
the Parisian code, they are solitary examples. Such souls live so far
out of the main current that they are not borne away by the doctrines
of society; they dwell beside some clear spring of everflowing water,
without seeking to leave the green shade; happy to listen to the echoes
of the infinite in everything around them and in their own souls,
waiting in patience to take their flight for heaven, while they look
with pity upon those of earth.

Rastignac, like most young men who have been early impressed by the
circumstances of power and grandeur, meant to enter the lists fully
armed; the burning ambition of conquest possessed him already; perhaps
he was conscious of his powers, but as yet he knew neither the end to
which his ambition was to be directed, nor the means of attaining it.
In default of the pure and sacred love that fills a life, ambition
may become something very noble, subduing to itself every thought of
personal interest, and setting as the end--the greatness, not of one
man, but of a whole nation.

But the student had not yet reached the time of life when a man surveys
the whole course of existence and judges it soberly. Hitherto he had
scarcely so much as shaken off the spell of the fresh and gracious
influences that envelop a childhood in the country, like green leaves
and grass. He had hesitated on the brink of the Parisian Rubicon, and
in spite of the prickings of ambition, he still clung to a lingering
tradition of an old ideal--the peaceful life of the noble in his
chateau. But yesterday evening, at the sight of his rooms, those
scruples had vanished. He had learned what it was to enjoy the material
advantages of fortune, as he had already enjoyed the social advantages
of birth; he ceased to be a provincial from that moment, and slipped
naturally and easily into a position which opened up a prospect of a
brilliant future.

So, as he waited for Delphine, in the pretty boudoir, where he felt
that he had a certain right to be, he felt himself so far away from the
Rastignac who came back to Paris a year ago, that, turning some power of
inner vision upon this latter, he asked himself whether that past self
bore any resemblance to the Rastignac of that moment.

“Madame is in her room,” Therese came to tell him. The woman’s voice
made him start.

He found Delphine lying back in her low chair by the fireside, looking
fresh and bright. The sight of her among the flowing draperies of muslin
suggested some beautiful tropical flower, where the fruit is set amid
the blossom.

“Well,” she said, with a tremor in her voice, “here you are.”

“Guess what I bring for you,” said Eugene, sitting down beside her. He
took possession of her arm to kiss her hand.

Mme. de Nucingen gave a joyful start as she saw the card. She turned
to Eugene; there were tears in her eyes as she flung her arms about his
neck, and drew him towards her in a frenzy of gratified vanity.

“And I owe this happiness to you--to _thee_” (she whispered the more
intimate word in his ear); “but Therese is in my dressing-room, let us
be prudent.--This happiness--yes, for I may call it so, when it comes
to me through _you_--is surely more than a triumph for self-love? No one
has been willing to introduce me into that set. Perhaps just now I may
seem to you to be frivolous, petty, shallow, like a Parisienne, but
remember, my friend, that I am ready to give up all for you; and that if
I long more than ever for an entrance into the Faubourg Saint-Germain,
it is because I shall meet you there.”

“Mme. de Beauseant’s note seems to say very plainly that she does not
expect to see the _Baron_ de Nucingen at her ball; don’t you think so?”
 said Eugene.

“Why, yes,” said the Baroness as she returned the letter. “Those women
have a talent for insolence. But it is of no consequence, I shall go.
My sister is sure to be there, and sure to be very beautifully
dressed.--Eugene,” she went on, lowering her voice, “she will go to
dispel ugly suspicions. You do not know the things that people are
saying about her. Only this morning Nucingen came to tell me that they
had been discussing her at the club. Great heavens! on what does a
woman’s character and the honor of a whole family depend! I feel that
I am nearly touched and wounded in my poor sister. According to some
people, M. de Trailles must have put his name to bills for a hundred
thousand francs, nearly all of them are overdue, and proceedings are
threatened. In this predicament, it seems that my sister sold her
diamonds to a Jew--the beautiful diamonds that belonged to her husband’s
mother, Mme. de Restaud the elder,--you have seen her wearing them. In
fact, nothing else has been talked about for the last two days. So I can
see that Anastasie is sure to come to Mme. de Beauseant’s ball in tissue
of gold, and ablaze with diamonds, to draw all eyes upon her; and I will
not be outshone. She has tried to eclipse me all her life, she has never
been kind to me, and I have helped her so often, and always had money
for her when she had none.--But never mind other people now, to-day I
mean to be perfectly happy.”

At one o’clock that morning Eugene was still with Mme. de Nucingen. In
the midst of their lovers’ farewell, a farewell full of hope of bliss to
come, she said in a troubled voice, “I am very fearful, superstitious.
Give what name you like to my presentiments, but I am afraid that my
happiness will be paid for by some horrible catastrophe.”

“Child!” said Eugene.

“Ah! have we changed places, and am I the child to-night?” she asked,
laughingly.

Eugene went back to the Maison Vauquer, never doubting but that he
should leave it for good on the morrow; and on the way he fell to
dreaming the bright dreams of youth, when the cup of happiness has left
its sweetness on the lips.

“Well?” cried Goriot, as Rastignac passed by his door.

“Yes,” said Eugene; “I will tell you everything to-morrow.”

“Everything, will you not?” cried the old man. “Go to bed. To-morrow our
happy life will begin.”

