of piety to her in the name of love. His education had begun to bear its
fruits; he loved selfishly already. Besides, his tact had discovered to
him the real nature of Delphine; he divined instinctively that she was
capable of stepping over her father’s corpse to go to the ball; and
within himself he felt that he had neither the strength of mind to play
the part of mentor, nor the strength of character to vex her, nor the
courage to leave her to go alone.

“She would never forgive me for putting her in the wrong over it,” he
said to himself. Then he turned the doctor’s dictum over in his mind;
he tried to believe that Goriot was not so dangerously ill as he had
imagined, and ended by collecting together a sufficient quantity of
traitorous excuses for Delphine’s conduct. She did not know how ill her
father was; the kind old man himself would have made her go to the ball
if she had gone to see him. So often it happens that this one or that
stands condemned by the social laws that govern family relations;
and yet there are peculiar circumstances in the case, differences of
temperament, divergent interests, innumerable complications of family
life that excuse the apparent offence.

Eugene did not wish to see too clearly; he was ready to sacrifice his
conscience to his mistress. Within the last few days his whole life had
undergone a change. Woman had entered into his world and thrown it into
chaos, family claims dwindled away before her; she had appropriated
all his being to her uses. Rastignac and Delphine found each other at
a crisis in their lives when their union gave them the most poignant
bliss. Their passion, so long proved, had only gained in strength by the
gratified desire that often extinguishes passion. This woman was his,
and Eugene recognized that not until then had he loved her; perhaps love
is only gratitude for pleasure. This woman, vile or sublime, he adored
for the pleasure she had brought as her dower; and Delphine loved
Rastignac as Tantalus would have loved some angel who had satisfied his
hunger and quenched the burning thirst in his parched throat.

“Well,” said Mme. de Nucingen when he came back in evening dress, “how
is my father?”

“Very dangerously ill,” he answered; “if you will grant me a proof of
your affections, we will just go in to see him on the way.”

“Very well,” she said. “Yes, but afterwards. Dear Eugene, do be nice,
and don’t preach to me. Come.”

They set out. Eugene said nothing for a while.

“What is it now?” she asked.

“I can hear the death-rattle in your father’s throat,” he said almost
angrily. And with the hot indignation of youth, he told the story of
Mme. de Restaud’s vanity and cruelty, of her father’s final act of
self-sacrifice, that had brought about this struggle between life
and death, of the price that had been paid for Anastasie’s golden
embroideries. Delphine cried.

“I shall look frightful,” she thought. She dried her tears.

“I will nurse my father; I will not leave his bedside,” she said aloud.

“Ah! now you are as I would have you,” exclaimed Rastignac.

The lamps of five hundred carriages lit up the darkness about the Hotel
de Beauseant. A gendarme in all the glory of his uniform stood on either
side of the brightly lighted gateway. The great world was flocking
thither that night in its eager curiosity to see the great lady at the
moment of her fall, and the rooms on the ground floor were already full
to overflowing, when Mme. de Nucingen and Rastignac appeared. Never
since Louis XIV. tore her lover away from La grand Mademoiselle, and
the whole court hastened to visit that unfortunate princess, had a
disastrous love affair made such a sensation in Paris. But the youngest
daughter of the almost royal house of Burgundy had risen proudly above
her pain, and moved till the last moment like a queen in this world--its
vanities had always been valueless for her, save in so far as they
contributed to the triumph of her passion. The salons were filled with
the most beautiful women in Paris, resplendent in their toilettes, and
radiant with smiles. Ministers and ambassadors, the most distinguished
men at court, men bedizened with decorations, stars, and ribbons, men
who bore the most illustrious names in France, had gathered about the
Vicomtesse.

The music of the orchestra vibrated in wave after wave of sound from the
golden ceiling of the palace, now made desolate for its queen.

Madame de Beauseant stood at the door of the first salon to receive the
guests who were styled her friends. She was dressed in white, and wore
no ornament in the plaits of hair braided about her head; her face was
calm; there was no sign there of pride, nor of pain, nor of joy that
she did not feel. No one could read her soul; she stood there like some
Niobe carved in marble. For a few intimate friends there was a tinge of
satire in her smile; but no scrutiny saw any change in her, nor had she
looked otherwise in the days of the glory of her happiness. The most
callous of her guests admired her as young Rome applauded some gladiator
who could die smiling. It seemed as if society had adorned itself for a
last audience of one of its sovereigns.

“I was afraid that you would not come,” she said to Rastignac.

“Madame,” he said, in an unsteady voice, taking her speech as a
reproach, “I shall be the last to go, that is why I am here.”

“Good,” she said, and she took his hand. “You are perhaps the only one
I can trust here among all these. Oh, my friend, when you love, love
a woman whom you are sure that you can love always. Never forsake a
woman.”

She took Rastignac’s arm, and went towards a sofa in the card-room.

“I want you to go to the Marquis,” she said. “Jacques, my footman, will
go with you; he has a letter that you will take. I am asking the Marquis
to give my letters back to me. He will give them all up, I like to think
that. When you have my letters, go up to my room with them. Some one
shall bring me word.”

She rose to go to meet the Duchesse de Langeais, her most intimate
friend, who had come like the rest of the world.

Rastignac went. He asked for the Marquis d’Ajuda at the Hotel Rochefide,
feeling certain that the latter would be spending his evening there, and
so it proved. The Marquis went to his own house with Rastignac, and gave
a casket to the student, saying as he did so, “They are all there.”

He seemed as if he was about to say something to Eugene, to ask
about the ball, or the Vicomtesse; perhaps he was on the brink of
the confession that, even then, he was in despair, and knew that his
marriage had been a fatal mistake; but a proud gleam shone in his eyes,
and with deplorable courage he kept his noblest feelings a secret.

“Do not even mention my name to her, my dear Eugene.” He grasped
Rastignac’s hand sadly and affectionately, and turned away from him.
Eugene went back to the Hotel Beauseant, the servant took him to the
Vicomtesse’s room. There were signs there of preparations for a journey.
He sat down by the fire, fixed his eyes on the cedar wood casket, and
fell into deep mournful musings. Mme. de Beauseant loomed large in these
imaginings, like a goddess in the Iliad.

“Ah! my friend!...” said the Vicomtesse; she crossed the room and laid
her hand on Rastignac’s shoulder. He saw the tears in his cousin’s
uplifted eyes, saw that one hand was raised to take the casket, and that
the fingers of the other trembled. Suddenly she took the casket, put it
in the fire, and watched it burn.

“They are dancing,” she said. “They all came very early; but death
will be long in coming. Hush! my friend,” and she laid a finger on
Rastignac’s lips, seeing that he was about to speak. “I shall never see
Paris again. I am taking my leave of the world. At five o’clock this
morning I shall set out on my journey; I mean to bury myself in the
remotest part of Normandy. I have had very little time to make my
arrangements; since three o’clock this afternoon I have been busy
signing documents, setting my affairs in order; there was no one whom I
could send to...”

