
“As if what?” said Sylvie, bursting into a guffaw. “The two of them make
a pair.”

“It is a strange thing, isn’t it, Sylvie, how M. Vautrin got in last
night after Christophe had bolted the door?”

“Not at all, madame. Christophe heard M. Vautrin, and went down and
undid the door. And here are you imagining that----?”

“Give me my bodice, and be quick and get breakfast ready. Dish up the
rest of the mutton with the potatoes, and you can put the stewed pears
on the table, those at five a penny.”

A few moments later Mme. Vauquer came down, just in time to see the cat
knock down a plate that covered a bowl of milk, and begin to lap in all
haste.

“Mistigris!” she cried.

The cat fled, but promptly returned to rub against her ankles.

“Oh! yes, you can wheedle, you old hypocrite!” she said. “Sylvie!
Sylvie!”

“Yes, madame; what is it?”

“Just see what the cat has done!”

“It is all that stupid Christophe’s fault. I told him to stop and lay
the table. What has become of him? Don’t you worry, madame; Father
Goriot shall have it. I will fill it up with water, and he won’t know
the difference; he never notices anything, not even what he eats.”

“I wonder where the old heathen can have gone?” said Mme. Vauquer,
setting the plates round the table.

“Who knows? He is up to all sorts of tricks.”

“I have overslept myself,” said Mme. Vauquer.

“But madame looks as fresh as a rose, all the same.”

The door bell rang at that moment, and Vautrin came through the
sitting-room, singing loudly:

  “‘Tis the same old story everywhere,
   A roving heart and a roving glance..

“Oh! Mamma Vauquer! good-morning!” he cried at the sight of his hostess,
and he put his arm gaily round her waist.

“There! have done----”

“‘Impertinence!’ Say it!” he answered. “Come, say it! Now, isn’t that
what you really mean? Stop a bit, I will help you to set the table. Ah!
I am a nice man, am I not?

  “For the locks of brown and the golden hair
     A sighing lover...

“Oh! I have just seen something so funny----

                  .... led by chance.”

“What?” asked the widow.

“Father Goriot in the goldsmith’s shop in the Rue Dauphine at half-past
eight this morning. They buy old spoons and forks and gold lace there,
and Goriot sold a piece of silver plate for a good round sum. It had
been twisted out of shape very neatly for a man that’s not used to the
trade.”

“Really? You don’t say so?”

“Yes. One of my friends is expatriating himself; I had been to see him
off on board the Royal Mail steamer, and was coming back here. I waited
after that to see what Father Goriot would do; it is a comical affair.
He came back to this quarter of the world, to the Rue des Gres, and went
into a money-lender’s house; everybody knows him, Gobseck, a stuck-up
rascal, that would make dominoes out of his father’s bones, a Turk,
a heathen, an old Jew, a Greek; it would be a difficult matter to rob
_him_, for he puts all his coin into the Bank.”

“Then what was Father Goriot doing there?”

“Doing?” said Vautrin. “Nothing; he was bent on his own undoing. He is a
simpleton, stupid enough to ruin himself by running after----”

“There he is!” cried Sylvie.

“Christophe,” cried Father Goriot’s voice, “come upstairs with me.”

Christophe went up, and shortly afterwards came down again.

“Where are you going?” Mme. Vauquer asked of her servant.

“Out on an errand for M. Goriot.”

“What may that be?” said Vautrin, pouncing on a letter in Christophe’s
hand. “_Mme. la Comtesse Anastasie de Restaud_,” he read. “Where are you
going with it?” he added, as he gave the letter back to Christophe.

“To the Rue du Helder. I have orders to give this into her hands
myself.”

“What is there inside it?” said Vautrin, holding the letter up to the
light. “A banknote? No.” He peered into the envelope. “A receipted
account!” he cried. “My word! ‘tis a gallant old dotard. Off with you,
old chap,” he said, bringing down a hand on Christophe’s head, and
spinning the man round like a thimble; “you will have a famous tip.”

By this time the table was set. Sylvie was boiling the milk, Mme.
Vauquer was lighting a fire in the stove with some assistance from
Vautrin, who kept humming to himself:

  “The same old story everywhere,
   A roving heart and a roving glance.”

When everything was ready, Mme. Couture and Mlle. Taillefer came in.

“Where have you been this morning, fair lady?” said Mme. Vauquer,
turning to Mme. Couture.

“We have just been to say our prayers at Saint-Etienne du Mont. To-day
is the day when we must go to see M. Taillefer. Poor little thing! She
is trembling like a leaf,” Mme. Couture went on, as she seated herself
before the fire and held the steaming soles of her boots to the blaze.

“Warm yourself, Victorine,” said Mme. Vauquer.

“It is quite right and proper, mademoiselle, to pray to Heaven to soften
your father’s heart,” said Vautrin, as he drew a chair nearer to the
orphan girl; “but that is not enough. What you want is a friend who
will give the monster a piece of his mind; a barbarian that has three
millions (so they say), and will not give you a dowry; and a pretty girl
needs a dowry nowadays.”

“Poor child!” said Mme. Vauquer. “Never mind, my pet, your wretch of a
father is going just the way to bring trouble upon himself.”

Victorine’s eyes filled with tears at the words, and the widow checked
herself at a sign from Mme. Couture.

“If we could only see him!” said the Commissary-General’s widow; “if I
could speak to him myself and give him his wife’s last letter! I
have never dared to run the risk of sending it by post; he knew my
handwriting----”

“‘Oh woman, persecuted and injured innocent!’” exclaimed Vautrin,
