are not like an ordinary man; one can talk to you, you can understand
things. You will not dabble about much longer among the tadpoles in
these swamps. Well, then, it is all settled. You will marry. Both of us
carry our point. Mine is made of iron, and will never soften, he! he!”

Vautrin went out. He would not wait to hear the student’s repudiation,
he wished to put Eugene at his ease. He seemed to understand the secret
springs of the faint resistance still made by the younger man; the
struggles in which men seek to preserve their self-respect by justifying
their blameworthy actions to themselves.

“He may do as he likes; I shall not marry Mlle. Taillefer, that is
certain,” said Eugene to himself.

He regarded this man with abhorrence, and yet the very cynicism of
Vautrin’s ideas, and the audacious way in which he used other men for
his own ends, raised him in the student’s eyes; but the thought of a
compact threw Eugene into a fever of apprehension, and not until he
had recovered somewhat did he dress, call for a cab, and go to Mme. de
Restaud’s.

For some days the Countess had paid more and more attention to a young
man whose every step seemed a triumphal progress in the great world; it
seemed to her that he might be a formidable power before long. He paid
Messieurs de Trailles and d’Ajuda, played at whist for part of the
evening, and made good his losses. Most men who have their way to make
are more or less of fatalists, and Eugene was superstitious; he chose to
consider that his luck was heaven’s reward for his perseverance in the
right way. As soon as possible on the following morning he asked Vautrin
whether the bill he had given was still in the other’s possession; and
on receiving a reply in the affirmative, he repaid the three thousand
francs with a not unnatural relief.

“Everything is going on well,” said Vautrin.

“But I am not your accomplice,” said Eugene.

“I know, I know,” Vautrin broke in. “You are still acting like a child.
You are making mountains out of molehills at the outset.”

Two days later, Poiret and Mlle. Michonneau were sitting together on
a bench in the sun. They had chosen a little frequented alley in the
Jardin des Plantes, and a gentleman was chatting with them, the same
person, as a matter of fact, about whom the medical student had, not
without good reason, his own suspicions.

“Mademoiselle,” this M. Gondureau was saying, “I do not see any
cause for your scruples. His Excellency, Monseigneur the Minister of
Police----”

“Yes, his Excellency is taking a personal interest in the matter,” said
Gondureau.

Who would think it probable that Poiret, a retired clerk, doubtless
possessed of some notions of civic virtue, though there might be nothing
else in his head--who would think it likely that such a man would
continue to lend an ear to this supposed independent gentleman of the
Rue de Buffon, when the latter dropped the mask of a decent citizen by
that word “police,” and gave a glimpse of the features of a detective
from the Rue de Jerusalem? And yet nothing was more natural. Perhaps the
following remarks from the hitherto unpublished records made by certain
observers will throw a light on the particular species to which Poiret
belonged in the great family of fools. There is a race of quill-drivers,
confined in the columns of the budget between the first degree of
latitude (a kind of administrative Greenland where the salaries begin at
twelve hundred francs) to the third degree, a more temperate zone, where
incomes grow from three to six thousand francs, a climate where
the _bonus_ flourishes like a half-hardy annual in spite of some
difficulties of culture. A characteristic trait that best reveals the
feeble narrow-mindedness of these inhabitants of petty officialdom is a
kind of involuntary, mechanical, and instinctive reverence for the Grand
Lama of every Ministry, known to the rank and file only by his signature
(an illegible scrawl) and by his title--“His Excellency Monseigneur
le Ministre,” five words which produce as much effect as the _il Bondo
Cani_ of the _Calife de Bagdad_, five words which in the eyes of this
low order of intelligence represent a sacred power from which there is
no appeal. The Minister is administratively infallible for the clerks
in the employ of the Government, as the Pope is infallible for good
Catholics. Something of this peculiar radiance invests everything he
does or says, or that is said or done in his name; the robe of office
covers everything and legalizes everything done by his orders; does not
his very title--His Excellency--vouch for the purity of his intentions
and the righteousness of his will, and serve as a sort of passport and
introduction to ideas that otherwise would not be entertained for a
moment? Pronounce the words “His Excellency,” and these poor folk will
forthwith proceed to do what they would not do for their own interests.
Passive obedience is as well known in a Government department as in
the army itself; and the administrative system silences consciences,
annihilates the individual, and ends (give it time enough) by fashioning
a man into a vise or a thumbscrew, and he becomes part of the machinery
of Government. Wherefore, M. Gondureau, who seemed to know something
of human nature, recognized Poiret at once as one of those dupes of
officialdom, and brought out for his benefit, at the proper moment, the
_deus ex machina_, the magical words “His Excellency,” so as to dazzle
Poiret just as he himself unmasked his batteries, for he took Poiret and
the Michonneau for the male and female of the same species.

“If his Excellency himself, his Excellency the Minister... Ah! that is
quite another thing,” said Poiret.

“You seem to be guided by this gentleman’s opinion, and you hear what he
says,” said the man of independent means, addressing Mlle. Michonneau.
“Very well, his Excellency is at this moment absolutely certain that the
so-called Vautrin, who lodges at the Maison Vauquer, is a convict
who escaped from penal servitude at Toulon, where he is known by the
nickname _Trompe-la-Mort_.”

“Trompe-la-Mort?” said Pioret. “Dear me, he is very lucky if he deserves
that nickname.”

“Well, yes,” said the detective. “They call him so because he has been
so lucky as not to lose his life in the very risky businesses that he
has carried through. He is a dangerous man, you see! He has qualities
that are out of the common; the thing he is wanted for, in fact, was a
matter which gained him no end of credit with his own set----”

“Then is he a man of honor?” asked Poiret.

“Yes, according to his notions. He agreed to take another man’s crime
upon himself--a forgery committed by a very handsome young fellow that
he had taken a great fancy to, a young Italian, a bit of a gambler,
who has since gone into the army, where his conduct has been
unexceptionable.”

“But if his Excellency the Minister of Police is certain that M.
Vautrin is this _Trompe-la-Mort_, why should he want me?” asked Mlle.
Michonneau.

“Oh yes,” said Poiret, “if the Minister, as you have been so obliging as
to tell us, really knows for a certainty----”

“Certainty is not the word; he only suspects. You will soon understand
how things are. Jacques Collin, nicknamed _Trompe-la-Mort_, is in the
confidence of every convict in the three prisons; he is their man of
business and their banker. He makes a very good thing out of managing
their affairs, which want a _man of mark_ to see about them.”

“Ha! ha! do you see the pun, mademoiselle?” asked Poiret. “This
gentleman calls himself a _man of mark_ because he is a _marked
man_--branded, you know.”

“This so-called Vautrin,” said the detective, “receives the money
belonging to my lords the convicts, invests it for them, and holds it at
the disposal of those who escape, or hands it over to their families if
they leave a will, or to their mistresses when they draw upon him for
their benefit.”

“Their mistresses! You mean their wives,” remarked Poiret.

“No, sir. A convict’s wife is usually an illegitimate connection. We
