in the earth. He had my dowry, so he paid my debts, but he stipulated at
the same time that my expenses in future must not exceed a certain fixed
sum, and I gave way for the sake of peace. And then,” she went on, “I
wanted to gratify the self-love of some one whom you know. He may have
deceived me, but I should do him the justice to say that there was
nothing petty in his character. But, after all, he threw me over
disgracefully. If, at a woman’s utmost need, _somebody_ heaps gold upon
her, he ought never to forsake her; that love should last for ever!
But you, at one-and-twenty, you, the soul of honor, with the unsullied
conscience of youth, will ask me how a woman can bring herself to accept
money in such a way? _Mon Dieu_! is it not natural to share everything
with the one to whom we owe our happiness? When all has been given, why
should we pause and hesitate over a part? Money is as nothing between
us until the moment when the sentiment that bound us together ceases to
exist. Were we not bound to each other for life? Who that believes in
love foresees such an end to love? You swear to love us eternally; how,
then, can our interests be separate?

“You do not know how I suffered to-day when Nucingen refused to give
me six thousand francs; he spends as much as that every month on his
mistress, an opera dancer! I thought of killing myself. The wildest
thoughts came into my head. There have been moments in my life when I
have envied my servants, and would have changed places with my maid. It
was madness to think of going to our father, Anastasie and I have bled
him dry; our poor father would have sold himself if he could have raised
six thousand francs that way. I should have driven him frantic to no
purpose. You have saved me from shame and death; I was beside myself
with anguish. Ah! monsieur, I owed you this explanation after my mad
ravings. When you left me just now, as soon as you were out of sight, I
longed to escape, to run away... where, I did not know. Half the women
in Paris lead such lives as mine; they live in apparent luxury, and in
their souls are tormented by anxiety. I know of poor creatures even
more miserable than I; there are women who are driven to ask their
tradespeople to make out false bills, women who rob their husbands. Some
men believe that an Indian shawl worth a thousand louis only cost five
hundred francs, others that a shawl costing five hundred francs is worth
a hundred louis. There are women, too, with narrow incomes, who scrape
and save and starve their children to pay for a dress. I am innocent
of these base meannesses. But this is the last extremity of my torture.
Some women will sell themselves to their husbands, and so obtain their
way, but I, at any rate, am free. If I chose, Nucingen would cover me
with gold, but I would rather weep on the breast of a man whom I can
respect. Ah! tonight, M. de Marsay will no longer have a right to think
of me as a woman whom he has paid.” She tried to conceal her tears from
him, hiding her face in her hands; Eugene drew them away and looked at
her; she seemed to him sublime at that moment.

“It is hideous, is it not,” she cried, “to speak in a breath of money
and affection. You cannot love me after this,” she added.

The incongruity between the ideas of honor which make women so great,
and the errors in conduct which are forced upon them by the constitution
of society, had thrown Eugene’s thoughts into confusion; he uttered
soothing and consoling words, and wondered at the beautiful woman before
him, and at the artless imprudence of her cry of pain.

“You will not remember this against me?” she asked; “promise me that you
will not.”

“Ah! madame, I am incapable of doing so,” he said. She took his hand and
held it to her heart, a movement full of grace that expressed her deep
gratitude.

“I am free and happy once more, thanks to you,” she said. “Oh! I have
felt lately as if I were in the grasp of an iron hand. But after this
I mean to live simply and to spend nothing. You will think me just as
pretty, will you not, my friend? Keep this,” she went on, as she took
only six of the banknotes. “In conscience I owe you a thousand crowns,
for I really ought to go halves with you.”

Eugene’s maiden conscience resisted; but when the Baroness said, “I
am bound to look on you as an accomplice or as an enemy,” he took the
money.

“It shall be a last stake in reserve,” he said, “in case of misfortune.”

“That was what I was dreading to hear,” she cried, turning pale. “Oh,
if you would that I should be anything to you, swear to me that you will
never re-enter a gaming-house. Great Heaven! that I should corrupt you!
I should die of sorrow!”

They had reached the Rue Saint-Lazare by this time. The contrast between
the ostentation of wealth in the house, and the wretched condition of
its mistress, dazed the student; and Vautrin’s cynical words began to
ring in his ears.

“Seat yourself there,” said the Baroness, pointing to a low chair beside
the fire. “I have a difficult letter to write,” she added. “Tell me what
to say.”

“Say nothing,” Eugene answered her. “Put the bills in an envelope,
direct it, and send it by your maid.”

“Why, you are a love of a man,” she said. “Ah! see what it is to have
been well brought up. That is the Beauseant through and through,” she
went on, smiling at him.

“She is charming,” thought Eugene, more and more in love. He looked
round him at the room; there was an ostentatious character about the
luxury, a meretricious taste in the splendor.

“Do you like it?” she asked, as she rang for the maid.

“Therese, take this to M. de Marsay, and give it into his hands
yourself. If he is not at home, bring the letter back to me.”

Therese went, but not before she had given Eugene a spiteful glance.

Dinner was announced. Rastignac gave his arm to Mme. de Nucingen, she
led the way into a pretty dining-room, and again he saw the luxury of
the table which he had admired in his cousin’s house.

“Come and dine with me on opera evenings, and we will go to the Italiens
afterwards,” she said.

“I should soon grow used to the pleasant life if it could last, but I am
a poor student, and I have my way to make.”

“Oh! you will succeed,” she said laughing. “You will see. All that you
wish will come to pass. _I_ did not expect to be so happy.”

It is the wont of women to prove the impossible by the possible, and to
annihilate facts by presentiments. When Mme. de Nucingen and Rastignac
took their places in her box at the Bouffons, her face wore a look of
happiness that made her so lovely that every one indulged in those small
slanders against which women are defenceless; for the scandal that
is uttered lightly is often seriously believed. Those who know Paris,
believe nothing that is said, and say nothing of what is done there.

Eugene took the Baroness’ hand in his, and by some light pressure of the
fingers, or a closer grasp of the hand, they found a language in which
to express the sensations which the music gave them. It was an evening
of intoxicating delight for both; and when it ended, and they went out
together, Mme. de Nucingen insisted on taking Eugene with her as far as
the Pont Neuf, he disputing with her the whole of the way for a single
kiss after all those that she had showered upon him so passionately at
the Palais-Royal; Eugene reproached her with inconsistency.

“That was gratitude,” she said, “for devotion that I did not dare to
hope for, but now it would be a promise.”

“And will you give me no promise, ingrate?”

He grew vexed. Then, with one of those impatient gestures that fill a
lover with ecstasy, she gave him her hand to kiss, and he took it with a
discontented air that delighted her.

“I shall see you at the ball on Monday,” she said.

As Eugene went home in the moonlight, he fell to serious reflections.
