the matter a profound secret, but to-morrow the king will sign the
marriage-contract, and your poor cousin the Vicomtesse knows nothing
of it as yet. She cannot put off her ball, and the Marquis will not be
there. People are wondering what will happen?”

“The world laughs at baseness and connives at it. But this will kill
Mme. de Beauseant.”

“Oh, no,” said Delphine, smiling, “you do not know that kind of woman.
Why, all Paris will be there, and so shall I; I ought to go there for
your sake.”

“Perhaps, after all, it is one of those absurd reports that people set
in circulation here.”

“We shall know the truth to-morrow.”

Eugene did not return to the Maison Vauquer. He could not forego the
pleasure of occupying his new rooms in the Rue d’Artois. Yesterday
evening he had been obliged to leave Delphine soon after midnight, but
that night it was Delphine who stayed with him until two o’clock in the
morning. He rose late, and waited for Mme. de Nucingen, who came about
noon to breakfast with him. Youth snatches eagerly at these rosy moments
of happiness, and Eugene had almost forgotten Goriot’s existence.
The pretty things that surrounded him were growing familiar; this
domestication in itself was one long festival for him, and Mme. de
Nucingen was there to glorify it all by her presence. It was four
o’clock before they thought of Goriot, and of how he had looked forward
to the new life in that house. Eugene said that the old man ought to be
moved at once, lest he should grow too ill to move. He left Delphine
and hurried back to the lodging-house. Neither Father Goriot nor young
Bianchon was in the dining-room with the others.

“Aha!” said the painter as Eugene came in, “Father Goriot has broken
down at last. Bianchon is upstairs with him. One of his daughters--the
Comtesse de Restaurama--came to see the old gentleman, and he would get
up and go out, and made himself worse. Society is about to lose one of
its brightest ornaments.”

Rastignac sprang to the staircase.

“Hey! Monsieur Eugene!”

“Monsieur Eugene, the mistress is calling you,” shouted Sylvie.

“It is this, sir,” said the widow. “You and M. Goriot should by rights
have moved out on the th of February. That was three days ago; to-day
is the th, I ought really to be paid a month in advance; but if you
will engage to pay for both, I shall be quite satisfied.”

“Why can’t you trust him?”

“Trust him, indeed! If the old gentleman went off his head and died,
those daughters of his would not pay me a farthing, and his things won’t
fetch ten francs. This morning he went out with all the spoons and
forks he has left, I don’t know why. He had got himself up to look quite
young, and--Lord, forgive me--but I thought he had rouge on his cheeks;
he looked quite young again.”

“I will be responsible,” said Eugene, shuddering with horror, for he
foresaw the end.

He climbed the stairs and reached Father Goriot’s room. The old man was
tossing on his bed. Bianchon was with him.

“Good-evening, father,” said Eugene.

The old man turned his glassy eyes on him, smiled gently, and said:

“How is _she_?”

“She is quite well. But how are you?”

“There is nothing much the matter.”

“Don’t tire him,” said Bianchon, drawing Eugene into a corner of the
room.

“Well?” asked Rastignac.

“Nothing but a miracle can save him now. Serous congestion has set in;
I have put on mustard plasters, and luckily he can feel them, they are
acting.”

“Is it possible to move him?”

“Quite out of the question. He must stay where he is, and be kept as
quiet as possible----”

“Dear Bianchon,” said Eugene, “we will nurse him between us.”

“I have had the head physician round from my hospital to see him.”

“And what did he say?”

“He will give no opinion till to-morrow evening. He promised to look in
again at the end of the day. Unluckily, the preposterous creature must
needs go and do something foolish this morning; he will not say what it
was. He is as obstinate as a mule. As soon as I begin to talk to him
he pretends not to hear, and lies as if he were asleep instead of
answering, or if he opens his eyes he begins to groan. Some time this
morning he went out on foot in the streets, nobody knows where he went,
and he took everything that he had of any value with him. He has been
driving some confounded bargain, and it has been too much for his
strength. One of his daughters has been here.”

“Was it the Countess?” asked Eugene. “A tall, dark-haired woman, with
large bright eyes, slender figure, and little feet?”

“Yes.”

“Leave him to me for a bit,” said Rastignac. “I will make him confess;
he will tell me all about it.”

“And meanwhile I will get my dinner. But try not to excite him; there is
still some hope left.”

“All right.”

“How they will enjoy themselves to-morrow,” said Father Goriot when they
were alone. “They are going to a grand ball.”

“What were you doing this morning, papa, to make yourself so poorly this
evening that you have to stop in bed?”

“Nothing.”

“Did not Anastasie come to see you?” demanded Rastignac.

“Yes,” said Father Goriot.

“Well, then, don’t keep anything from me. What more did she want of
you?”

“Oh, she was very miserable,” he answered, gathering up all his strength
to speak. “It was this way, my boy. Since that affair of the diamonds,
Nasie has not had a penny of her own. For this ball she had ordered a
golden gown like a setting for a jewel. Her mantuamaker, a woman without
a conscience, would not give her credit, so Nasie’s waiting-woman
advanced a thousand francs on account. Poor Nasie! reduced to such
shifts! It cut me to the heart to think of it! But when Nasie’s maid
saw how things were between her master and mistress, she was afraid of
losing her money, and came to an understanding with the dressmaker, and
the woman refuses to send the ball-dress until the money is paid. The
gown is ready, and the ball is to-morrow night! Nasie was in despair.
She wanted to borrow my forks and spoons to pawn them. Her husband is
determined that she shall go and wear the diamonds, so as to contradict
the stories that are told all over Paris. How can she go to that
heartless scoundrel and say, ‘I owe a thousand francs to my dressmaker;
pay her for me!’ She cannot. I saw that myself. Delphine will be there
