Mme. Vauquer glanced round, and saw in a moment on which side her
interest lay. She waddled across to Mlle. Michonneau.

“Come, now,” she said; “you would not be the ruin of my establishment,
would you, eh? There’s a dear, kind soul. You see what a pass these
gentlemen have brought me to; just go up to your room for this evening.”

“Never a bit of it!” cried the boarders. “She must go, and go this
minute!”

“But the poor lady has had no dinner,” said Poiret, with piteous
entreaty.

“She can go and dine where she likes,” shouted several voices.

“Turn her out, the spy!”

“Turn them both out! Spies!”

“Gentlemen,” cried Poiret, his heart swelling with the courage that love
gives to the ovine male, “respect the weaker sex.”

“Spies are of no sex!” said the painter.

“A precious sexorama!”

“Turn her into the streetorama!”

“Gentlemen, this is not manners! If you turn people out of the house,
it ought not to be done so unceremoniously and with no notice at all. We
have paid our money, and we are not going,” said Poiret, putting on his
cap, and taking a chair beside Mlle. Michonneau, with whom Mme. Vauquer
was remonstrating.

“Naughty boy!” said the painter, with a comical look; “run away, naughty
little boy!”

“Look here,” said Bianchon; “if you do not go, all the rest of us will,”
 and the boarders, to a man, made for the sitting-room-door.

“Oh! mademoiselle, what is to be done?” cried Mme. Vauquer. “I am a
ruined woman. You can’t stay here; they will go further, do something
violent.”

Mlle. Michonneau rose to her feet.

“She is going!--She is not going!--She is going!--No, she isn’t.”

These alternate exclamations, and a suggestion of hostile intentions,
borne out by the behavior of the insurgents, compelled Mlle. Michonneau
to take her departure. She made some stipulations, speaking in a low
voice in her hostess’ ear, and then--“I shall go to Mme. Buneaud’s,” she
said, with a threatening look.

“Go where you please, mademoiselle,” said Mme. Vauquer, who regarded
this choice of an opposition establishment as an atrocious insult. “Go
and lodge with the Buneaud; the wine would give a cat the colic, and the
food is cheap and nasty.”

The boarders stood aside in two rows to let her pass; not a word was
spoken. Poiret looked so wistfully after Mlle. Michonneau, and so
artlessly revealed that he was in two minds whether to go or stay, that
the boarders, in their joy at being quit of Mlle. Michonneau, burst out
laughing at the sight of him.

“Hist!--st!--st! Poiret,” shouted the painter. “Hallo! I say, Poiret,
hallo!” The _employe_ from the Museum began to sing:

     “Partant pour la Syrie,
      Le jeune et beau Dunois...”

“Get along with you; you must be dying to go, _trahit sua quemque
voluptas!_” said Bianchon.

“Every one to his taste--free rendering from Virgil,” said the tutor.

Mlle. Michonneau made a movement as if to take Poiret’s arm, with an
appealing glance that he could not resist. The two went out together,
the old maid leaning upon him, and there was a burst of applause,
followed by peals of laughter.

“Bravo, Poiret!”

“Who would have thought it of old Poiret!”

“Apollo Poiret!”

“Mars Poiret!”

“Intrepid Poiret!”

A messenger came in at that moment with a letter for Mme. Vauquer, who
read it through, and collapsed in her chair.

“The house might as well be burned down at once,” cried she, “if there
are to be any more of these thunderbolts! Young Taillefer died at three
o’clock this afternoon. It serves me right for wishing well to those
ladies at that poor man’s expense. Mme. Couture and Victorine want me
to send their things, because they are going to live with her father.
M. Taillefer allows his daughter to keep old Mme. Couture as her lady
companion. Four rooms to let! and five lodgers gone!...”

She sat up, and seemed about to burst into tears.

“Bad luck has come to lodge here, I think,” she cried.

Once more there came a sound of wheels from the street outside.

“What! another windfall for somebody!” was Sylvie’s comment.

But it was Goriot who came in, looking so radiant, so flushed with
happiness, that he seemed to have grown young again.

“Goriot in a cab!” cried the boarders; “the world is coming to an end.”

The good soul made straight for Eugene, who was standing wrapped in
thought in a corner, and laid a hand on the young man’s arm.

“Come,” he said, with gladness in his eyes.

“Then you haven’t heard the news?” said Eugene. “Vautrin was an escaped
convict; they have just arrested him; and young Taillefer is dead.”

“Very well, but what business is it of ours?” replied Father Goriot. “I
am going to dine with my daughter in _your house_, do you understand?
She is expecting you. Come!”

He carried off Rastignac with him by main force, and they departed in as
great a hurry as a pair of eloping lovers.

“Now, let us have dinner,” cried the painter, and every one drew his
chair to the table.

“Well, I never,” said the portly Sylvie. “Nothing goes right to-day! The
haricot mutton has caught! Bah! you will have to eat it, burned as it
is, more’s the pity!”

Mme. Vauquer was so dispirited that she could not say a word as she
looked round the table and saw only ten people where eighteen should
be; but every one tried to comfort and cheer her. At first the dinner
contingent, as was natural, talked about Vautrin and the day’s events;
but the conversation wound round to such topics of interest as duels,
jails, justice, prison life, and alterations that ought to be made
in the laws. They soon wandered miles away from Jacques Collin and
Victorine and her brother. There might be only ten of them, but they
made noise enough for twenty; indeed, there seemed to be more of them
than usual; that was the only difference between yesterday and to-day.
Indifference to the fate of others is a matter of course in this selfish
world, which, on the morrow of tragedy, seeks among the events of
Paris for a fresh sensation for its daily renewed appetite, and this
