troubles have broken my night’s rest; I shall grow ugly.”

“Oh! that is impossible,” cried the law student; “but I am curious to
know what these troubles can be that a devoted love cannot efface.”

“Ah! if I were to tell you about them, you would shun me,” she said.
“Your love for me is as yet only the conventional gallantry that men use
to masquerade in; and, if you really loved me, you would be driven to
despair. I must keep silence, you see. Let us talk of something else,
for pity’s sake,” she added. “Let me show you my rooms.”

“No; let us stay here,” answered Eugene; he sat down on the sofa
before the fire, and boldly took Mme. de Nucingen’s hand in his. She
surrendered it to him; he even felt the pressure of her fingers in one
of the spasmodic clutches that betray terrible agitation.

“Listen,” said Rastignac; “if you are in trouble, you ought to tell me
about it. I want to prove to you that I love you for yourself alone. You
must speak to me frankly about your troubles, so that I can put an end
to them, even if I have to kill half-a-dozen men; or I shall go, never
to return.”

“Very well,” she cried, putting her hand to her forehead in an agony of
despair, “I will put you to the proof, and this very moment. Yes,” she
said to herself, “I have no other resource left.”

She rang the bell.

“Are the horses put in for the master?” she asked of the servant.

“Yes, madame.”

“I shall take his carriage myself. He can have mine and my horses. Serve
dinner at seven o’clock.”

“Now, come with me,” she said to Eugene, who thought as he sat in
the banker’s carriage beside Mme. de Nucingen that he must surely be
dreaming.

“To the Palais-Royal,” she said to the coachman; “stop near the
Theatre-Francais.”

She seemed to be too troubled and excited to answer the innumerable
questions that Eugene put to her. He was at a loss what to think of her
mute resistance, her obstinate silence.

“Another moment and she will escape me,” he said to himself.

When the carriage stopped at last, the Baroness gave the law student a
glance that silenced his wild words, for he was almost beside himself.

“Is it true that you love me?” she asked.

“Yes,” he answered, and in his manner and tone there was no trace of the
uneasiness that he felt.

“You will not think ill of me, will you, whatever I may ask of you?”

“No.”

“Are you ready to do my bidding?”

“Blindly.”

“Have you ever been to a gaming-house?” she asked in a tremulous voice.

“Never.”

“Ah! now I can breathe. You will have luck. Here is my purse,” she said.
“Take it! there are a hundred francs in it, all that such a fortunate
woman as I can call her own. Go up into one of the gaming-houses--I do
not know where they are, but there are some near the Palais-Royal. Try
your luck with the hundred francs at a game they call roulette; lose
it all or bring me back six thousand francs. I will tell you about my
troubles when you come back.”

“Devil take me, I’m sure, if I have a glimmer of a notion of what I am
about, but I will obey you,” he added, with inward exultation, as he
thought, “She has gone too far to draw back--she can refuse me nothing
now!”

Eugene took the dainty little purse, inquired the way of a second-hand
clothes-dealer, and hurried to number , which happened to be the
nearest gaming-house. He mounted the staircase, surrendered his hat, and
asked the way to the roulette-table, whither the attendant took him, not
a little to the astonishment of the regular comers. All eyes were fixed
on Eugene as he asked, without bashfulness, where he was to deposit his
stakes.

“If you put a louis on one only of those thirty-six numbers, and it
turns up, you will win thirty-six louis,” said a respectable-looking,
white-haired old man in answer to his inquiry.

Eugene staked the whole of his money on the number  (his own age).
There was a cry of surprise; before he knew what he had done, he had
won.

“Take your money off, sir,” said the old gentleman; “you don’t often win
twice running by that system.”

Eugene took the rake that the old man handed to him, and drew in his
three thousand six hundred francs, and, still perfectly ignorant of
what he was about, staked again on the red. The bystanders watched him
enviously as they saw him continue to play. The disc turned, and again
he won; the banker threw him three thousand six hundred francs once
more.

“You have seven thousand, two hundred francs of your own,” the old
gentleman said in his ear. “Take my advice and go away with your
winnings; red has turned up eight times already. If you are charitable,
you will show your gratitude for sound counsel by giving a trifle to an
old prefect of Napoleon who is down on his luck.”

Rastignac’s head was swimming; he saw ten of his louis pass into the
white-haired man’s possession, and went down-stairs with his seven
thousand francs; he was still ignorant of the game, and stupefied by his
luck.

“So, that is over; and now where will you take me?” he asked, as soon as
the door was closed, and he showed the seven thousand francs to Mme. de
Nucingen.

Delphine flung her arms about him, but there was no passion in that wild
embrace.

“You have saved me!” she cried, and tears of joy flowed fast.

“I will tell you everything, my friend. For you will be my friend, will
you not? I am rich, you think, very rich; I have everything I want, or
I seem as if I had everything. Very well, you must know that M. de
Nucingen does not allow me the control of a single penny; he pays all
the bills for the house expenses; he pays for my carriages and opera
box; he does not give me enough to pay for my dress, and he reduces
me to poverty in secret on purpose. I am too proud to beg from him. I
should be the vilest of women if I could take his money at the price at
which he offers it. Do you ask how I, with seven hundred thousand francs
of my own, could let myself be robbed? It is because I was proud, and
scorned to speak. We are so young, so artless when our married life
begins! I never could bring myself to ask my husband for money; the
words would have made my lips bleed, I did not dare to ask; I spent my
savings first, and then the money that my poor father gave me, then I
ran into debt. Marriage for me is a hideous farce; I cannot talk about
it, let it suffice to say that Nucingen and I have separate rooms, and
that I would fling myself out of the window sooner than consent to any
other manner of life. I suffered agonies when I had to confess to my
girlish extravagance, my debts for jewelry and trifles (for our poor
father had never refused us anything, and spoiled us), but at last I
found courage to tell him about them. After all, I had a fortune of my
own. Nucingen flew into a rage; he said that I should be the ruin of
him, and used frightful language! I wished myself a hundred feet down
