be little girls? (Oh! my head! this racking pain in my head!) Ah! ah!
forgive me, children, this pain is fearful; it must be agony indeed, for
you have used me to endure pain. _Mon Dieu!_ if only I held their hands
in mine, I should not feel it at all.--Do you think that they are on the
way? Christophe is so stupid; I ought to have gone myself. _He_ will see
them. But you went to the ball yesterday; just tell me how they looked.
They did not know that I was ill, did they, or they would not have been
dancing, poor little things? Oh! I must not be ill any longer. They
stand too much in need of me; their fortunes are in danger. And such
husbands as they are bound to! I must get well! (Oh! what pain this
is! what pain this is! ... ah! ah!)--I must get well, you see; for they
_must_ have money, and I know how to set about making some. I will go
to Odessa and manufacture starch there. I am an old hand, I will make
millions. (Oh! this is agony!)”

Goriot was silent for a moment; it seemed to require his whole strength
to endure the pain.

“If they were here, I should not complain,” he said. “So why should I
complain now?”

He seemed to grow drowsy with exhaustion, and lay quietly for a long
time. Christophe came back; and Rastignac, thinking that Goriot was
asleep, allowed the man to give his story aloud.

“First of all, sir, I went to Madame la Comtesse,” he said; “but she
and her husband were so busy that I couldn’t get to speak to her. When I
insisted that I must see her, M. de Restaud came out to me himself, and
went on like this: ‘M. Goriot is dying, is he? Very well, it is the
best thing he can do. I want Mme. de Restaud to transact some important
business, when it is all finished she can go.’ The gentleman looked
angry, I thought. I was just going away when Mme. de Restaud came out
into an ante-chamber through a door that I did not notice, and said,
‘Christophe, tell my father that my husband wants me to discuss some
matters with him, and I cannot leave the house, the life or death of my
children is at stake; but as soon as it is over, I will come.’ As for
Madame la Baronne, that is another story! I could not speak to her
either, and I did not even see her. Her waiting-woman said, ‘Ah yes, but
madame only came back from a ball at a quarter to five this morning; she
is asleep now, and if I wake her before mid-day she will be cross. As
soon as she rings, I will go and tell her that her father is worse. It
will be time enough then to tell her bad news!’ I begged and I prayed,
but, there! it was no good. Then I asked for M. le Baron, but he was
out.”

“To think that neither of his daughters should come!” exclaimed
Rastignac. “I will write to them both.”

“Neither of them!” cried the old man, sitting upright in bed. “They are
busy, they are asleep, they will not come! I knew that they would not.
Not until you are dying do you know your children.... Oh! my friend, do
not marry; do not have children! You give them life; they give you your
deathblow. You bring them into the world, and they send you out of it.
No, they will not come. I have known that these ten years. Sometimes I
have told myself so, but I did not dare to believe it.”

The tears gathered and stood without overflowing the red sockets.

“Ah! if I were rich still, if I had kept my money, if I had not given
all to them, they would be with me now; they would fawn on me and cover
my cheeks with their kisses! I should be living in a great mansion; I
should have grand apartments and servants and a fire in my room; and
_they_ would be about me all in tears, and their husbands and their
children. I should have had all that; now--I have nothing. Money brings
everything to you; even your daughters. My money. Oh! where is my money?
If I had plenty of money to leave behind me, they would nurse me and
tend me; I should hear their voices, I should see their faces. Ah, God!
who knows? They both of them have hearts of stone. I loved them too
much; it was not likely that they should love me. A father ought always
to be rich; he ought to keep his children well in hand, like unruly
horses. I have gone down on my knees to them. Wretches! this is the
crowning act that brings the last ten years to a proper close. If you
but knew how much they made of me just after they were married. (Oh!
this is cruel torture!) I had just given them each eight hundred
thousand francs; they were bound to be civil to me after that, and their
husbands too were civil. I used to go to their houses: it was ‘My kind
father’ here, ‘My dear father’ there. There was always a place for me at
their tables. I used to dine with their husbands now and then, and they
were very respectful to me. I was still worth something, they thought.
How should they know? I had not said anything about my affairs. It
is worth while to be civil to a man who has given his daughters eight
hundred thousand francs apiece; and they showed me every attention
then--but it was all for my money. Grand people are not great. I
found that out by experience! I went to the theatre with them in their
carriage; I might stay as long as I cared to stay at their evening
parties. In fact, they acknowledged me their father; publicly they owned
that they were my daughters. But I was always a shrewd one, you see,
and nothing was lost upon me. Everything went straight to the mark and
pierced my heart. I saw quite well that it was all sham and pretence,
but there is no help for such things as these. I felt less at my ease at
their dinner-table than I did downstairs here. I had nothing to say for
myself. So these grand folks would ask in my son-in-law’s ear, ‘Who may
that gentleman be?’--‘The father-in-law with the money bags; he is very
rich.’--‘The devil, he is!’ they would say, and look again at me with
the respect due to my money. Well, if I was in the way sometimes, I paid
dearly for my mistakes. And besides, who is perfect? (My head is one
sore!) Dear Monsieur Eugene, I am suffering so now, that a man might die
of the pain; but it is nothing to be compared with the pain I endured
when Anastasie made me feel, for the first time, that I had said
something stupid. She looked at me, and that glance of hers opened all
my veins. I used to want to know everything, to be learned; and one
thing I did learn thoroughly--I knew that I was not wanted here on
earth.

“The next day I went to Delphine for comfort, and what should I do there
but make some stupid blunder that made her angry with me. I was like one
driven out of his senses. For a week I did not know what to do; I did
not dare to go to see them for fear they should reproach me. And that
was how they both turned me out of the house.

“Oh God! Thou knowest all the misery and anguish that I have endured;
Thou hast counted all the wounds that have been dealt to me in these
years that have aged and changed me and whitened my hair and drained my
life; why dost Thou make me to suffer so to-day? Have I not more than
expiated the sin of loving them too much? They themselves have been the
instruments of vengeance; they have tortured me for my sin of affection.

“Ah, well! fathers know no better; I loved them so; I went back to them
as a gambler goes to the gaming table. This love was my vice, you see,
my mistress--they were everything in the world to me. They were always
wanting something or other, dresses and ornaments, and what not; their
maids used to tell me what they wanted, and I used to give them the
things for the sake of the welcome that they bought for me. But, at
the same time, they used to give me little lectures on my behavior in
society; they began about it at once. Then they began to feel ashamed of
me. That is what comes of having your children well brought up. I could
not go to school again at my time of life. (This pain is fearful! _Mon
Dieu!_ These doctors! these doctors! If they would open my head, it
would give me some relief!) Oh, my daughters, my daughters! Anastasie!
Delphine! If I could only see them! Send for the police, and make them
come to me! Justice is on my side, the whole world is on my side, I have
natural rights, and the law with me. I protest! The country will go to
ruin if a father’s rights are trampled under foot. That is easy to see.
The whole world turns on fatherly love; fatherly love is the foundation
of society; it will crumble into ruin when children do not love their
fathers. Oh! if I could only see them, and hear them, no matter what
they said; if I could simply hear their voices, it would soothe the
pain. Delphine! Delphine most of all. But tell them when they come not
to look so coldly at me as they do. Oh! my friend, my good Monsieur
Eugene, you do not know that it is when all the golden light in a glance
suddenly turns to a leaden gray. It has been one long winter here since
the light in their eyes shone no more for me. I have had nothing but
disappointments to devour. Disappointment has been my daily bread; I
have lived on humiliation and insults. I have swallowed down all the
affronts for which they sold me my poor stealthy little moments of
joy; for I love them so! Think of it! a father hiding himself to get a
glimpse of his children! I have given all my life to them, and to-day
they will not give me one hour! I am hungering and thirsting for them,
my heart is burning in me, but they will not come to bring relief in the
agony, for I am dying now, I feel that this is death. Do they not know
