indifference soon gained the upper hand. Mme. Vauquer herself grew
calmer under the soothing influence of hope, and the mouthpiece of hope
was the portly Sylvie.

That day had gone by like a dream for Eugene, and the sense of unreality
lasted into the evening; so that, in spite of his energetic character
and clear-headedness, his ideas were a chaos as he sat beside Goriot in
the cab. The old man’s voice was full of unwonted happiness, but Eugene
had been shaken by so many emotions that the words sounded in his ears
like words spoken in a dream.

“It was finished this morning! All three of us are going to dine
there together, together! Do you understand? I have not dined with my
Delphine, my little Delphine, these four years, and I shall have her
for a whole evening! We have been at your lodging the whole time since
morning. I have been working like a porter in my shirt sleeves, helping
to carry in the furniture. Aha! you don’t know what pretty ways she
has; at table she will look after me, ‘Here, papa, just try this, it is
nice.’ And I shall not be able to eat. Oh, it is a long while since I
have been with her in quiet every-day life as we shall have her.”

“It really seems as if the world has been turned upside down.”

“Upside down?” repeated Father Goriot. “Why, the world has never been so
right-side up. I see none but smiling faces in the streets, people who
shake hands cordially and embrace each other, people who all look as
happy as if they were going to dine with their daughter, and gobble down
a nice little dinner that she went with me to order of the chef at the
Cafe des Anglais. But, pshaw! with her beside you gall and wormwood
would be as sweet as honey.”

“I feel as if I were coming back to life again,” said Eugene.

“Why, hurry up there!” cried Father Goriot, letting down the window in
front. “Get on faster; I will give you five francs if you get to the
place I told you of in ten minutes time.”

With this prospect before him the cabman crossed Paris with miraculous
celerity.

“How that fellow crawls!” said Father Goriot.

“But where are you taking me?” Eugene asked him.

“To your own house,” said Goriot.

The cab stopped in the Rue d’Artois. Father Goriot stepped out first and
flung ten francs to the man with the recklessness of a widower returning
to bachelor ways.

“Come along upstairs,” he said to Rastignac. They crossed a courtyard,
and climbed up to the third floor of a new and handsome house. There
they stopped before a door; but before Goriot could ring, it was opened
by Therese, Mme. de Nucingen’s maid. Eugene found himself in a charming
set of chambers; an ante-room, a little drawing-room, a bedroom, and a
study, looking out upon a garden. The furniture and the decorations of
the little drawing-room were of the most daintily charming description,
the room was full of soft light, and Delphine rose up from a low chair
by the fire and stood before him. She set her fire-screen down on the
chimney-piece, and spoke with tenderness in every tone of her voice.

“So we had to go in search of you, sir, you who are so slow to
understand!”

Therese left the room. The student took Delphine in his arms and held
her in a tight clasp, his eyes filled with tears of joy. This last
contrast between his present surroundings and the scenes he had just
witnessed was too much for Rastignac’s over-wrought nerves, after the
day’s strain and excitement that had wearied heart and brain; he was
almost overcome by it.

“I felt sure myself that he loved you,” murmured Father Goriot, while
Eugene lay back bewildered on the sofa, utterly unable to speak a word
or to reason out how and why the magic wand had been waved to bring
about this final transformation scene.

“But you must see your rooms,” said Mme. de Nucingen. She took his hand
and led him into a room carpeted and furnished like her own; indeed,
down to the smallest details, it was a reproduction in miniature of
Delphine’s apartment.

“There is no bed,” said Rastignac.

“No, monsieur,” she answered, reddening, and pressing his hand. Eugene,
looking at her, understood, young though he yet was, how deeply modesty
is implanted in the heart of a woman who loves.

“You are one of those beings whom we cannot choose but to adore for
ever,” he said in her ear. “Yes, the deeper and truer love is, the more
mysterious and closely veiled it should be; I can dare to say so, since
we understand each other so well. No one shall learn our secret.”

“Oh! so I am nobody, I suppose,” growled the father.

“You know quite well that ‘we’ means you.”

“Ah! that is what I wanted. You will not mind me, will you? I shall go
and come like a good fairy who makes himself felt everywhere without
being seen, shall I not? Eh, Delphinette, Ninette, Dedel--was it not a
good idea of mine to say to you, ‘There are some nice rooms to let in
the Rue d’Artois; let us furnish them for him?’ And she would not hear
of it! Ah! your happiness has been all my doing. I am the author of your
happiness and of your existence. Fathers must always be giving if they
would be happy themselves; always giving--they would not be fathers
else.”

“Was that how it happened?” asked Eugene.

“Yes. She would not listen to me. She was afraid that people would
talk, as if the rubbish that they say about you were to be compared with
happiness! Why, all women dream of doing what she has done----”

Father Goriot found himself without an audience, for Mme. de Nucingen
had led Rastignac into the study; he heard a kiss given and taken, low
though the sound was.

The study was furnished as elegantly as the other rooms, and nothing was
wanting there.

“Have we guessed your wishes rightly?” she asked, as they returned to
the drawing-room for dinner.

“Yes,” he said, “only too well, alas! For all this luxury so well
carried out, this realization of pleasant dreams, the elegance that
satisfies all the romantic fancies of youth, appeals to me so strongly
that I cannot but feel that it is my rightful possession, but I cannot
accept it from you, and I am too poor as yet to----”

“Ah! ah! you say me nay already,” she said with arch imperiousness,
and a charming little pout of the lips, a woman’s way of laughing away
scruples.

But Eugene had submitted so lately to that solemn self-questioning, and
Vautrin’s arrest had so plainly shown him the depths of the pit that lay
ready to his feet, that the instincts of generosity and honor had been
strengthened in him, and he could not allow himself to be coaxed into
abandoning his high-minded determinations. Profound melancholy filled
his mind.

“Do you really mean to refuse?” said Mme. de Nucingen. “And do you know
what such a refusal means? That you are not sure of yourself, that you
do not dare to bind yourself to me. Are you really afraid of betraying
my affection? If you love me, if I--love you, why should you shrink back
from such a slight obligation? If you but knew what a pleasure it has
been to see after all the arrangements of this bachelor establishment,
you would not hesitate any longer, you would ask me to forgive you for
your hesitation. I had some money that belonged to you, and I have made
good use of it, that is all. You mean this for magnanimity, but it is
very little of you. You are asking me for far more than this.... Ah!”
 she cried, as Eugene’s passionate glance was turned on her, “and you are
