woman, I would die (no--not such a fool), I would live for him.” He
bent lower and spoke in the widow’s ear. “When I see those two together,
madame, I cannot help thinking that Providence meant them for each
other; He works by secret ways, and tries the reins and the heart,” he
said in a loud voice. “And when I see you, my children, thus united by
a like purity and by all human affections, I say to myself that it is
quite impossible that the future should separate you. God is just.”--He
turned to Victorine. “It seems to me,” he said, “that I have seen the
line of success in your hand. Let me look at it, Mlle. Victorine; I am
well up in palmistry, and I have told fortunes many a time. Come, now,
don’t be frightened. Ah! what do I see? Upon my word, you will be one of
the richest heiresses in Paris before very long. You will heap riches
on the man who loves you. Your father will want you to go and live with
him. You will marry a young and handsome man with a title, and he will
idolize you.”

The heavy footsteps of the coquettish widow, who was coming down the
stairs, interrupted Vautrin’s fortune-telling. “Here is Mamma Vauquerre,
fair as a starr-r-r, dressed within an inch of her life.--Aren’t we a
trifle pinched for room?” he inquired, with his arm round the lady;
“we are screwed up very tightly about the bust, mamma! If we are much
agitated, there may be an explosion; but I will pick up the fragments
with all the care of an antiquary.”

“There is a man who can talk the language of French gallantry!” said the
widow, bending to speak in Mme. Couture’s ear.

“Good-bye, little ones!” said Vautrin, turning to Eugene and Victorine.
“Bless you both!” and he laid a hand on either head. “Take my word for
it, young lady, an honest man’s prayers are worth something; they should
bring you happiness, for God hears them.”

“Good-bye, dear,” said Mme. Vauquer to her lodger. “Do you think that M.
Vautrin means to run away with me?” she added, lowering her voice.

“Lack-a-day!” said the widow.

“Oh! mamma dear, suppose it should really happen as that kind M. Vautrin
said!” said Victorine with a sigh as she looked at her hands. The two
women were alone together.

“Why, it wouldn’t take much to bring it to pass,” said the elderly lady;
“just a fall from his horse, and your monster of a brother----”

“Oh! mamma.”

“Good Lord! Well, perhaps it is a sin to wish bad luck to an enemy,” the
widow remarked. “I will do penance for it. Still, I would strew
flowers on his grave with the greatest pleasure, and that is the truth.
Black-hearted, that he is! The coward couldn’t speak up for his own
mother, and cheats you out of your share by deceit and trickery. My
cousin had a pretty fortune of her own, but unluckily for you, nothing
was said in the marriage-contract about anything that she might come in
for.”

“It would be very hard if my fortune is to cost some one else his life,”
 said Victorine. “If I cannot be happy unless my brother is to be taken
out of the world, I would rather stay here all my life.”

“_Mon Dieu!_ it is just as that good M. Vautrin says, and he is full of
piety, you see,” Mme. Couture remarked. “I am very glad to find that
he is not an unbeliever like the rest of them that talk of the Almighty
with less respect than they do of the Devil. Well, as he was saying, who
can know the ways by which it may please Providence to lead us?”

With Sylvie’s help the two women at last succeeded in getting Eugene
up to his room; they laid him on the bed, and the cook unfastened
his clothes to make him more comfortable. Before they left the room,
Victorine snatched an opportunity when her guardian’s back was turned,
and pressed a kiss on Eugene’s forehead, feeling all the joy that this
stolen pleasure could give her. Then she looked round the room, and
gathering up, as it were, into one single thought all the untold bliss
of that day, she made a picture of her memories, and dwelt upon it until
she slept, the happiest creature in Paris.

That evening’s merry-making, in the course of which Vautrin had
given the drugged wine to Eugene and Father Goriot, was his own
ruin. Bianchon, flustered with wine, forgot to open the subject of
Trompe-la-Mort with Mlle. Michonneau. The mere mention of the name would
have set Vautrin on his guard; for Vautrin, or, to give him his real
name, Jacques Collin, was in fact the notorious escaped convict.

But it was the joke about the Venus of Pere-Lachaise that finally
decided his fate. Mlle. Michonneau had very nearly made up her mind to
warn the convict and to throw herself on his generosity, with the idea
of making a better bargain for herself by helping him to escape that
night; but as it was, she went out escorted by Poiret in search of the
famous chief of detectives in the Petite Rue Saint-Anne, still thinking
that it was the district superintendent--one Gondureau--with whom she
had to do. The head of the department received his visitors courteously.
There was a little talk, and the details were definitely arranged. Mlle.
Michonneau asked for the draught that she was to administer in order to
set about her investigation. But the great man’s evident satisfaction
set Mlle. Michonneau thinking; and she began to see that this business
involved something more than the mere capture of a runaway convict. She
racked her brains while he looked in a drawer in his desk for the
little phial, and it dawned upon her that in consequence of treacherous
revelations made by the prisoners the police were hoping to lay their
hands on a considerable sum of money. But on hinting her suspicions to
the old fox of the Petite Rue Saint-Anne, that officer began to smile,
and tried to put her off the scent.

“A delusion,” he said. “Collin’s _sorbonne_ is the most dangerous that
has yet been found among the dangerous classes. That is all, and the
rascals are quite aware of it. They rally round him; he is the backbone
of the federation, its Bonaparte, in short; he is very popular with them
all. The rogue will never leave his _chump_ in the Place de Greve.”

As Mlle. Michonneau seemed mystified, Gondureau explained the two
slang words for her benefit. _Sorbonne_ and _chump_ are two forcible
expressions borrowed from thieves’ Latin, thieves, of all people, being
compelled to consider the human head in its two aspects. A sorbonne is
the head of a living man, his faculty of thinking--his council; a chump
is a contemptuous epithet that implies how little a human head is worth
after the axe has done its work.

“Collin is playing us off,” he continued. “When we come across a man
like a bar of steel tempered in the English fashion, there is always one
resource left--we can kill him if he takes it into his head to make the
least resistance. We are reckoning on several methods of killing Collin
to-morrow morning. It saves a trial, and society is rid of him without
all the expense of guarding and feeding him. What with getting up the
case, summoning witnesses, paying their expenses, and carrying out the
sentence, it costs a lot to go through all the proper formalities before
you can get quit of one of these good-for-nothings, over and above the
three thousand francs that you are going to have. There is a saving
in time as well. One good thrust of the bayonet into Trompe-la-Mort’s
paunch will prevent scores of crimes, and save fifty scoundrels from
following his example; they will be very careful to keep themselves out
of the police courts. That is doing the work of the police thoroughly,
and true philanthropists will tell you that it is better to prevent
crime than to punish it.”

“And you do a service to our country,” said Poiret.

“Really, you are talking in a very sensible manner tonight, that you
are,” said the head of the department. “Yes, of course, we are serving
our country, and we are very hardly used too. We do society very great
services that are not recognized. In fact, a superior man must rise
above vulgar prejudices, and a Christian must resign himself to
the mishaps that doing right entails, when right is done in an
out-of-the-way style. Paris is Paris, you see! That is the explanation
of my life.--I have the honor to wish you a good-evening, mademoiselle.
I shall bring my men to the Jardin du Roi in the morning. Send
Christophe to the Rue du Buffon, tell him to ask for M. Gondureau in the
house where you saw me before.--Your servant, sir. If you should ever
have anything stolen from you, come to me, and I will do my best to get
it back for you.”

“Well, now,” Poiret remarked to Mlle. Michonneau, “there are idiots
