
“Who has not his troubles?” answered Rastignac. “If we men were sure
of being loved, sure of a devotion which would be our reward for the
sacrifices which we are always ready to make, then perhaps we should
have no troubles.”

For answer Mlle. Taillefer only gave him a glance but it was impossible
to mistake its meaning.

“You, for instance, mademoiselle; you feel sure of your heart to-day,
but are you sure that it will never change?”

A smile flitted over the poor girl’s lips; it seemed as if a ray of
light from her soul had lighted up her face. Eugene was dismayed at the
sudden explosion of feeling caused by his words.

“Ah! but suppose,” he said, “that you should be rich and happy
to-morrow, suppose that a vast fortune dropped down from the clouds
for you, would you still love the man whom you loved in your days of
poverty?”

A charming movement of the head was her only answer.

“Even if he were very poor?”

Again the same mute answer.

“What nonsense are you talking, you two?” exclaimed Mme. Vauquer.

“Never mind,” answered Eugene; “we understand each other.”

“So there is to be an engagement of marriage between M. le Chevalier
Eugene de Rastignac and Mlle. Victorine Taillefer, is there?” The words
were uttered in Vautrin’s deep voice, and Vautrin appeared at the door
as he spoke.

“Oh! how you startled me!” Mme. Couture and Mme. Vauquer exclaimed
together.

“I might make a worse choice,” said Rastignac, laughing. Vautrin’s voice
had thrown him into the most painful agitation that he had yet known.

“No bad jokes, gentlemen!” said Mme. Couture. “My dear, let us go
upstairs.”

Mme. Vauquer followed the two ladies, meaning to pass the evening in
their room, an arrangement that economized fire and candlelight. Eugene
and Vautrin were left alone.

“I felt sure you would come round to it,” said the elder man with the
coolness that nothing seemed to shake. “But stay a moment! I have as
much delicacy as anybody else. Don’t make up your mind on the spur of
the moment; you are a little thrown off your balance just now. You are
in debt, and I want you to come over to my way of thinking after sober
reflection, and not in a fit of passion or desperation. Perhaps you want
a thousand crowns. There, you can have them if you like.”

The tempter took out a pocketbook, and drew thence three banknotes,
which he fluttered before the student’s eyes. Eugene was in a most
painful dilemma. He had debts, debts of honor. He owed a hundred louis
to the Marquis d’Ajuda and to the Count de Trailles; he had not the
money, and for this reason had not dared to go to Mme. de Restaud’s
house, where he was expected that evening. It was one of those informal
gatherings where tea and little cakes are handed round, but where it is
possible to lose six thousand francs at whist in the course of a night.

“You must see,” said Eugene, struggling to hide a convulsive tremor,
“that after what has passed between us, I cannot possibly lay myself
under any obligation to you.”

“Quite right; I should be sorry to hear you speak otherwise,” answered
the tempter. “You are a fine young fellow, honorable, brave as a lion,
and as gentle as a young girl. You would be a fine haul for the devil! I
like youngsters of your sort. Get rid of one or two more prejudices, and
you will see the world as it is. Make a little scene now and then, and
act a virtuous part in it, and a man with a head on his shoulders can
do exactly as he likes amid deafening applause from the fools in the
gallery. Ah! a few days yet, and you will be with us; and if you would
only be tutored by me, I would put you in the way of achieving all your
ambitions. You should no sooner form a wish than it should be realized
to the full; you should have all your desires--honors, wealth, or women.
Civilization should flow with milk and honey for you. You should be our
pet and favorite, our Benjamin. We would all work ourselves to death for
you with pleasure; every obstacle should be removed from your path. You
have a few prejudices left; so you think that I am a scoundrel, do you?
Well, M. de Turenne, quite as honorable a man as you take yourself to
be, had some little private transactions with bandits, and did not
feel that his honor was tarnished. You would rather not lie under any
obligation to me, eh? You need not draw back on that account,” Vautrin
went on, and a smile stole over his lips. “Take these bits of paper
and write across this,” he added, producing a piece of stamped paper,
“_Accepted the sum of three thousand five hundred francs due this day
twelvemonth_, and fill in the date. The rate of interest is stiff enough
to silence any scruples on your part; it gives you the right to call me
a Jew. You can call quits with me on the score of gratitude. I am quite
willing that you should despise me to-day, because I am sure that you
will have a kindlier feeling towards me later on. You will find out
fathomless depths in my nature, enormous and concentrated forces that
weaklings call vices, but you will never find me base or ungrateful.
In short, I am neither a pawn nor a bishop, but a castle, a tower of
strength, my boy.”

“What manner of man are you?” cried Eugene. “Were you created to torment
me?”

“Why no; I am a good-natured fellow, who is willing to do a dirty piece
of work to put you high and dry above the mire for the rest of your
days. Do you ask the reason of this devotion? All right; I will tell you
that some of these days. A word or two in your ear will explain it. I
have begun by shocking you, by showing you the way to ring the changes,
and giving you a sight of the mechanism of the social machine; but your
first fright will go off like a conscript’s terror on the battlefield.
You will grow used to regarding men as common soldiers who have made up
their minds to lose their lives for some self-constituted king. Times
have altered strangely. Once you could say to a bravo, ‘Here are a
hundred crowns; go and kill Monsieur So-and-so for me,’ and you could
sup quietly after turning some one off into the dark for the least thing
in the world. But nowadays I propose to put you in the way of a handsome
fortune; you have only to nod your head, it won’t compromise you in any
way, and you hesitate. ‘Tis an effeminate age.”

Eugene accepted the draft, and received the banknotes in exchange for
it.

“Well, well. Come, now, let us talk rationally,” Vautrin continued. “I
mean to leave this country in a few months’ time for America, and set
about planting tobacco. I will send you the cigars of friendship. If
I make money at it, I will help you in your career. If I have no
children--which will probably be the case, for I have no anxiety to
raise slips of myself here--you shall inherit my fortune. That is what
you may call standing by a man; but I myself have a liking for you. I
have a mania, too, for devoting myself to some one else. I have done it
before. You see, my boy, I live in a loftier sphere than other men do;
I look on all actions as means to an end, and the end is all that I look
at. What is a man’s life to me? Not _that_,” he said, and he snapped his
thumb-nail against his teeth. “A man, in short, is everything to me, or
just nothing at all. Less than nothing if his name happens to be Poiret;
you can crush him like a bug, he is flat and he is offensive. But a man
is a god when he is like you; he is not a machine covered with a skin,
but a theatre in which the greatest sentiments are displayed--great
thoughts and feelings--and for these, and these only, I live. A
sentiment--what is that but the whole world in a thought? Look at Father
Goriot. For him, his two girls are the whole universe; they are the clue
by which he finds his way through creation. Well, for my own part,
I have fathomed the depths of life, there is only one real
sentiment--comradeship between man and man. Pierre and Jaffier, that is
my passion. I knew _Venice Preserved_ by heart. Have you met many men
plucky enough when a comrade says, ‘Let us bury a dead body!’ to go and
do it without a word or plaguing him by taking a high moral tone? I have
done it myself. I should not talk like this to just everybody, but you
