was through a bright mist. Soon the noise began to subside, one by one
the boarders went. At last, when their numbers had so dwindled that the
party consisted of Mme. Vauquer, Mme. Couture, Mlle. Victorine, Vautrin,
and Father Goriot, Rastignac watched as though in a dream how Mme.
Vauquer busied herself by collecting the bottles, and drained the
remainder of the wine out of each to fill others.

“Oh! how uproarious they are! what a thing it is to be young!” said the
widow.

These were the last words that Eugene heard and understood.

“There is no one like M. Vautrin for a bit of fun like this,” said
Sylvie. “There, just hark at Christophe, he is snoring like a top.”

“Good-bye, mamma,” said Vautrin; “I am going to a theatre on the
boulevard to see M. Marty in _Le Mont Sauvage_, a fine play taken
from _Le Solitaire_.... If you like, I will take you and these two
ladies----”

“Thank you; I must decline,” said Mme. Couture.

“What! my good lady!” cried Mme. Vauquer, “decline to see a play founded
on the _Le Solitaire_, a work by Atala de Chateaubriand? We were so fond
of that book that we cried over it like Magdalens under the _line-trees_
last summer, and then it is an improving work that might edify your
young lady.”

“We are forbidden to go to the play,” answered Victorine.

“Just look, those two yonder have dropped off where they sit,” said
Vautrin, shaking the heads of the two sleepers in a comical way.

He altered the sleeping student’s position, settled his head more
comfortably on the back of his chair, kissed him warmly on the forehead,
and began to sing:

     “Sleep, little darlings;
      I watch while you slumber.”

“I am afraid he may be ill,” said Victorine.

“Then stop and take care of him,” returned Vautrin. “‘Tis your duty as
a meek and obedient wife,” he whispered in her ear. “The young fellow
worships you, and you will be his little wife--there’s your fortune for
you. In short,” he added aloud, “they lived happily ever afterwards,
were much looked up to in all the countryside, and had a numerous
family. That is how all the romances end.--Now, mamma,” he went on, as
he turned to Madame Vauquer and put his arm round her waist, “put on
your bonnet, your best flowered silk, and the countess’ scarf, while I
go out and call a cab--all my own self.”

And he started out, singing as he went:

     “Oh! sun! divine sun!
      Ripening the pumpkins every one.”

“My goodness! Well, I’m sure! Mme. Couture, I could live happily in a
garret with a man like that.--There, now!” she added, looking round for
the old vermicelli maker, “there is that Father Goriot half seas over.
_He_ never thought of taking me anywhere, the old skinflint. But he will
measure his length somewhere. My word! it is disgraceful to lose his
senses like that, at his age! You will be telling me that he couldn’t
lose what he hadn’t got--Sylvie, just take him up to his room!”

Sylvie took him by the arm, supported him upstairs, and flung him just
as he was, like a package, across the bed.

“Poor young fellow!” said Mme. Couture, putting back Eugene’s hair that
had fallen over his eyes; “he is like a young girl, he does not know
what dissipation is.”

“Well, I can tell you this, I know,” said Mme. Vauquer, “I have taken
lodgers these thirty years, and a good many have passed through my
hands, as the saying is, but I have never seen a nicer nor a more
aristocratic looking young man than M. Eugene. How handsome he looks
sleeping! Just let his head rest on your shoulder, Mme. Couture. Pshaw!
he falls over towards Mlle. Victorine. There’s a special providence for
young things. A little more, and he would have broken his head against
the knob of the chair. They’d make a pretty pair those two would!”

“Hush, my good neighbor,” cried Mme. Couture, “you are saying such
things----”

“Pooh!” put in Mme. Vauquer, “he does not hear.--Here, Sylvie! come and
help me to dress. I shall put on my best stays.”

“What! your best stays just after dinner, madame?” said Sylvie. “No, you
can get some one else to lace you. I am not going to be your murderer.
It’s a rash thing to do, and might cost you your life.”

“I don’t care, I must do honor to M. Vautrin.”

“Are you so fond of your heirs as all that?”

“Come, Sylvie, don’t argue,” said the widow, as she left the room.

“At her age, too!” said the cook to Victorine, pointing to her mistress
as she spoke.

Mme. Couture and her ward were left in the dining-room, and Eugene
slept on Victorine’s shoulder. The sound of Christophe’s snoring echoed
through the silent house; Eugene’s quiet breathing seemed all the
quieter by force of contrast, he was sleeping as peacefully as a child.
Victorine was very happy; she was free to perform one of those acts of
charity which form an innocent outlet for all the overflowing sentiments
of a woman’s nature; he was so close to her that she could feel the
throbbing of his heart; there was a look of almost maternal protection
and conscious pride in Victorine’s face. Among the countless thoughts
that crowded up in her young innocent heart, there was a wild flutter of
joy at this close contact.

“Poor, dear child!” said Mme. Couture, squeezing her hand.

The old lady looked at the girl. Victorine’s innocent, pathetic face,
so radiant with the new happiness that had befallen her, called to
mind some naive work of mediaeval art, when the painter neglected the
accessories, reserving all the magic of his brush for the quiet,
austere outlines and ivory tints of the face, which seems to have caught
something of the golden glory of heaven.

“After all, he only took two glasses, mamma,” said Victorine, passing
her fingers through Eugene’s hair.

“Indeed, if he had been a dissipated young man, child, he would have
carried his wine like the rest of them. His drowsiness does him credit.”

There was a sound of wheels outside in the street.

“There is M. Vautrin, mamma,” said the girl. “Just take M. Eugene. I
would rather not have that man see me like this; there are some ways of
looking at you that seem to sully your soul and make you feel as though
you had nothing on.”

“Oh, no, you are wrong!” said Mme. Couture. “M. Vautrin is a worthy man;
he reminds me a little of my late husband, poor dear M. Couture, rough
but kind-hearted; his bark is worse than his bite.”

Vautrin came in while she was speaking; he did not make a sound, but
looked for a while at the picture of the two young faces--the lamplight
falling full upon them seemed to caress them.

“Well,” he remarked, folding his arms, “here is a picture! It would have
suggested some pleasing pages to Bernardin de Saint-Pierre (good
soul), who wrote _Paul et Virginie_. Youth is very charming, Mme.
Couture!--Sleep on, poor boy,” he added, looking at Eugene, “luck
sometimes comes while you are sleeping.--There is something touching and
attractive to me about this young man, madame,” he continued; “I know
that his nature is in harmony with his face. Just look, the head of
a cherub on an angel’s shoulder! He deserves to be loved. If I were a
