He was satisfied, and yet dissatisfied. He was pleased with an adventure
which would probably give him his desire, for in the end one of the
prettiest and best-dressed women in Paris would be his; but, as a
set-off, he saw his hopes of fortune brought to nothing; and as soon as
he realized this fact, the vague thoughts of yesterday evening began to
take a more decided shape in his mind. A check is sure to reveal to us
the strength of our hopes. The more Eugene learned of the pleasures of
life in Paris, the more impatient he felt of poverty and obscurity. He
crumpled the banknote in his pocket, and found any quantity of plausible
excuses for appropriating it.

He reached the Rue Neuve-Sainte-Genevieve at last, and from the
stairhead he saw a light in Goriot’s room; the old man had lighted a
candle, and set the door ajar, lest the student should pass him by, and
go to his room without “telling him all about his daughter,” to use
his own expression. Eugene, accordingly, told him everything without
reserve.

“Then they think that I am ruined!” cried Father Goriot, in an agony of
jealousy and desperation. “Why, I have still thirteen hundred livres a
year! _Mon Dieu!_ Poor little girl! why did she not come to me? I would
have sold my rentes; she should have had some of the principal, and I
would have bought a life-annuity with the rest. My good neighbor, why
did not _you_ come to tell me of her difficulty? How had you the
heart to go and risk her poor little hundred francs at play? This is
heart-breaking work. You see what it is to have sons-in-law. Oh! if I
had hold of them, I would wring their necks. _Mon Dieu! crying!_ Did you
say she was crying?”

“With her head on my waistcoat,” said Eugene.

“Oh! give it to me,” said Father Goriot. “What! my daughter’s tears have
fallen there--my darling Delphine, who never used to cry when she was
a little girl! Oh! I will buy you another; do not wear it again; let me
have it. By the terms of her marriage-contract, she ought to have the
use of her property. To-morrow morning I will go and see Derville; he is
an attorney. I will demand that her money should be invested in her own
name. I know the law. I am an old wolf, I will show my teeth.”

“Here, father; this is a banknote for a thousand francs that she wanted
me to keep out of our winnings. Keep them for her, in the pocket of the
waistcoat.”

Goriot looked hard at Eugene, reached out and took the law student’s
hand, and Eugene felt a tear fall on it.

“You will succeed,” the old man said. “God is just, you see. I know an
honest man when I see him, and I can tell you, there are not many men
like you. I am to have another dear child in you, am I? There, go to
sleep; you can sleep; you are not yet a father. She was crying! and I
have to be told about it!--and I was quietly eating my dinner, like an
idiot, all the time--I, who would sell the Father, Son and Holy Ghost to
save one tear to either of them.”



“An honest man!” said Eugene to himself as he lay down. “Upon my word, I
think I will be an honest man all my life; it is so pleasant to obey
the voice of conscience.” Perhaps none but believers in God do good in
secret; and Eugene believed in a God.

The next day Rastignac went at the appointed time to Mme. de Beauseant,
who took him with her to the Duchesse de Carigliano’s ball. The
Marechale received Eugene most graciously. Mme. de Nucingen was there.
Delphine’s dress seemed to suggest that she wished for the admiration
of others, so that she might shine the more in Eugene’s eyes; she
was eagerly expecting a glance from him, hiding, as she thought, this
eagerness from all beholders. This moment is full of charm for one who
can guess all that passes in a woman’s mind. Who has not refrained from
giving his opinion, to prolong her suspense, concealing his pleasure
from a desire to tantalize, seeking a confession of love in her
uneasiness, enjoying the fears that he can dissipate by a smile? In
the course of the evening the law student suddenly comprehended his
position; he saw that, as the cousin of Mme. de Beauseant, he was a
personage in this world. He was already credited with the conquest
of Mme. de Nucingen, and for this reason was a conspicuous figure;
he caught the envious glances of other young men, and experienced the
earliest pleasures of coxcombry. People wondered at his luck, and scraps
of these conversations came to his ears as he went from room to room;
all the women prophesied his success; and Delphine, in her dread of
losing him, promised that this evening she would not refuse the kiss
that all his entreaties could scarcely win yesterday.

Rastignac received several invitations. His cousin presented him to
other women who were present; women who could claim to be of the highest
fashion; whose houses were looked upon as pleasant; and this was
the loftiest and most fashionable society in Paris into which he was
launched. So this evening had all the charm of a brilliant debut; it
was an evening that he was to remember even in old age, as a woman looks
back upon her first ball and the memories of her girlish triumphs.

The next morning, at breakfast, he related the story of his success for
the benefit of Father Goriot and the lodgers. Vautrin began to smile in
a diabolical fashion.

“And do you suppose,” cried that cold-blooded logician, “that a young
man of fashion can live here in the Rue Neuve-Sainte-Genevieve, in the
Maison Vauquer--an exceedingly respectable boarding-house in every way,
I grant you, but an establishment that, none the less, falls short
of being fashionable? The house is comfortable, it is lordly in its
abundance; it is proud to be the temporary abode of a Rastignac; but,
after all, it is in the Rue Neuve-Sainte-Genevieve, and luxury would be
out of place here, where we only aim at the purely _patriarchalorama_.
If you mean to cut a figure in Paris, my young friend,” Vautrin
continued, with half-paternal jocularity, “you must have three horses,
a tilbury for the mornings, and a closed carriage for the evening; you
should spend altogether about nine thousand francs on your stables. You
would show yourself unworthy of your destiny if you spent no more than
three thousand francs with your tailor, six hundred in perfumery, a
hundred crowns to your shoemaker, and a hundred more to your hatter. As
for your laundress, there goes another thousand francs; a young man of
fashion must of necessity make a great point of his linen; if your linen
comes up to the required standard, people often do not look any further.
Love and the Church demand a fair altar-cloth. That is fourteen thousand
francs. I am saying nothing of losses at play, bets, and presents; it
is impossible to allow less than two thousand francs for pocket money. I
have led that sort of life, and I know all about these expenses. Add the
cost of necessaries next; three hundred louis for provender, a thousand
francs for a place to roost in. Well, my boy, for all these little wants
of ours we had need to have twenty-five thousand francs every year in
our purse, or we shall find ourselves in the kennel, and people laughing
at us, and our career is cut short, good-bye to success, and good-bye to
your mistress! I am forgetting your valet and your groom! Is Christophe
going to carry your _billets-doux_ for you? Do you mean to employ the
stationery you use at present? Suicidal policy! Hearken to the wisdom
of your elders!” he went on, his bass voice growing louder at each
syllable. “Either take up your quarters in a garret, live virtuously,
and wed your work, or set about the thing in a different way.”

Vautrin winked and leered in the direction of Mlle. Taillefer to enforce
his remarks by a look which recalled the late tempting proposals by
which he had sought to corrupt the student’s mind.

Several days went by, and Rastignac lived in a whirl of gaiety. He dined
almost every day with Mme. de Nucingen, and went wherever she went, only
returning to the Rue Neuve-Sainte-Genevieve in the small hours. He rose
at mid-day, and dressed to go into the Bois with Delphine if the day was
fine, squandering in this way time that was worth far more than he knew.
He turned as eagerly to learn the lessons of luxury, and was as quick
to feel its fascination, as the flowers of the date palm to receive the
fertilizing pollen. He played high, lost and won large sums of money,
and at last became accustomed to the extravagant life that young men
lead in Paris. He sent fifteen hundred francs out of his first winnings
to his mother and sisters, sending handsome presents as well as the
money. He had given out that he meant to leave the Maison Vauquer; but
January came and went, and he was still there, still unprepared to go.

One rule holds good of most young men--whether rich or poor. They never
have money for the necessaries of life, but they have always money to
spare for their caprices--an anomaly which finds its explanation in
