was that our four friends were left to dwell in the cottage, where
they lived happily for the rest of their lives, and as they had now
everything they wanted, they quite gave up their idea of going to St.
Gudule.

[Illustration]




[Illustration: THE KING]

THE TRIAL OF REYNARD THE FOX


I. HOW CHANTICLEER THE COCK MADE COMPLAINT AGAINST REYNARD

There was rejoicing among the animals, for it was said that Reynard the
Fox--sly, spiteful Reynard--had at last repented him of his misdeeds
and resolved to lead a new life. Such a thing was, indeed, very hard to
believe, but nevertheless everybody said that it was true. Certainly he
was seen no more in his usual haunts, or about the Court of King Lion.
The news went round that he had put on the robe of piety and had become
a hermit, endeavouring to atone, by fasting and prayer, for all the
sins of which he had been guilty.

At the Court of King Nobel, Reynard's change of heart was the one
topic of conversation. A few of the animals frankly expressed their
doubts of the sincerity of such a tardy repentance, but the majority
were quite willing to accept it, for, as a rule, one believes what one
wishes to believe.

While the subject was still being eagerly discussed by the animals
around the Lion's throne, the sound of wailing was heard, and a strange
procession was seen making its way towards the King's throne. At the
head of the procession marched Chanticleer the Cock, dressed in the
deepest mourning and sobbing miserably, with bowed head. Behind him,
borne by two hens, was a bier on which was stretched the headless body
of a beautiful fowl, one of his daughters, and all the other hens
of his family followed the bier, raising their voices to heaven in
grievous lamentation. At this sad sight the whole Court stood in amaze,
and many of the animals wept in sympathy with the bereaved father, who
advanced towards the King's throne, crying for justice.

"Whom do you accuse?" asked the Lion.

"Whom should I accuse but that accursed Reynard, the source of untold
misery to me and mine? You know, O King, none better, how we have
suffered from his cruelty in the past. The tale I now have to tell is
a tale of wrong that would bring tears to the eyes of a stone image--a
tale of treachery such as would abash the Evil One himself, a tale so
base that I can hardly bring myself to utter it!"

"Say on," said the King, "and rest content, for if what you say be
true, the Fox shall receive his due reward--I swear it by my crown!"

"Lord," continued Chanticleer, "I had six sons and fourteen daughters.
We all dwelt together in the farmyard, a peaceable and happy family.
The rigours of the winter were spent; spring had come again with its
flowers and perfumes. The sun shone brightly, and insects abounded
in the farmyard. We dwelt in the midst of abundance; we were happy,
and as we thought, safe, for the farmer's six faithful dogs guarded
us from danger. Alas, for our beautiful hopes! A few days ago Reynard
appeared--cruel, black-hearted Reynard--and at one fell blow changed
our happiness into misery.

"This is how it all happened, Sire. Reynard came to the farmyard one
fine morning and brought me a letter bearing your Majesty's own seal.
I opened it, and read that your Majesty had commanded that all the
animals should hence-forward live together in peace. A noble ordinance,
Sire, such as would make the world a beautiful place--were it not for
villains. I gave the document back to Reynard, expressing my joy at the
news it contained, whereupon he said: 'My heart is full, Cock, when I
think of the cruelty with which I have treated you and your family in
the past, but you need have no further fear, I have seen the error of
my ways. Henceforth my life shall be given up to repentance and prayer.
I have renounced all worldly pleasures. Even now I am on my way to a
remote hermitage where, in fasting and solitude, I shall endeavour to
atone for my sins.'

"Then the hypocritical wretch stretched his paw over my head and gave
me his blessing and departed, reading his Book of Hours.

"Thinking no evil, and full of joy at the news, I called my children
around me and cried: 'Rejoice, my dear ones. No more will you live in
daily terror of your lives. Our noble King has given us his protection
and has commanded the Fox to leave us alone. Reynard himself has just
brought me the news, so I know it is true, and he himself has gone away
to become a holy hermit!'

"My children danced with glee when they heard my words, and I danced
with them, O King! We danced in the farmyard and in the garden, and in
the kitchen garden, for it was as though a black cloud had vanished
from over us.

[Illustration: AT THE HEAD OF THE PROCESSION MARCHED CHANTICLEER]

"This was the very moment Reynard had been waiting for. He had not
gone far away--no farther in fact than the shelter of the wall by the
kitchen garden, and as soon as we reached there, he rushed out, fell
upon the finest of my daughters and slew her before my eyes. It all
happened in a flash! We ran hither and thither, trying to escape, but
all in vain. Before we had gone a dozen steps the Fox was among us
again, and killed fifteen of my children. Last night he returned, and
slew her whose body now lies upon the bier. I have brought her here to
show you, O King, that the sight of her corpse may strike pity into
your heart, for I claim justice upon her murderer!"

So saying, the Cock bowed his head again and wept bitterly into his
handkerchief, and pitiful sobs echoed from among the beasts around.
Even the King could hardly restrain his emotion.

"A terrible tale, indeed," said he. "Our hearts are heavy for you,
Cock, and it will go hard with this Reynard when he falls into our
hands!" Then, addressing his courtiers, he asked for volunteers to go
to the Fox's retreat and bring the murderer to justice. For a time
there was no response, for few of the animals relished the task, but at
last the Bear, who had an old grudge against Reynard, offered to go.
"Leave this to me," said he. "If the Fox won't come quietly, I'll drag
him here by his tail. He shall not escape!"

So the Bear set off to find Reynard, who had retreated to one of
his châteaux--a veritable fortress--situated many miles away in the
mountains at the very end of the kingdom. To reach it the Bear had to
travel over lonely paths, and through dark woods, where he lost his way
a hundred times, but at length he arrived at Reynard's house, only to
find the massive door locked, and the walls so high that he could not
climb them.


II. HOW BRUIN THE BEAR WAS SENT TO BRING REYNARD TO COURT

"Open, in the name of the King!" cried Bruin, hammering at the door.
"Come out, Reynard! I have been sent to bring you up for trial. You
have come to the end of your rope at last! Open the door, I say, or
I'll batter it down!"

From his safe retreat in the very heart of the fortress Reynard heard
Bruin's clamour. He stretched himself lazily and yawned. "Now who is
this pestilent fellow making such a din?" said he to his wife. "Well,
I suppose I'd better go and see." So he made his way through the
labyrinth of passages which led from his burrow to the open air, and
peeped through the crack of the door. There was Bruin, hammering away
at the massive oak, and roaring: "Come out, Reynard. Come out and be
hanged!"

[Illustration: THE FOX'S CHÂTEAU]

"What! is that you, Uncle Bruin?" said Reynard, opening the wicket.
"You are in a noisy mood this morning. What is the matter?"
