
"A crown! Come now, that's high pay. You must want him very badly!"

"I do indeed, and I'll break every bone in his body when I catch him."

"Here, lend me your horse, master," said the drummer. "I'll catch him
for you, and not for a crown neither, but for nothing. I'd like to see
him get a good thrashing, for he called me names as he passed by."

"But can you ride?" asked the peasant.

"Can a duck swim?" answered the drummer scornfully. "Dismount quickly
or the scoundrel will get away. Wait here for me," he added, as he
rode off, "I'll be back in less than half an hour." Off he went at a
gallop, smiling to himself. "First of all a hundred crowns, and now a
fine steed," thought he. "Come Donatus, your luck is standing you in
good stead. It's odds but you'll win through yet!" He reached the wood,
entered it, and the peasant waiting by the roadside, heard the sound of
his horse's hoofs grow fainter and fainter until at last they died away.

A quarter of an hour passed, half an hour, an hour, but the labourer
did not return. The peasant, fuming with impatience, strode up and down
the road, slashing at the grass and bushes with his stick. Suddenly
he heard footsteps, and saw a man in a red coat approaching. It was
the labourer dressed in the drummer's clothes, who had drunk, not one,
but several glasses of wine, and was now returning very pleased with
himself and all the world. As he came he trilled out a merry song.

"You knave! You villain!" cried the peasant, throwing himself upon him.
"Where are my hundred crowns? What! you would teach me the language of
the bees, would you?--and my poor wife is stung all over, and cannot
see out of her eyes. Rascal! Scoundrel! Oh, you scum! Take that, and
that, and that!" And with each word, he lifted his heavy stick and
brought it down heavily upon the shoulders of the unfortunate labourer.

"Here, hold hard, master!" cried the man, twisting and turning to get
away. "What's the meaning of this? I'll have the law on you if you
don't leave me alone! _Ouch_, give over I tell you! What do I know
about your hundred crowns or your wife?"

"What!" cried the peasant, laying on harder than before. "Do you add
lying to your other crimes? You will tell me next you have never seen a
drum!" And with one last mighty cut he stretched the unfortunate fellow
at his feet. Then, for the first time, he had a full view of his face,
and saw that he was not the man he took him for.

"Was there ever such an unlucky man in all the world as I?" he moaned,
as he turned wearily homeward, pursued by the curses and threats of the
man he had beaten. "First I lose a hundred crowns, and then the love
of my wife, who will never forgive me her injuries; and now, into the
bargain, I have lost my horse! God forgive that drummer, and protect
him if ever he falls into my hands!"

I wish I could tell you that the unlucky peasant's desire was
fulfilled, and that the drummer met with his deserts. Unhappily my
story ends here, and I do not know for certain what happened to him,
but people do say that he never came out of the wood, but rode straight
into a marsh and was drowned. If this is true, I am sure that nobody
will be sorry!

[Illustration]




[Illustration: WHEN THE FIFTY ROOKS BEGAN TO FLY HE COULD NOT GET FREE]

THE DRUNKEN ROOKS


It was the middle of winter and the ground was covered with snow. Along
the high road came Mynheer Van Ash, the well-known merchant of Alost,
driving to the town with two immense casks of the liquor known as
Hollands, in which he traded. All unknown to the merchant, one of the
casks had a hole in it, and as he drove along the liquor leaked out,
and sank into the snow.

In a field close by the roadside were a flock of fifty rooks, who
were eagerly turning up the snow and pecking at the ground beneath in
search of food. Attracted by the strong and heady smell of the spilt
liquor, they flew across to investigate, and having tasted some of the
gin-sodden snow, liked it so well that they followed in the train of
the cart, eating more and more of it, until at last they were so drunk
that they could hardly stand on their feet. Away they went to the
fields again, and very soon afterwards the whole flock of them was fast
asleep.

Presently, Little Pol, a peasant who worked in the neighbourhood,
happened to cross the field on his way homeward, and saw the crows
lying stiff and silent on the snow.

"Ah!" said he to himself. "Here is a funny sight! Fifty crows frozen
to death with the cold. I'll take them home with me and pluck them.
Rook-pie is excellent eating, and such a find is welcome these hard
times!" So, taking a cord from his pocket, he set to work to gather
up all the rooks, and tie them together by the legs. This done, he
proceeded on his way, dragging the rooks behind him.

The roughness of the motion and the friction of the snow very soon
aroused the rooks from their slumber. They all woke up, and finding
their legs tied, began to flap their wings together with admirable
precision. Unfortunately for Little Pol, he had taken the precaution
of fastening the cord to the belt round his middle, so when the fifty
rooks began to fly he could not get free, and found himself being
lifted into the air.

Up went the fifty rooks cawing and crying, and up too went Little Pol,
calling in vain for help. They reached the clouds; they penetrated the
clouds; they disappeared from sight.

And since that day not a sign has ever been seen either of the fifty
rooks or of Little Pol.

[Illustration]

[Illustration: THE BATTLE OF THE BIRDS AND BEASTS]




[Illustration: FIGHTING]

THE BATTLE OF THE BIRDS AND BEASTS


One day as Bruin the Bear and Isengrim the Wolf were taking a walk in
the woods they came to a big elm-tree with a hollow trunk. Peering
within in the hope of finding something to eat they espied a little
nest supported by two notches in the bark. It was the tiniest and
neatest little house one could wish to see, made of fresh green moss,
with a small opening in the middle for a door, and was, in fact, the
home of a little bird called the Golden-crested Wren. Now among the
country people the golden-crested wren is often known by the name of
the Kinglet, and being aware of this, Isengrim saw a chance of playing
a joke upon his companion. "Look at this nest, Bruin," said he. "What
would you say if I told you it was a King's palace?"

"That a King's palace!" laughed Bruin scornfully. "A handful of moss
in a hole! Why, with one tap of my paw I could smash it to fragments!"

"I should not advise you to do any such thing," said Isengrim. "The
King who lives in that palace is much more powerful than you think, and
unless you are looking for trouble it would be best to leave his home
alone."

"What!" cried Bruin, in a rage. "Am I to be defied by a miserable
little fowl in my own forest? That for your King!" And with one sweep
of his paw, he reduced the nest to a shapeless heap of moss. "Now
let him revenge himself if he can," he roared. "I hereby declare war
upon him and upon all his tribe. Fur against feather! The four-legged
