Then there came thunder and lightning, and a piece of the earth heaved
itself up and knocked me spinning! Beyond all doubt the man-animal
takes the palm for cunning, but I never want to see him again, for I
shall carry the marks of our first meeting to my dying day."

And Reynard grinned, and said: "I told you so!"

[Illustration]




[Illustration]

SPONSKEN AND THE GIANT


There was once a lad whose face was so badly pitted by the smallpox
that everybody called him Sponsken, which means little sponge. From
the very day of his birth Sponsken had been a great cause of anxiety
to his parents, and as he grew older he became more trouble still, for
he was so full of whims and mischief that one never knew where one had
him. He would not learn his lessons, nor work at any serious task for
ten minutes on end. All he seemed to think of was cutting capers and
playing practical jokes on people. At last, in despair, his parents
told their trouble to the village sexton, who was a great friend of the
family, and often came to smoke his pipe with Sponsken's father in the
chimney corner.

"Don't worry, my friends," said the sexton. "I've seen young men like
your son before, and they are quite easy to manage if one only goes
about it the right way. Just leave him to me. What he wants is a good
fright, and I'll make it my business to see that he gets it."

So far so good. Sponsken's parents were only too glad to fall in with
any plan which seemed likely to reform their unruly son, so the sexton
went off to make his arrangements. That night he whitened his face with
flour, covered himself in a white sheet, and hid behind a tree on a
road along which he knew Sponsken would have to pass.

It was the dark of the moon, and the place the sexton had chosen was
very lonely. For a long time he waited; then, hearing Sponsken coming
along whistling a merry tune, he sprang out suddenly from behind his
tree and waved his arms in a terrifying manner.

"Hallo!" said Sponsken. "Who are you?"

The sexton uttered a hollow groan.

"What's the matter?" said the boy. "Are you ill? If you can't speak,
get out of my way, for I am in a hurry."

The sexton groaned again, louder than before, and waved his arms wildly.

"Come, come," cried Sponsken, "I can't stay here all night. Tell me
what you want at once and let me pass." Then, as the ghostly figure
made no answer, he struck it a blow with the stout ash-stick which he
carried, and the poor sexton fell, stunned, to the ground. Sponsken
stayed long enough to take a glimpse of the ghost's face and to
recognize the features of the sexton beneath the flour; then he went on
his way homeward, whistling as merrily as before.

When he reached home his parents gazed at him uneasily. They were very
anxious about the success of their friend's plan, but Sponsken did not
look at all like a lad who had been frightened--quite the contrary in
fact, for he drew his chair up to the table and set to work upon his
supper with an excellent appetite.

"A funny thing happened to me to-night," he said carelessly between
two bites of an onion. "As I was walking along the lonely road by the
cemetery a white figure jumped out at me."

"A wh-white figure!" stammered his father. "How terrifying! And what
did you do, my son?"

"Do?" said Sponsken cheerfully. "Why, I fetched him a crack on the
skull with my staff. He went down like a ninepin, and I warrant he
won't try to frighten travellers again!"

"Base, ungrateful boy!" cried his father, rising to his feet. "It was
my dear friend Jan the sexton you struck. All I hope is that you have
not killed him."

"Well, if I have, it is his own fault," answered Sponsken. "He should
not play tricks on me." But his father continued to rage and grumble so
long that Sponsken got tired of hearing him at last, and flung off to
bed in a sulk.

"I'll stand no more of this," he said to himself. "Since my own people
do not appreciate me, I'll go out and seek my own fortune in the world,
and they may go on as best they can."

The next morning, therefore, having packed a loaf of bread and a piece
of cheese in a bag, Sponsken set off on his travels, telling nobody
where he was going, and taking nothing else with him except a sparrow
which he had tamed and kept since it was a fledgling. After walking for
a long time he came to a forest, and feeling rather tired he sat down
on the trunk of a fallen tree to rest.

Now in this forest lived a giant who was the most hideous creature
one could possibly imagine. From his forehead jutted a pair of horns;
his features were more like those of a beast than a man, and his
finger-nails grew long and curved like the claws of a wild animal. The
giant considered himself lord of the whole wood, and was very jealous
lest anybody should enter his domain. When, therefore, he saw Sponsken
he was very angry, and having pulled up a young tree by the roots to
serve him as a club, he approached the young man, who was sitting with
his eyes closed, and struck him a heavy blow on the shoulder.

[Illustration: SPONSKEN, THE GIANT, AND THE PRINCESS]

In spite of appearances, Sponsken was not asleep; he was far too wary
a person to be caught napping under such conditions. As a matter of
fact, he had seen the giant before the giant saw him, and he knew that
his only chance of escape was to remain unperturbed and calm. When,
therefore, the giant struck him on the shoulder, he opened his eyes
sleepily, rubbed the place, and said with a yawn: "A pest on these
flies! They bite so hard that a fellow can't sleep for them."

"You shall sleep soundly enough in a minute!" muttered the giant, who
was enraged at Sponsken's nonchalance. "See how you like this!" And he
gave the lad a blow on the other shoulder, harder than before.

"There they are again!" cried Sponsken, rubbing the place. "My word!
They bite even harder on this side than on the other. It is time I was
going!" And he rose from his seat, starting back with surprise as he
affected to see the giant for the first time.

"So it's you, is it?" he cried. "What do you mean by tickling me when I
am trying to sleep? If I were not so kind-hearted I'd break your neck
for you!"

"Have a care what you say," cried the giant. "Do you know that I have
the strength of twenty men and could crush you between my hands like a
kitten?"

"Pooh!" said Sponsken. "Words are windy things. I have no doubt you
could kill a whole regiment with your breath. But words won't go with
me, my man; you must give me some proof of your prowess."

"Proof!" roared the giant. "See here! I can throw a stone so high into
the air that it will not come down for a quarter of an hour." And he
was as good as his word, for, picking up a large stone, he flung it
with all his strength, and it was more than a quarter of an hour before
it fell again at their feet.

"Can you match that?" asked the giant with a grin.

"Easily," said Sponsken. "I will throw a stone so high that it will
not come down at all!" Bending to the ground he picked up a pebble and
