proceedings to a living soul, and having settled the very hour and day
of your Majesty's assassination, they departed to their homes.

[Illustration: "I SAW HIM STOP AT THE FOOT OF A GREAT TREE"]

"Now, like all apes, Grimbard was a chatterer, and no sooner was
he within his house than he told his wife all that had happened,
explaining to her that it was a great secret and she was not to tell
a soul. Of course she promised faithfully to keep a still tongue in
her head, and as a matter of fact I believe she did manage to keep
the secret for a whole day. Then she happened to meet my wife in the
woods, and having sworn _her_ to secrecy, told her the whole thing. My
wife, out of a feeling of love and regard to your Majesty, thought it
her duty to inform me, which she did, immediately she returned home,
without keeping back a single detail.

"I could not believe my ears at first. 'What! Bruin, king!' I cried.
'That great fat lump of hairy stupidity, king of the animals! Is the
world going mad? Would they dethrone our loved and gracious lord in
favour of so base a beast?' There and then, O King, I raised my hand
above my head and swore to defend your Majesty's life to the last.
'While Reynard lives,' I said, 'the King's throne shall be secure, cost
what it may!'

"From that moment I thought of nothing else but how best to thwart my
father's base plans. It seemed to me that if I could only discover the
treasure I might stop the whole thing, for the conspirators relied
upon the gold to pay the armies they intended to raise. For days,
therefore, I lurked about the woods, following my father wherever he
went, in the hope that, sooner or later, he would betray the treasure's
whereabouts. But he was far too wary to go near it, and had it not been
for the stupidity of the Ape I might have remained none the wiser. One
day I noticed Grimbard wheeling a barrow through the forest with an
air of great secrecy, and following him unseen, at a safe distance, I
saw him stop in the midst of the ruins of that ancient palace in the
forest. There, at the foot of a great tree, he lifted a heavy stone,
discovering a deep hole, from which he took several vases filled to the
brim with golden coins. These he placed upon his barrow, and having
carefully covered up the hole again, trundled off into the forest.

"No sooner had he disappeared amid the shade of the trees than I ran
forward and lifted the stone. What a sight met my eyes! There lay
the treasure--chest upon chest of shining gold, and heaps of jewels
flashing with rays of many-coloured light. My eyes were nearly blinded
by the splendour.

[Illustration: THE CONSPIRACY GAINED ADHERENTS EVERY DAY]

"Even as I stood gazing in a sort of dazed trance, I realized what I
must do. If I could get this treasure away from the place where it was
hidden, and, unknown to the conspirators, transport it somewhere else,
their plot would be strangled at its birth. Unfortunately the treasure
was heavy and I had no means of conveyance--not even a barrow, but I
took counsel of Hermeline, my wife, and she, noble soul as she is,
strengthened me in my resolve. 'Though we wear our paws to the bone,'
said she, 'we must take the treasure away and save the life of our
noble and our beloved King.' That very night we began our task, and
little by little we moved the treasure, hiding it in a safe place known
only to ourselves. For the best part of a month we laboured, working
only at night, and fearful every moment that we should be discovered.
At last everything was finished, and the whole of the treasure removed.

"In the meantime, the conspiracy gained adherents every day. My father
was the life and soul of the plot. He sent messengers far and near,
into every corner of the land, to win the animals over to his side.
'Those who enrol under my banner,' said he, 'shall receive a large
sum of money paid in advance. I do not ask them to trust my word, but
to come to me and let me pour the money into their hands.' In such
circumstance what wonder that his supporters grew every hour. Before
long he had gathered together an immense army, which was increased by
troops raised by the Bear, the Wolf, and the Cat. Bruin, in particular,
was very proud of his success in raising soldiers. He already fancied
himself king, and walked about giving orders to everybody who crossed
his path.

"Now the time for payment had come, so my father, accompanied by
Grimbard and the Cat, made his way to the hiding-place of the treasure
to bring out the gold. I watched them from afar, and saw them uncover
the hole, and never to my dying day shall I forget the scream my father
uttered when he saw that the treasure was no longer there. Frantically
the two of them dug up the soil around the place in the hope that they
were mistaken, but not a single gold piece could they find. At last
Grimbard, chattering with fear, turned and slunk away, while my father
crept home and hanged himself with a cord to a nail just outside the
back door. A terrible end, O King, but though he was my father, I
cannot help feeling he deserved the misery he had brought upon himself.
As for Bruin, he found himself faced with the necessity of explaining
to the soldiers that no money was forthcoming, and being a coward at
heart, he shirked the task. He, too, fled secretly, and Tybert the Cat
soon followed. To-day, sire, these three stand among the foremost of my
accusers. If I have sinned, have they not sinned too, and in greater
measure?"

[Illustration: THE SUIT OF GOLDEN ARMOUR EMRIK WORE]

The King waved his paw impatiently. "We will deal with them presently,"
said he. "For the present, keep to your tale. Where is the treasure
hidden? Speak, and lie not, on your life!"

"Why should I lie, O King?" asked Reynard in an aggrieved tone. "Have
I not sworn to tell the truth? In Western Flanders there is a little
wood called Husterloo. In the midst of that wood lies a pool, which is
known by the name of Krekelput.[] It is a dreary place, O King, and
solitary, for it lies among marshes where no man can pass. No sound
is heard in that place save only the call of the carrion-crow by day,
and the dismal hooting of the owl by night. There, close to that pool,
I hid the treasure, in a hole in the earth which I covered with soil,
marking the place with three great stones. Remove those stones, and
dig up the soil, and you will discover three enormous golden vases,
beautifully carved and modelled. In the first is the royal crown of the
ancient King Emrik, which Bruin thought to wear. In the second is the
crown of Emrik's queen--a thing of wonder, flashing with splendid gems;
and in the third is the suit of golden armour Emrik wore. Beneath these
three vases lies the rest of the treasure--chest after chest of golden
coins, ropes of pearls, necklaces of diamonds and rubies, so many gems
that I cannot describe them all. If your Majesty will send trusty
messengers to Krekelput, they can easily prove the truth of what I say!"

      [] Snail's well.

During this recital the King had raised himself from his throne in
his excitement, and now he turned to the assembled animals and cried:
"Which of you knows Krekelput? Who will go and fetch the treasure?"

Nobody answered, for, as a matter of fact, not a soul present had ever
heard of Krekelput before Reynard mentioned the name.

"Come, come," cried the King. "One of you must know the wood of
Husterloo and the pool of which Reynard speaks!"

"Be patient with them, Sire," said Reynard. "They are afraid to speak.
The Hare knows the place very well. Do you not remember, friend," said
he, fixing the Hare with a menacing glance, "you took refuge in the
wood of Husterloo one day when the hounds were after you!"

[Illustration: THEY WALKED IN SILENCE]

"I cannot remember very well," stammered the Hare, who was nearly out
of his senses with fright. "Perhaps I did!"

"Of course you did," said Reynard, "and you could find the place again,
no doubt?"

"I am not sure," said the poor Hare, who indeed had never heard of
Husterloo.

"A truce to all this!" cried the King impatiently. "If you cannot
remember, Reynard shall go with you to refresh your memory, and Bellyn
the Ram shall accompany the two of you to see that you do not run away.
Be off with you at once, and bring back the treasure as quickly as you
