
Reynard needed no pressing, but went home with the young man there and
then, and thoroughly enjoyed the good fare with which he was provided.
Since, however, a fox is always a fox, no matter what company he is
in, Master Reynard could not forbear from stealing, and every night
he crept into the hen-house and killed one or two chickens. When the
knight discovered this he was very angry, and picking up a big stick he
gave the fox a good thrashing and drove him forth.

"That is _The Reward of the World_," he said to himself, as he watched
Reynard disappearing into the distance. But whether he was referring to
the way the fox had treated him, or to his own treatment of the fox, I
cannot say.

[Illustration]




[Illustration: NOTHING WAS LEFT OF THE FISHES]

ONE BAD TURN BEGETS ANOTHER


Tybert the Cat and Courtoys the Dog were very great friends--that is
to say they were as friendly as their natures would let them be. Both
of them were exceedingly greedy and selfish. The Cat was spiteful and
the Dog was sullen. Master Tyb was always willing to give up to the dog
what he did not need himself, and on his part, Courtoys never stole the
cat's food while the cat was looking. Neither was loath to play a mean
trick upon the other if he could do so without injury to himself, but
except for these little matters they were quite in accord, and very
friendly, as I said before, and on the whole they got on very well
together.

There came a time when, in spite of Tybert's shyness and Courtoys'
strength, they could by no means find anything to eat. For two days
not a morsel of food had passed the lips of either; and this made them
very bad tempered.

"I wish I'd never seen you," said Courtoys to Tyb. "A fine partner you
are, upon my word, when you can't find food for us. Where are those
wonderful wits of yours, of which you are always boasting."

"In my head," answered Tyb spitefully. "And such as they are, they have
to do duty for two. If you'd talk less, and think more, and use your
eyes, we would be better off. Here is a cart coming along the road;
perhaps we shall find our dinner inside it!"

Sure enough, a heavy wagon was rumbling along the road towards them,
driven by a peasant with a round and rather stupid face. As it came
nearer, Tyb and Courtoys sniffed the air, and the water ran out of the
corners of their mouths.

"Fish," said Tybert ravenously.

"Fish!" echoed Courtoys. "Here's a chance to exercise those wits of
yours. How can we get it?"

"I have a plan," answered the Cat. "Come quickly and hide yourself with
me in the ditch until the wagon has passed, and I will tell you all
about it!"

So it was done. The wagon rumbled by, the scent of the fish with which
it was laden filling the air, and the driver went on calmly smoking his
pipe, little dreaming that four hungry eyes were gazing at him through
the bushes that bordered the side of the road.

"Now then," cried Tybert, "our time has come. Follow the wagon and
don't let it out of your sight for a moment, but take care that the
driver does not see you. I shall go on in front and stretch myself out
on the road, pretending to be dead. It's odds but what the driver,
seeing me lying there, will covet my skin, and will pick me up and
throw me into the cart. Once there, I'll throw the fish out to you, and
you will know what to do with it."

"Oh, yes, I'll know what to do with it," said Courtoys to himself, with
a grin, and, keeping well out of sight of the driver, he followed the
wagon.

[Illustration: THE BIGGEST AND FATTEST FISH]

Tybert's plan worked to perfection. He ran on for about a quarter of
a mile, keeping to the fields bordering the road, and then stretched
himself out at full length, with his mouth open as though he were dead.

"Oho!" said the peasant, as he drove up. "What's this? A dead cat! I'll
take him with me, and sell his skin for a few sous. This time next
week some fine lady will be wearing him round her neck, thinking he's
sable." And with that he dismounted, picked up the cat and slung him
carelessly into the wagon on top of the heap of fish.

[Illustration: STRETCHED HIMSELF OUT AT FULL LENGTH]

Hardly was he back in his place, than Tybert arose and began to pick
out the biggest and fattest fish and throw them into the road. He had
to be very careful in doing this, because now and again the peasant
turned his head. Once when a very big fish was tumbled out, the noise
of its fall aroused the peasant, who swung round sharply, and Tybert
was only just in time to avert discovery by laying himself out and
pretending to be dead as before.

When he had thrown out what he considered was a sufficient quantity,
Tybert rested awhile, so that the dog could collect the spoils, and
then jumped from the wagon to go and claim his share. When he came up
to Courtoys, however, he found to his dismay that nothing was left of
the fish but a heap of bones.

"That was a splendid plan of yours, brother," said Courtoys, licking
his lips. "The fish were delicious, and I hardly feel hungry at
all now! Do make haste and take your share!" And he waved his paw
invitingly towards the heap of bones. Tybert gave him one look, and
then grinned as though in enjoyment of an excellent joke. Not by word
or action did he give any sign of the anger which was consuming him,
but he determined to have his revenge.

A day or two later his chance came. Lurking in his usual stealthy way
in a farmyard, he saw the farmer go into the house with a fine big ham,
which he hung by a cord on a nail in the kitchen wall. Away he ran to
Courtoys and told him what he had seen.

"Well," said Courtoys surlily, "and what about it?"

"Why," answered Tybert. "There is no reason why we should not feast on
that ham, you and I. It will be the easiest thing in the world to steal
it. The latch of the kitchen window is broken, and it cannot be locked.
All you have to do is to go there to-night, creep through the window,
pull down the ham, and throw it out to me."

"Why can't you get it yourself?" asked Courtoys suspiciously.

"Ah," said the cat, "I am not strong enough to pull it down."

"And what about the farmer's dogs? I seem to remember hearing they are
savage brutes!"

"Well, of course, if you're _afraid_ ..." answered the cat disdainfully.

"Afraid yourself!" cried Courtoys. "You leave this to me."

So that very night, when the moon had set, the two crept into the
farmyard, and the dog managed to get through the window into the
kitchen unobserved. The next moment he had pulled down the ham and had
thrown it out of the window to Tybert, who was waiting below. Tybert
seized it in his mouth and ran off, but as soon as he reached the gate
he gave a series of such blood-curdling miaows, that he roused every
dog on the farm. Out they came, hair bristling, and teeth flashing,
just in time to catch our friend Courtoys as he jumped down from the
window.

