
"The matter is that the King has sent me to bring you to Court,"
growled the Bear. "And you had best come quietly, for I represent the
law."

"By all means," answered Reynard, opening the door. "My word, but I'm
glad to see you, uncle! And an ambassador, too--such an honour! How are
you, and what sort of a journey have you had? Very trying, I'm afraid.
Really it was a shame to impose upon your good nature and send you all
this way!"

So saying the Fox led the way into his castle, keeping up a continual
patter of talk, so that Bruin could not get a word in edgeways.

"I'm so sorry to have kept you waiting at the gate," Reynard went on.
"The fact is, I was dozing and did not hear you at first. I rarely
sleep in the afternoon, but to-day I had such a heavy dinner that I
felt extremely drowsy!"

"What did you have?" asked the Bear with interest.

"Oh, a simple meal enough. I am not rich, you know, and I have to eat
what I can find. To-day it was a big comb of honey--not very much to my
taste, but I was hungry and I ate it!"

Bruin pricked up his ears. "Eh?" said he. "Did you say honey?"

"Strange food for a fox, isn't it?" said Reynard. "I wish I hadn't
touched the stuff now, for, to tell you the truth, it's lying on my
chest like a load of lead. I swear never to eat it again, although I
know a place, not far from here, where there are immense quantities of
it!"

By this time Bruin was all agog with excitement.

"Nephew," said he, laying his paw on Reynard's shoulder, "show me the
place where that honey is. My mouth is watering at the very thought of
it. I love honey better than anything else in the world, and I'd give
all I possess for a taste of it!"

"You are joking, no doubt," said Reynard laughingly. "How can any one
like such stuff?"

"Joking, am I?" growled Bruin. "Just lead me to the honey and I'll show
you whether I'm joking. I tell you I'd give my eyes and ears for a
taste!"

"Well, if that's the case," said Reynard, "you shall be satisfied.
There's a carpenter not far from here who keeps bees, and from time
immemorial his family have been noted for the excellence of their
honey. I'll take you there, and I'm very glad to be able to render you
this little service. In return, all I ask of you is that you will
speak up for me when I come before the King."

[Illustration: THE POOR BEAST ROARED WITH PAIN]

"Of course I will," answered Bruin. "Let us go at once. I can hardly
contain myself for impatience."

Reynard called upon Bruin to follow him and led the way to the
carpenter's yard. The afternoon was very hot, and the carpenter was
taking a nap after dinner. His yard was empty and in the middle of it
was the trunk of a great oak-tree which he had laid out ready to be cut
up into planks. The trunk was split down the middle, and kept open by
two wedges of wood.

"Here you are!" said Reynard, going up to the tree-trunk. "This is the
place where the carpenter keeps his honey. Put your muzzle in and root
it out from the bottom. Don't eat too much!"

"Never fear," answered Bruin. "I'll be moderate." And he plunged his
head and his two front paws into the crack. The next moment Reynard
knocked out the wedges which kept the two halves of the trunk apart.
They sprang together with the force of a steel spring, catching Bruin
firmly by the nose and paws.

The poor beast roared with pain, making a din that echoed back like
thunder from the mountains. The carpenter woke up from his slumber, and
seizing an axe, ran out into the yard. His wife came tumbling out of
the scullery with a broom in her hand, and people from the neighbouring
village came running to see what all the noise was about. When they saw
that the Bear was a prisoner they fell upon him and began to belabour
him with mighty blows, while the unhappy creature gave himself up for
lost. Maddened with pain, he redoubled his efforts to tear himself
free, and at last succeeded in getting away, although he left most of
the skin of his nose and paws behind. With the blood flowing from his
muzzle, and his eyes shining red with rage, he made such a terrible
picture that the people fled hither and thither, leaving him a free
passage, and he limped off into the shelter of the woods, moaning and
breathing out threats against his betrayer.

From a safe distance Reynard watched him go, with a malicious grin.
"Farewell, Uncle Bear," said he. "I hope you found the honey good!"


III. TYBERT'S MISSION AND HOW HE FARED

King Lion was furious when he saw the miserable state in which his
ambassador returned. He immediately called a council of his ministers,
to whom Bruin related all that had happened.

[Illustration: HE IMMEDIATELY CALLED A COUNCIL OF HIS MINISTERS]

"This recreant must be punished," said the King when the tale was
ended. "It is a disgrace to our kingdom that he remains at large.
Somebody else must go to bring him here. Who shall it be?"

After a good deal of discussion it was decided that Tybert the Cat
should undertake the task, for he was reputed to be as cunning and
artful as Reynard himself. "Do not be deceived by his wiles," said
the King. "No doubt he will try to flatter you, or to play upon your
weaknesses, but pay no attention to his words. You must take this
mission very seriously and not allow yourself to be led aside by
anything. On your head be it!"

The Cat promised to be very circumspect, and set off at once. He
travelled quickly, and soon arrived at the door of Reynard's castle,
where he found the Fox playing with his cubs on the grass, tumbling
them over and over, and having fine fun. It was a touching spectacle of
domestic bliss. Reynard jumped to his feet when he saw Tybert.

"Why, cousin," said he, "this is a pleasant surprise! What makes you
desert the gaieties of the Court for my poor home?"

"I come in the King's name," answered the Cat sternly. "He has sent
me to bring you to Court, where you are to answer for your revolting
crimes. The Bear returned yesterday, and the tale he told has stiffened
the King's anger against you. I am to say that if you refuse to
accompany me, your house shall be destroyed and your family wiped off
the face of the earth!"

"Refuse," said Reynard, "whoever thought of refusing? I am sure the
King has no more obedient subject than I. As for that Bruin, he is a
bad subject, and I expect he has been telling a pack of lies about me.
Do I look as if I could do anybody any harm? As a matter of fact I
spend all my time here in meditation and prayer. But come in, come in!
You must have a meal, for you have had a long journey. To-morrow we
will set out together."

"It seems to me," said the Cat, "that it would be better if we started
at once."

"Nonsense, my dear fellow," said Reynard. "It is bad to make a journey
on an empty stomach. What difference will an hour or two make? We shall
travel all the faster if we start in good condition."

"Well, there's something in that," said Tybert, who, to tell the
truth, was not sorry of an excuse to break a fast of many hours. "What
have you got for dinner?"

