in his life! Is it not so, my lord?" he added, turning to Peter.

[Illustration: AN EXCLAMATION OF ASTONISHMENT]

Peter gave a grin and a nod of the head, and the affair passed without
further comment, but on their way in to dinner Reynard seized the
opportunity to warn his friend against further faults of deportment.
But, as the saying goes, it is no use trying to make a silk purse out
of a sow's ear, and no sooner were they seated at table, and Peter saw
the magnificent golden dishes, the delicate cut glass, and the fine
candlesticks, than he opened his eyes wide, and gave an exclamation of
astonishment.

"What is the matter now?" asked the King, staring at him.

"I crave your Majesty's pardon," said Reynard. "My friend is a little
overwhelmed, for your customs are new to him. In his own palace, you
see, he is used to a certain degree of luxury--such a service of plate,
for instance, as this on the table, would there only be found in the
servant's quarters. Come, come, my lord," he added, clapping Peter on
the shoulder, "it will do you good to live the simple life. Spartan
fare, my lord, Spartan fare!"

Peter rolled his eyes and grinned again, before falling to, with a
fairly good appetite, upon the rich food spread before him.

"This lord must certainly be of enormous wealth," thought the King.
"True, he has certain curious tricks of manner, such as supping his
gravy with a table-knife, but what does a little thing like that
matter! In other countries, other ways! That is a very good proverb."

After dinner was over Reynard broached the matter of Peter's marriage
with the King's daughter, and the King gave his consent. He begged
Reynard and his friend to remain at the palace as his guests until
the ceremony should take place, and apportioned to them a magnificent
suite of rooms. A week later Peter and the Princess were married. The
poor man could hardly believe his good luck as he stood before the
altar dressed out in gorgeous robes. All he could do was to stare like
one who is dazed, and Reynard had to nudge him from behind to get him
to make the responses. After the wedding a splendid feast was held,
to which all the greatest and wealthiest lords in the kingdom were
invited, and then the King's carriages arrived to conduct the happy
pair to Peter's castle.

Now what was to be done? Peter's castle was a broken-down hovel at
the edge of the forest. He shivered with fear when he thought of what
the Princess would say when she saw it, with its mud floor, and its
furniture consisting of one chair with no back, one battered table,
and a heap of brushwood covered with a ragged pallet which served as a
bed. Could Reynard overcome this difficulty as he had overcome all the
others?

Of course he could, and he did! Away went the coaches, with Reynard
sitting proudly on the box of the foremost, and presently the whole
cortège halted before the gates of an enchanted castle, which Reynard
had borrowed from the fairies of the forest. There Lord Jaco Peter and
his bride lived for many happy years. They had six children, three boys
and three girls, and Reynard was the friend of them all.

[Illustration]




[Illustration: "OH DEAR ME, THAT'S TWICE!"]

THE PEASANT AND HIS ASS


There once lived a poor peasant. I do not know his name, but he earned
a living by gathering dead wood in the forest, and he had a donkey who
was no bigger ass than himself. Perhaps by this you will be able to
recognize him.

One day the peasant hitched his donkey into the shafts of his little
cart and went off as usual to the wood for his day's toil. Arrived
there, he tied the donkey to a tree and then, by way of the cart,
climbed the trunk in order to break off some dead branches which he had
noticed above. As he sat there, legs astraddle on the branch, busily
breaking away the dead wood, along through the forest came a lord
dressed in fine clothes, with his manservant behind him.

"Hallo! my man," cried the lord, "if you don't come down from that
tree pretty soon you'll get a tumble. The branch you are sitting on is
cracked."

"Cracked, is it?" answered the peasant. "Well, so much the worse for
me." And he went on calmly with his work.

The lord went away shrugging his shoulders at the peasant's stupidity;
and, sure enough, before he had gone very far, _crack! crack!_ the
branch broke, and down fell the peasant to the foot of the tree, giving
himself a fine blow on the nose, which immediately swelled almost to
the size of a turnip.

"My word," muttered the peasant, tenderly feeling the sore place, "that
man must have been a sorcerer! He can foretell the future! He said I'd
fall and I certainly have fallen! I must run after him and ask him to
tell me something else. This is a chance not to be missed!"

So off he ran as fast as his bruised limbs would allow, in pursuit of
the lord, and presently came up with him. "Hi, sir, wait a minute!" he
cried. "You told me the truth about the tree. The branch broke right
enough and I fell on my nose. Won't you tell me something else?"

"Willingly," answered the lord, "and I hope this time that you will pay
heed to what I say. Take care not to load your ass too heavily, for if
you do so he will bray, and if he brays three times running I predict
that you will suddenly die."

"Oh dear me!" sighed the peasant. "I am the most unfortunate of
men. Each prediction about my future seems to be an unhappy one.
Nevertheless, I am very much obliged to you, sir. Good day." And he
took off his cap to the lord and bowed, and lurched off back to his
tree.

For a long time he worked busily, and found so much wood that his
little cart soon became full. Then he remembered what the lord had told
him about loading his ass too heavily, but he was so avaricious that
he could not make up his mind to stop. "One more branch won't make any
difference," he kept on saying as he piled more and more wood into the
cart. At last the poor donkey could stand no more and, lifting his
head, he uttered a loud "Hee-haw!"

[Illustration: "HALLO MY MAN," CRIED THE LORD]

At this the peasant turned pale with fright. "Stop, stop, what are you
doing?" he cried. "Oh, my dear little ass, I beg you not to bray again.
I will not put another branch into the cart. We will go home straight
away and you shall have carrots for supper!"

So saying, he climbed to his seat and shook the reins as a signal for
departure. The donkey pulled and pulled, but not an inch would the cart
budge, although he strained his muscles to the utmost. Finding all his
efforts vain, he turned his head and once again gave utterance to a
loud bray of protest.

"Oh, dear me, that's twice!" cried the peasant, jumping down from his
perch. "If he brays once more I'm a dead man. Do you hear that, little
ass? For goodness' sake, remain dumb until we reach home, and I'll help
you pull the cart!" Freed of the peasant's weight, the load for a time
was easier to pull, but at the end of another ten minutes the weight
began to tell again. The ass stopped and brayed loudly for the third
time.

"That's finished it!" cried the peasant. "I am dead!" And he fell flat
to the ground.

Left to himself, the ass wandered slowly on, dragging the load behind
him. Soon he came to the gates of the town, and the guard took him and
