
_Crack!_ The cord snapped suddenly, and the two monkeys tumbled head
over heels. Never mind; they got another cord to repair the damage, and
this time they succeeded in pulling Little James clear of the mud.

Did I say Little James? Alas! it was only half of him! His rescuers had
pulled so hard that he had broken off short in the middle, and his two
legs were left embedded in the mud.

[Illustration: "PULL, BROTHER, PULL, AND WE'LL SOON HAVE HIM OUT"]

"Dear me!" said the first monkey, scratching his head. "This is very
sad. The poor fellow has lost his legs. What shall we do?"

"Let us make him some wooden ones!" said the other.

So said, so done. They made him a beautiful pair of wooden legs, and
Little James hobbled painfully home. By the time he reached his house
he felt so ill that he went straight to bed. "I believe I am going to
die," he said to himself. "I must make my will and set down the cause
of my death."

So he sent for pen and paper and began to write. Before very long,
however, he stopped and began to scratch his head in perplexity. "If
I am going to die," he thought, "I must be going to die of something!
Now, what am I going to die of? This must be carefully considered, for
above all one must write the truth in one's last testament!"

So he pondered and pondered, but he could not make up his mind as
to the cause of his death. Was he going to die of the fall from the
balloon, or of his broken legs, or what? Just then he happened to look
in the mirror by the bedside, and saw that there was a lump on his
forehead, which he had got while fighting with James and Jemmy in the
balloon.

"Why, of course," cried he, "I am going to die of that big bruise on my
forehead!" So he wrote it down in his will, and then, happy at having
solved the difficulty, turned over on his side and died.

And, as I said before, this all took place in Monkey-land, ever so long
ago.

[Illustration]




[Illustration: BIRDS]

HOW THE GOLDFINCH GOT HIS COLOURS


When the Angel whose mission it was to colour the birds had finished
his work, he began to scrape his palette and to make ready for
departure. He had done his task well, for the plumage of the feathered
creatures all around him glowed with a thousand glorious colours. There
was the lordly eagle, arrayed in a robe of golden brown. The peacock
had a tail of shimmering blue and green that looked as if it were
studded with precious stones. The crow's black coat shone in the sun
with a kind of steely radiance, very wonderful to behold. The canary
was as yellow as a buttercup; the jay had a spot of blue sky on either
wing; even the humble sparrow wore a handsome black neck-tie; while
Chanticleer, the cock, was resplendent in yellow, black, and red. All
the birds were very proud of their appearance, and they strutted about
here and there, gazing at their reflections in the water and calling
upon their neighbours to come and admire their beauties.

[Illustration: THE ANGEL WHOSE MISSION IT WAS TO COLOUR THE BIRDS]

Alone among the birds the little goldfinch took no part in the
rejoicing. Somehow or other the Angel had overlooked him, so that he
remained uncoloured, a drab little creature, in his sober grey dress,
among the gaily clothed throng. More than once he had tried to draw
the Angel's attention to himself, and now, seeing him cleaning his
palette in readiness to depart, he stepped forward and said: "Have
pity on me, good Angel, and paint my plumage as you have painted that
of the others, so that I may walk among them unashamed. I have nothing
to commend me--no beautiful song like the nightingale or the throstle,
no grace of form such as the swallows have. If I am to go unadorned,
nothing remains for me but to hide myself among the leaves."

[Illustration: HE TOOK A PLACE AMONG THE MOST BEAUTIFUL OF THEM ALL]

Then the Angel took pity on the little creature, and would gladly have
painted him with glowing colours, but alas, he had scraped his palette
clean. Therefore he took up a brush, and going from bird to bird took
from each a spot of colour, which he laid upon the goldfinch, blending
a score of brilliant hues with marvellous skill. When he had finished,
the tiny bird was transformed, and from being the saddest in that
brilliant company he took a place among the most beautiful of them all.

[Illustration: ALL THE BIRDS WERE VERY PROUD OF THEIR APPEARANCE]

It is not possible, by means of words, to describe the beauty of the
colouring which the Angel gave to the goldfinch, but you may see him
any day you like, sitting on a thistle, and chirping his song of
gratitude and praise.

[Illustration]




[Illustration: THE FOX WAS NOT A LITTLE FRIGHTENED]

THE COCK AND THE FOX


This is the story that the old woman who was called Tante Sannie told
to the little boy who would always be talking:

A long time ago (she said) there lived in a farmyard a Cock who was
very proud of himself, and with reason, too, for he was, indeed,
a plump and handsome bird. Nothing could have been finer than his
appearance when he strutted through the yard, lifting his feet high as
he walked, and nodding his head at each step. He had a magnificent comb
of coral-red, and blue-black plumage streaked with gold, which shone so
brilliantly when the sun flashed on it that it was a joy to see him. No
wonder that his twenty wives gazed at him admiringly and followed him
wherever he went, and were quite content to let him hustle them about
and gobble up all the fattest worms and the finest grains of corn.

If this Cock was proud of his appearance, there was one thing of which
he was even prouder, and that was his voice. He was a famous songster;
he could crow you high and he could crow you low; he could utter tones
as deep as the pealing of the organ in church or as shrill as the blast
of a trumpet. Every morning, when the first streak of dawn appeared in
the sky, he would get down off his perch, raise himself on his toes,
stretch out his neck, close his eyes and crow so loudly that he roused
people who were sleeping in the next parish. And this he loved to do,
because it was his nature.

Now in the forest close to the farmyard there lived a Fox who had often
gazed with longing eyes upon the plump and handsome bird. His mouth
watered every time he thought of him, and many were the artful tricks
he played to try and catch him for his dinner. One day he hid himself
among the bushes in the garden by the farmyard and waited patiently
until the Cock happened to stray his way. After a time the bird came
along, pecking here and pecking there, wandered through the gate into
the garden, and made straight for the bush under which Master Fox was
hidden. He was just going to run into the bush after a butterfly which
was fluttering about, when he caught sight of Reynard's black snout and
cunning, watchful eyes, and with a squeak of alarm he jumped aside,
just in time, and hopped on to the wall.

At this the Fox rose to his feet. "Don't go away, my dear friend," said
he in honeyed tones. "I would not for the world do you any harm. I
know that it is my bad fortune to be disliked by your family--I can't
for the life of me think why, and it is a pity, because I have to hide
myself for the pleasure of hearing you sing. There is no cock in all
