showed it to the giant, but very cleverly he managed at the last moment
to exchange it for the sparrow which he carried in his pocket, and
this he was able to do because the giant was rather short-sighted, and,
if truth be told, slow-witted as well.

[Illustration: HE TOSSED THE BIRD INTO THE AIR]

"One, two, three!" cried Sponsken, and he tossed the bird into the air,
and of course it flew up and up and never came down at all.

"Well, well," said the giant, "I never saw such a thing as that in my
life before. You are certainly a wonderful stone-thrower, little man.
But can you do this?" And picking up another stone, he squeezed it so
hard between his immense fists that he crushed it into a fine powder.

"Yes, that is hard to do," said Sponsken, "but I think I can go one
better. Any oaf, if he be strong enough, can crush a stone to powder,
but it requires skill as well as strength to wring the juice out of
one. Watch me!" So saying, Sponsken adroitly slipped out his piece of
cheese, and squeezed it until the whey dripped from between his fingers.

[Illustration: "THE THREE ANIMALS ARE A BEAR, A UNICORN, AND A WILD
BOAR"]

"Marvellous!" said the giant. "I confess myself beaten. Let us go into
partnership, for there cannot be two others like us in the whole world."

"Willingly," answered Sponsken, "but what are we to do?"

"Why, as for that," said the giant, "the King of this country has
promised his daughter's hand in marriage, and a great treasure besides,
to anybody who can destroy three ferocious beasts which are devastating
his realm. It seems to me that this is a task we can quite well do
together. You, with your quickness and skill, can trap the beasts, and
I can kill them with my club. That done, we will divide the spoils."

So it was agreed, and without wasting a moment the two took the wood
together. Before very long they reached the King's palace, and sent up
a message by one of the lords in waiting that they would like to see
His Majesty.

"And do you mean to tell me," asked the King, when he had heard the
giant's tale, "that you can overcome the three fierce animals by the
help of this ugly little pock-marked fellow."

"Hush! Not so loud, for the love of heaven!" whispered the giant. "My
friend is very touchy about his appearance, and if he hears you making
such slighting remarks it is very likely he will bring the whole of
your palace down about your head!"

[Illustration: THE BEAR FOLLOWED HIM INTO THE HOLLOW TRUNK]

"You don't say so!" whispered the King in reply, glancing fearfully
at the terrible little man. "Well, you are at liberty to try your
luck. The three animals are a bear, a unicorn, and a wild boar, and at
present they are hidden in the wood close by. There you will find them,
but take care of yourselves, for they have already killed scores of my
men."

"Don't be afraid," answered the giant, "for us this is as easy as
playing a game."

After having partaken of a good meal the two made their way towards the
wood in which the animals were hidden.

"We must make a plan," said Sponsken. "Listen to what I propose. You go
into the middle of the wood while I remain here on the outskirts; then
when you drive the beasts out I will see that they do not escape."

So it was arranged. The giant went forward into the wood, while
Sponsken remained outside, waiting to see what would happen. He had
not to wait long, for presently there was a crashing and a tearing of
undergrowth and a great bear came lumbering towards him. Sponsken did
not like the look of the creature at all, and decided to put as much
space between them as possible. Looking here and there for a refuge,
he spied a big oak-tree, and quickly climbed its trunk and ensconced
himself among the branches. Unfortunately the bear had already seen
him, and, raising himself on his hind legs with a dreadful roar, he
rushed to the tree and began to climb. In another moment Sponsken would
have been lost, but by good chance the tree happened to be hollow, so
without hesitation the lad let himself down into the trunk, and finding
at the bottom a small hole which led to the open air, he was just able
to wriggle through it and escape. The bear followed him into the hollow
trunk, but the hole at the bottom was too small for him to get out
by, and as there was hardly room to move inside the trunk, the angry
creature had to stay where he was, waking all the echoes in the forest
with his growling.

The next minute the giant came running out of the forest. "Have you
seen the bear?" he cried. "I drove him towards you!"

"Don't worry," answered Sponsken coolly; "I've shut him up in the tree
there to keep him safe."

The giant rushed to the tree and dispatched the bear with one blow
of his great club. Then, pulling out the carcass, he shouldered it,
and the two went back to the palace, congratulating each other on the
excellent beginning of their enterprise.

There remained now the unicorn and the wild boar. Next day Sponsken and
the giant went to the forest again, and since their first plan had been
so successful, it was arranged that they should follow exactly the same
course. The giant went into the depths of the wood to find the unicorn
and drive him out, while Sponsken remained on the borders to capture
the animal when he came.

This time the period of waiting was longer, and Sponsken, leaning
against the oak-tree, had almost fallen asleep when a clattering of
hoofs awakened him, and he sprang aside just in time to escape the
unicorn, who, breathing fire from his nostrils, charged down upon
him. So great was the impetus of the beast's charge that he could not
stop himself, and with a mighty crash he ran full tilt into the tree,
driving his horn so far into the trunk that, although he pulled and
struggled, he could not wrench himself free.

[Illustration: WITH A MIGHTY CRASH HE RAN FULL TILT INTO THE TREE]

When the giant came up, Sponsken showed him the animal, which was
quickly killed with a single blow of the club.

"Didn't I manage that affair well?" asked Sponsken as they went back to
the palace.

"You are a wonder!" answered the giant, and he really believed what he
said.

Now only the wild boar remained, and on the following day the two
went to the forest to capture him also. Once again the same plan was
followed, but this time Sponsken kept his eyes wide open, and when the
ferocious beast broke cover he ran as fast as he could in the direction
of the royal chapel. The wild boar followed him, and a fearsome
creature he looked, I assure you, with his wicked little eyes and his
great curved tusks and the hair on his back bristling like the quills
of a porcupine.

Through the open door of the chapel Sponsken ran, and the boar,
snorting with fury, followed him. Then began a fine chase, round and
round the aisles, over the pews, and in and out of the vestries. At
last Sponsken seized a chair, and dashing it against a window broke
several panes, and so made good his escape. While the boar was still
standing stupidly staring at the hole through which he had gone out,
Sponsken ran round to the door, which he closed and locked. Then,
having broken one or two more panes of glass, he sat down quietly by
the chapel wall and began to pare his nails.

A short time afterwards the giant came rushing up.

"Where is the boar? Have you let him get away?" he cried.

"Don't get so excited," answered Sponsken. "The boar is safe enough.
