Towards nightfall they arrived at a farmyard, on the gate of which a
cock was crowing lustily.

"Hallo!" said Greyskin. "What's all this about?"

"I am singing my last song on earth," said the cock. "An hour ago
I sang a song, although it is not my usual custom to crow in the
afternoon, and as I ended I heard the farmer's wife say: 'Hearken to
Chanticleer. He's crowing for fine weather to-morrow. I wonder if he'd
crow so loudly if he knew that we had guests coming, and that he was
going into the pot to make their soup!' She has a horrid laugh, that
woman. I have always hated her!"

"And do you mean to tell me," said Greyskin, "that you are going to
stay here quite contentedly till they come to wring your neck?"

"What else can I do?" asked Chanticleer.

"Join us, and turn your talents to account. We are all beautiful
singers and we are going to Brussels to offer ourselves as choristers
at St. Gudule. We were a trio before. With you we shall be a quartet,
and that's one better!"

Chanticleer was only too glad to find a means of escape, so he
willingly joined the party, and they once more took the road. A little
while afterwards they came to a thick wood, which was the haunt of a
notorious band of robbers. There they decided to rest for the night,
so Greyskin and the dog lay down beneath the shelter of a large
beech-tree, while the cat climbed on to one of the branches, and
Chanticleer perched himself at the very top. From this lofty post he
could see over the whole wood, and it was not long before he espied a
light twinkling among the trees not far away.

[Illustration: "WHAT ELSE CAN I DO?" ASKED CHANTICLEER]

[Illustration: "HUSH!" SAID CHANTICLEER]

"There must be a house of some sort over there," he said to his
companions. "Shall we go and see? We may find something to eat."

"Or some straw to lie upon, at any rate," said Greyskin. "This damp
ground gives me rheumatics in my old bones."

"I was just thinking the same thing," said the dog. "Let us go."

So the four choristers, led by the cock, walked in the direction from
which the light came, and before long they found themselves in front of
a little house, the windows of which were brilliantly lighted. In order
to reach to the windows the animals made a tower of their bodies, with
Greyskin at the bottom and Chanticleer at the top.

Now this house was the abode of a band of robbers, who, at that very
moment, were seated before a table laden with all kinds of food. There
they sat and feasted, and poor Chanticleer's mouth watered as he
watched them.

"Is there anybody inside?" asked the dog, who was impatient.

"Hush!" said Chanticleer. "Men! They're eating their dinner!"

"I wish I was," said the dog. "What are they eating?"

"All sorts of things--sausage, and fish...."

"Sausage!" said the dog.

"Fish!" said the cat.

"And ever so many other delicacies," Chanticleer went on. "Look here,
friends. Wouldn't it be a fine thing if we could get a share of their
meal? I confess that my stomach aches with hunger."

"And mine too," said the dog. "I've never been so hungry in my life.
But how are we to get the food?"

"Let us serenade them, and perhaps they'll throw us something as a
reward," said Greyskin. "Music, you know, has charms to soothe the
savage breast."

This seemed such a good idea that the choristers lost no time in
putting it into execution. All four began to sing. The donkey
hee-hawed, the dog howled, the cat miaued, and the cock crowed. From
the noise they made one would have thought that the heavens were
falling.

[Illustration: BREAKING THE GLASS TO SMITHEREENS]

The effect of this marvellous quartet upon the robbers was
instantaneous. Leaping from their seats, they ran from place to place
in mortal terror, tumbling over one another, oversetting chairs and
adding to the racket by their shrieks and cries. At that moment the
cock fell against the window, breaking the glass to smithereens; the
donkey gave the frame a push, and all the four precipitated themselves
into the room. This was the last straw; the robbers could stand no
more; half mad with fear they rushed to the door and fled into the
forest.

Then our four choristers drew up to the table and set to work upon the
food with which it was laden. Their long walk had given them a good
appetite, so that there was little left by the time they had finished.
Feeling drowsy after their meal, they then settled themselves to sleep.
The donkey made himself a bed on a heap of straw in the yard; the dog
stretched himself out upon the mat by the house door; the cat lay
among the warm cinders on the hearth; and the cock perched upon the
roof-top. A few minutes more and they were all fast asleep.

Meanwhile the robbers, who had retreated some distance into the forest,
waited anxiously for something dreadful to happen. An hour passed by
and there was neither sight nor sound to alarm them, so they began to
feel a little ashamed of their cowardice. Creeping stealthily nearer to
the cottage, they saw that everything was still, and that no light was
showing from the windows.

At last the robber chief sent his lieutenant to spy out the land, and
this man, returning to the cottage without mishap, found his way into
the kitchen and proceeded to light a candle. He had no matches, but
he saw two sparks of fire among the cinders on the hearth, so he went
forward to get a light from them.

Now this light came from the cat's eyes, and as soon as puss felt the
robber touch her, she sprang up, snarling and spitting, and scratched
his face. With a scream of terror, he dropped his candle and rushed for
the door, and as he passed the dog bit him in the leg. By this time the
noise had awakened Greyskin, who got upon his feet just as the man ran
by, and helped him forward with a mighty kick, which sent him flying
out into the roadway. Seeing this, the cock on the housetop spread his
wings and crowed in triumph, "Cock-a-doodle-doo!"

I wish you could have seen the way that robber ran! He covered the
ground so quickly that he seemed like a flying shadow, and I am
perfectly certain that not even a hare could have overtaken him. At
last, panting for breath, he rejoined his comrades in the forest, who
were eagerly awaiting his return.

"Well," cried the chief, "is the way clear? Can we go back?"

"Not on any account," cried the robber. "There's a horrible witch in
the kitchen. Directly I entered she sprang at me and tore my face with
her long claws, calling out at the same time to her creatures to come
and devour me. As I ran through the door one of them buried his fangs
in my leg, and a little farther on, in the yard, a great black monster
struck at me with an enormous club, giving me a blow that nearly broke
my back-bone. On the roof a little demon with wings and eyes that shone
like coals of fire cried, 'Stop him! Eat him! Stop him! Eat him!' You
may guess that I did not wait for more. It is a miracle that I have
escaped with my life!"

When they heard this terrible story the robbers lost no time in
decamping, and such was their terror that they deserted the forest
altogether and went away to another part of the country. The result
