eagle called for silence, and, addressing the company again, insisted
upon the adoption of his own plan. He spoke sternly and menacingly, and
as all the birds went in fear of his curved beak and sharp talons, no
further objections were raised.

It was agreed that the trial should take place at once, and the cock
was chosen to give the signal for the start. Very proud of the honour,
he stationed himself on a little grassy knoll, and having ascertained
that everybody was ready, gave a loud and clarion call. There was the
sound as of a rushing mighty wind as all the birds sprang into the air.
Only the eagle remained in his place, looking after the others a little
contemptuously. So confident did he feel in his ability to outfly them
all, that he allowed them at least five minutes start. Then, very
leisurely, he spread his wings and soared. Up, up, up he went; he
overtook the stragglers on the fringe of the crowd, passed through the
thickest press, outdistanced the foremost flyer of them all. Still up
and up he soared, exalting in his strength and power, until the birds
flying far below were hidden by the clouds. Then he hung for a moment,
motionless on extended wings, for he was a little wearied by his
efforts.

All of a sudden he heard, above his head, a tiny _twit, twit, twit_,
and looking up, saw, to his surprise, the golden-crested wren, one of
the smallest of the birds, flying merrily above him.

"I have outdistanced you. I am king! I am king!" cried the wren in his
joy.

"We will see," said the eagle grimly; and once again he beat his mighty
wings and soared.

At the end of a further five minutes, he stopped again, only to hear,
as before, the wren's cheerful twitter above him. Again and again the
same thing happened. Try as he might, the eagle could not outdistance
the tiny bird, and at last, worn out with his exertions, he was obliged
to give up the contest, and to descend, crestfallen, to the earth again.

[Illustration: BIRDS GOING TO THE RACE]

And how did the little wren, which is certainly not famed for its
powers of flight, come to be able to defeat the mighty eagle? By a very
simple trick! When the eagle started on its flight the wren was safely
perched upon his back. There he clung until the eagle stopped flying,
when it was an easy matter to rise from his place and fly a yard or
two higher. When the eagle began to fly again, the wren again took its
place on his back, and this continued time after time until the great
bird was exhausted.

[Illustration: THERE WAS THE SOUND AS OF A RUSHING MIGHTY WIND]

Although nobody suspected the trick which the wren had played, the
other birds were very indignant when they heard the wren declare that
he had won the contest. "You, king!" they cried. "An insignificant
thing like you! It would be a disgrace to us if we were to suffer it.
We would rather be ruled by the lion! At any rate, he had majesty of
deportment and dignity. You have neither grace nor wisdom, strength nor
beauty. Away with you before we tear you to pieces!"

The wren was as perky as you please, and for only answer he flew to the
boughs of a tree, whence he looked down on them all with his head on
one side, chirping, "I am king! I am king. Bow down and make obeisance!"

A great cry of anger arose. "Kill him! Kill him!" screamed the hawk.
"Tear him to pieces!"

"You will have to catch him first!" twittered the wren, and as the hawk
made a rush at him, he popped into a hole in the trunk of a tree--a
hole so small that nobody could get at him. From the shelter of that
safe retreat he continued to gibe at the birds, issuing commands, and
asserting that he was their king.

What was to be done? Nobody could get at the wren, and yet all the
birds felt that he should be punished for his impudence. A consultation
was held, and it was finally decided to set the owl as a guard at the
mouth of his hole. "Sooner or later," said the eagle, "he will have to
come out in order to get food, and then we will have him. If, however,
he elects to stay where he is, let him; either way our purpose will be
served."

So the owl mounted guard by the hole in the trunk of the tree, and
having given him the most careful instructions not on any account to
let the wren escape, the other birds flew away. All that day the owl
remained vigilant at his post, and though the wren put his head out of
the hole a hundred times, he always found his guard keeping careful
watch. Night fell, and a great silence fell upon the woods, but still
the owl kept awake for hour after hour, watching with unwinking eyes.
At last, towards morning, his vigilance relaxed a little. His head
sank forward on his breast; and he fell fast asleep. Hardly had his
eyes closed than, _rip!_ the wren darted out of his hole, and the next
moment he had vanished among the trees.

When the birds returned the next morning they were furious to find that
their prisoner had escaped. "Unfaithful servant," they cried, "you have
betrayed your trust!" And they fell upon the owl to put him to death.
With some difficulty he managed to escape, but ever since that time the
birds chase the owl wherever they see him, for they are still angry
with him. To keep out of their way he has to hide during the day and
venture out only at night, when all the other birds are fast asleep.

As for the golden-crested wren, he is known as the Kinglet, or little
king, to this day.

[Illustration]




[Illustration: DONATUS]

A DRUM FULL OF BEES


A certain regiment had for its drummer an old man named Donatus. He was
a good-for-nothing rascal, who spent most of his time in the tavern
drinking and playing cards, but he was an excellent drummer for all
that, and it was a fine sight to see him on parade days, marching
along with the band, and playing on his drum with a flourish that was
the envy of all the boys in the town. None of his companions in the
regiment liked Donatus, because of his fondness for playing practical
jokes. There was hardly one of them whom at some time or another he
had not hoaxed, and as most of his jokes were spiteful ones, nobody
pretended to be sorry when one day the drummer was found cheating at
cards, and being brought before the Captain, was dismissed from the
regiment. It was in vain that he pleaded for mercy, with the tears
running down his face. The Captain had forgiven him many times, and was
determined not to do so again.

"Well," said Donatus at last, "if I must go, I beg you, Captain, to let
me keep my drum. I have played on it since I was a lad of fourteen, and
I know no other trade. If you take it away from me, I don't know how I
am going to live, but with it I may perhaps manage to turn an honest
penny or two."

"Very well, you old scoundrel," answered the Captain. "Keep your drum
and take yourself off; only be quick about it, or you shall be soundly
thrashed."

So away went Donatus with his drum on his back, and not having any
particular place to go to, he just took the first road that came, and
marched along it all day until he was forced to rest because his legs
were so tired. Setting his drum down in the middle of the road he sat
upon it and began to wonder what he should do for food and a bed for
the night. First of all he turned out his pockets to see what he could
find, but there was nothing there except two sous and a pack of very
greasy playing cards. Donatus put them back again, with a sigh, and
fell again to wondering how he was going to fare.

Now the road along which he had been walking was bordered by a dense
forest, and suddenly Donatus thought that if he were to get among
the trees he could at least find shelter. So he shouldered his drum
