death a hundred times. What have you to say?"

Reynard put a paw up to his face and brushed away a tear; then, with
his voice broken with emotion, he answered: "My lord the King, I have
been a miserable sinner, and there is nothing left for me to do but to
cast myself upon your royal mercy. Where King Nobel sits, there justice
and mercy sit also. I am sure of the one; therefore I make bold to
plead earnestly for the other. Perhaps, O King, I am not so bad as I
have been painted. The tongues of enemies have uttered slanders before
to-day, and brought upright men to ruin. All I ask, O King, is that you
will let me state my case, and, when I shall have finished my tale,
judge me according to my deserts. I will keep nothing back, for in this
serious hour I wish to speak nothing but the naked truth. Listen to me,
O King, and let these others listen also. Perchance the sad story of my
wrongdoings, and of my gradual fall from righteousness, may be a lesson
to many here, and by serving as an example help to keep them upon the
strait and narrow path."

"You have a glib tongue, Reynard," said the King. "It has saved you
before to-day, but this time the count is too serious to be hidden by
a mist of words. Yet speak on. The accused has a right to make his
own defence, and that right I should be the last to deny, even to one
forsworn and treacherous, as you have proved yourself to be."

Reynard sobbed aloud. "Hard words, O King," said he, "and harder still
because of the truth that is in them. I do not complain. Meekly I bow
the head and make confession of my sins."

At this all the animals settled themselves comfortably to listen. The
idea of Reynard the Fox confessing anything was so new that not one of
them would willingly have missed a word. Those of the animals who knew
Reynard well regarded him a little uneasily, but nobody broke silence.
Reynard remained for a time sobbing quietly with head bowed upon his
paws, then, in a broken voice, he began to speak:

[Illustration: "I WAS MISCHIEVOUS AND UNRULY"]

"From my very earliest years, O King," said he, "I was mischievous
and unruly. Had there been anybody to give me counsel and guidance
I might perhaps have outgrown the errors of my youth and become a
worthy subject. Unfortunately I fell into bad company, and, under the
influence of evil companions went rapidly from bad to worse. Isengrim
the Wolf was my friend in those early days. He it was who taught me
to steal and to prey upon the defenceless creatures of the woods and
fields. My first victim, I well remember, was a young lamb which had
strayed from the fold. Isengrim led me to her and persuaded me to kill
her, and afterwards, in the same way, a goat and two young deer fell
victims to my raging thirst for blood. Soon not a hen-house, not a
fold was safe from my depredations. I killed for the sake of killing,
and that part of the meat which I could not devour I gave to the Wolf,
who was only too willing to take it, or hid it in certain holes and
crannies in the wood."

All the time that Reynard had been speaking Isengrim had been making
frantic efforts to speak, but a glance from the King had kept him
silent. Now he could contain himself no longer. Trembling with fury, he
rose to his feet and cried: "Lies! All lies, O King! Will your Majesty
believe anything it pleases this slanderous dog to say?"

"Silence!" cried the King. "Your turn will come later. For the present
let the accused speak without interruption!"

"Thanks, O King," said Reynard. "I can well understand the Wolf's wrath
when his connexion with so vile a creature as I is thus brought to
light. Yet I have sworn to tell the truth, and the truth I will tell
without regard to persons. Sorry as I am to say it, the Wolf was not
the only one to lead me into bad ways. Among my companions of those
early days were also the Bear and the Cat. They made me hunt for them
when I was young, and such was their voracity that there was little
left for myself, and I should have died of hunger were it not for the
fact that I was fortunate enough to discover a hidden treasure!"

"Eh, what's that?" said the King. "Did you say a treasure?"

"Aye," answered Reynard, "a treasure of gold, my lord; so great a
treasure that it would take your servants many days even to count it
all. And not gold alone, but precious gems--diamonds of the purest
water, rubies red as blood, and emeralds green as the sea when the sun
shines upon it!"

The Queen leaned forward upon her throne and fixed Reynard with burning
eyes. "And pearls too?" she whispered.

"Pearls too, O Queen. Ropes of pearls that well would adorn your
Majesty's fair neck. And jewelled crowns worthy of a royal brow!
Hidden deep in the earth they lie, all those riches, and now they will
lie there for ever, for nobody knows of them but myself. Perhaps it
is as well. The lust of gold is the motive of many crimes, and this
treasure has already been the cause of a serious attempt against
the throne and the life of the King! But all this has nothing to do
with my confession. With your Majesty's leave I will go on with what I
was about to say."

[Illustration: THE TRIAL OF REYNARD THE FOX]

"One moment," said the Queen. "Those crowns you spoke of--describe them
more fully. What stones had they, and how set?"

"Time enough for that," cried the King. "You shall try the crowns upon
your head before all is done. Let the Fox tell us where this treasure
is hidden; that is the important thing!"

"I had thought to carry the secret with me to the grave," said Reynard,
"but in this solemn hour I can hide nothing. If it is your Majesty's
will, I will tell all."

[Illustration: "AND PEARLS TOO?" SHE WHISPERED]

"Beware, O King!" cried the Bear. "He will deceive you now as he has
deceived others. Believe not his lying words!"

"Silence!" cried the King. "This matter concerns me, and me alone. Let
Reynard speak!"

Reynard cast a look of triumph at Bruin and Isengrim, and, smiling
faintly, went on with his tale.

"The treasure was discovered first of all by my father. He came upon it
one day when he was hunting in the forest, among the ruins of a palace
that once belonged to an ancient king. There, in a deep hole, under a
big stone, he found the gold and gems, and for ever afterwards he was
a changed creature. No longer blithe and care-free, he slunk about as
though overburdened with responsibility. He knew himself rich beyond
compare--richer than any king in all the world, and gradually into his
heart there crept the desire to win, by means of his riches, a place of
power.

"At that time, O King, my father was bitter against your Majesty
because of your disapproval of his manner of life, and I am sorry to
say that he determined to wrest you from the throne and to set up
another in your place. Full of this project, he took Tybert the Cat
into his confidence. The two met together secretly in the forest of the
Ardennes, and after much discussion they decided to offer the throne to
Bruin the Bear!"

"Ah!" ejaculated the King, turning his gaze upon Bruin, who was too
furious to speak. "So now we know why you wished to still Reynard's
tongue."

"The Bear was delighted with the prospect," Reynard went on, "and
strutted about the forest as though he were already crowned. He was
always talking of the fine laws he would make and the splendid time
he would have, but he was too stupid to be of much use as a plotter.
Indeed, it was for reason of his stupidity that my father and Tybert
chose him as king, for they thought they could make of him a useful
tool. They had, however, to lay their plans without him, and the better
to carry them out, they called Isengrim the Wolf, and Grimbard the
Ape, into conference. The five met together at a certain place between
Heyst and Gand, and it was there, O King, that your death was decided
upon. Each of the conspirators took a solemn oath not to divulge the
