put him into the pound. After a time, as nobody claimed him, he was
sold.

Meanwhile the peasant lay where he had fallen. Presently a carriage
drove up, and the coachman was forced to pull in his horses because of
the body that lay stretched across the road.

"Come," he cried, thinking that the peasant was drunk, "rouse yourself,
swill-tub! Get up, unless you want to be run over!"

"I can't get up!" moaned the peasant.

"Why not?"

"Because I'm dead!"

"Dead, are you?" cried the coachman, jumping from his seat in anger.
"Well I've something here that will bring you to life again!" And he
took his whip and laid on to the peasant with such a will that in
less than ten seconds the fellow was capering about all over the road.
Having thus effectively brought the dead man to life, he remounted his
box and drove off grumbling.

In the roadway the peasant continued to dance about until the pain of
his beating had somewhat subsided. Then he looked around, and for the
first time missed his donkey.

[Illustration: "I CAN'T GET UP, BECAUSE I'M DEAD!"]

"Dear, dear, dear!" he cried, "one trouble after another! When I was
dead I wished I was alive; now I'm alive I wish I was dead again, for
I'm sore all over, and I've lost my donkey. Whatever shall I do?" And,
groaning and grumbling, he set off along the road in search of his
beast.

After a time he came to the gates of the town, where a sentry was
standing with his pike on his shoulder. "Good morning, good man," said
the peasant. "Have you seen my little ass?"

"Your ass!" answered the sentry, smiling. "The only ass that has passed
through these gates to-day is already become burgomaster!"

"What! Burgomaster!" cried the peasant. "My ass Burgomaster! Tell me
quickly, where does he live? I must go to him at once!"

Hardly able to control his amusement, the sentry pointed out the way
to the Burgomaster's house, and thither went the peasant in all haste.
Arrived at the door, he sounded the great bell--_Darlindindin!_--and a
maidservant appeared.

"Is the Burgomaster at home?" asked the peasant. Yes, he was at home,
and the maidservant led the peasant to the room where he sat behind a
big table loaded with documents.

"Good morning, Ass!" said the peasant, with a grin of delight that
twisted his swollen and discoloured features.

"Eh! what, what!" stammered the Burgomaster, turning purple with anger.

"I beg your pardon," said the peasant, "I should have said, 'Good
morning, Mr. Ass, Esquire,' for you have become a great man now, while
I am still a poor woodcutter. I don't envy you your good fortune, I am
sure, although your promotion has left me without a donkey. Since you
have become such a great lord, won't you give me back the ten florins
you cost me, so that I may buy another?"

At this the Burgomaster's rage exploded. Leaping over the table with
one bound, he seized the hapless peasant by the collar of his coat,
threw open the door, and, with one mighty kick, sent him sprawling from
top to bottom of the stairs.

[Illustration]




[Illustration: THE EAGLE AND THE KINGLET]

THE KING OF THE BIRDS


At one time the birds, like the four-footed animals, were ruled over
by the lion, who is the King of the Beasts, but they grew discontented
with his dominion and decided to have a king of their own. It was the
eagle's idea: he thought of it one day when he was standing on the
lofty crag by his nest, gazing out upon the plain below, and he saw the
lion, no bigger than a mouse in appearance, slinking beside a dried-up
stream. "Earth-bound creature!" thought the eagle scornfully. "Who are
you to reign over us, who cleave the air with wings and fly in the
face of the sun! He who is lordliest among the birds should rule the
feathered creatures, and surely I am he!"

So thinking, the eagle spread his wings and soared high into the
air, and then swooped suddenly down upon the lion, casting sand into
his eyes with a harsh scream of defiance. Having thus relieved his
feelings, he sent messengers near and far to assemble all the birds
that he might unfold his plan to them.

Such a scurry of wings as there was when the birds came to answer the
summons! The sky was black with them, so that the animals on the earth
below, fearing a dreadful storm, took shelter in their caves and holes.
From north, south, east, and west they came; over mountain, valley, and
plain; birds of all sorts and sizes, from the little humming-bird to
the condor and the vulture. The ostrich left the burning plains where
he loves to roam, and flapping his ridiculous wing, for he could not
fly, raced to the meeting-place. All those birds that dwell in the
tropical forests, and flash from tree to tree like living jewels in the
green twilight; the penguins and skua-gulls from the icy north; the
cormorants and shags, and all the hosts of the birds of the sea--if
I were to go on naming them I should fill every page of this book
and never even begin my story. And as they flew each uttered his own
cry, so that what with the calling and the screaming, the whistling,
warbling, chirping, and chattering, the air was filled with a mighty
sound that echoed to the very ends of the world.

When all the birds were duly assembled the eagle addressed them thus:
"Listen, brothers," said he, "I have called you together in order
that we may choose a king, for it is not fitting that the lion, that
earth-bound creature, should continue to reign over the free company of
the birds. We are distinguished from the beasts by our power of flight,
and it therefore seems to me that the crown of sovereignty should be
given to the one amongst us who possesses that power in the fullest
degree. What do you say? Shall we test this matter, and let him who can
fly nearest to the sun be king?"

A confused chorus of cries answered his question, one bird speaking
against another.

"What is flight compared to song?" asked the nightingale. "Let the
sweetest singer among us reign."

The canary and the throstle and the blackcap all agreed with the
nightingale, but they were shouted down.

"Beauty, beauty!" cried the peacock. "That is the test! A king should
be resplendent in gay robes!" And he spread his gorgeous tail.

"Aye, there speaks wisdom," gobbled the turkey, turning red in the
face, and strutting up and down. "What do you say, brother," he asked
the cock. "Shall we arrange it so?"

[Illustration: "IS OUR KING THEN ONLY TO BE LOOKED AT?"]

"A fig for gay feathers!" cackled the ostrich. "Is our king then only
to be looked at, or is he to do nothing all day but chirp and twitter
foolish songs? As for flying, I found my wings of so little use that
I gave up using them long ago. My idea is that we should settle this
matter by a running race!"

And so the birds went on quarrelling and disputing until at last the
