He's in the chapel there. I had no other place to put him, so I flung
him through the window!"

"What a wonderful little man you are!" said the giant gleefully, and
he ran off to kill the boar with one blow of his club. This done,
he hoisted the carcass on to his shoulders and took the road to the
palace. Half-way there the weight of the boar began to tell, for it
was a massive beast, and the giant was forced to stay and rest.

"It is all very well," said he, mopping his streaming brow, "but I
think you ought to take a turn with me in carrying this carcass."

"Not I," answered Sponsken. "We made an agreement that my work was done
when I captured the beast, and I intend to keep to it."

  [Illustration: SPONSKEN   THE PRINCESS   THE GIANT]

So the giant had to struggle on as best he could for the rest of the
way, grumbling at every step, while Sponsken followed, laughing up his
sleeve, and exceedingly thankful that he had escaped the task.

When they reached the palace the two presented themselves before the
King and claimed the promised reward. But now a difficulty arose. It
was quite easy to divide the treasure, but which of them was to have
the Princess?

"I think it should be I," said the giant, "for I killed the three
animals."

"Not at all," said Sponsken. "The Princess should be given to me, for I
captured the beasts."

"A lot of good your capturing them would have been if I had not killed
them!" said the giant.

"How could you have killed them if I had not caught them first?"
answered Sponsken. And so the two began to quarrel, and neither would
give way, and high words passed between them. Truth to tell, the King
was not at all sorry that the dispute had arisen, for he did not very
much relish the idea of his daughter marrying either the bestial giant
or the pock-marked, ugly little fellow who was his companion.

"There is only one way out of the difficulty," said the King at last.
"We must let fate decide. Listen to the plan I propose. You shall both
of you sleep in the Princess's chamber to-night--the giant in a bed on
one side of her couch, and Sponsken on the other. I also will remain in
her chamber and watch her carefully. If she spends most of the night
with her face turned towards Sponsken, it shall be a sign that she is
to marry him; if, on the other hand, she favours the giant, he shall be
her husband; but if she sleeps all night with her face towards neither
of you, then you must both give her up, and be satisfied with the
treasure."

So it was agreed, and that night the trial took place. Sponsken,
however, did not by any means intend that blind chance should settle so
important a matter, and he spent the intervening time in making certain
preparations. First of all he went to the palace gardens, from which
he gathered certain herbs having an aromatic and beautiful perfume;
these he placed in a bag and hid under his clothes. Then from the
woods he gathered all the herbs he could find which had a disagreeable
smell, such as garlic and stinkwort and poisonous fungus; these also
he placed in a bag, and seized an early opportunity, when they came to
the Princess's chamber, of hiding the bag under the pillow on which the
giant's head was to rest.

The Princess well knew the fateful issue which was to be decided in the
night, and as she had firmly made up her mind not to marry either the
one or the other of her suitors, she determined to remain awake all
night and to take care to keep her face turned towards the ceiling. For
a time she managed to do so, but before long drowsiness overcame her,
and she slept. Presently she turned over on her left side and lay with
her face turned towards the giant, who began to chuckle to himself.

"Wait a minute," thought Sponsken. "I don't think the Princess will
keep that position long!" And sure enough, the horrible stench of the
herbs in the bag beneath the giant's pillow penetrated even to her
dreams, and the Princess turned over hurriedly on the other side. What
a change was there! Instead of a disgusting smell which made her dream
of gloomy caverns and noisome things, she found now a delicious perfume
that brought pictures of sunlit gardens all glowing with flowers and
bright-winged butterflies flitting over them. The Princess gave a
little sigh of content, and for the rest of the night she remained with
her face turned towards Sponsken, so that the King had no choice but to
declare the little man the winner.

The Princess, however, refused to abide by the judgment. "I will _not_
marry that vulgar fellow," she cried. "I will die first! Oh, father, if
you love me, think of a means of escape!"

"Do not be afraid, my child," answered the King. "I will arrange
something." And the next day he took the giant aside and proposed to
him that he should rid him of Sponsken, promising a rich reward for the
service. The giant's greed was aroused, and being very jealous of his
companion's success, he was the more ready to fall in with the King's
suggestion.

Fortunately for himself, Sponsken's quick wits made him suspicious. He
guessed that some treachery was afoot, and in order to be prepared for
emergencies he took a heavy hammer with him when he retired to bed at
night. His suspicions were justified, for towards midnight the door of
his room opened and the giant entered on tiptoe, carrying a heavy axe
with which he intended to dispatch our friend. No sooner was his foot
inside the door, however, than Sponsken jumped out of bed and sprang
at him, looking so fierce that the giant, who was a coward at heart,
and had besides a healthy respect for his companion's powers, turned
and fled in dismay. Then Sponsken lifted his heavy hammer and struck
three resounding blows upon the floor. The noise awoke everybody in
the palace, and servants, guards, and lords in waiting came flocking
to the room to discover the cause. The King came last of all, a little
anxious about the success of his fine plot, and when he found Sponsken
sitting up in bed, quite unharmed, his face fell.

"What is the matter?" he stammered.

"Matter?" answered Sponsken. "Nothing very much! Some person wandered
into my room, so I just gave three taps with my fingers on the wall. It
is lucky for you all that I did not strike the blows with my fist, for
had I done so I am afraid there would have been nothing left of your
palace but a heap of dust!"

At these words everybody turned pale, and the King made haste to
protest his undying friendship for his terrible guest.

As for the giant, he was in such fear of encountering Sponsken's
resentment that he fled, and nobody ever saw him again.

Now the poor King did not know what to do, for his daughter still
persisted in her refusal to marry Sponsken, and he was torn two ways by
love and fear. Just at that time, however, a neighbouring monarch, who
was an old enemy of the King's, declared war upon him, and this offered
another opportunity for delay. Calling Sponsken before him, the King
proposed that he should prove his valour by challenging the enemy king
to mortal combat. Sponsken agreed; but his fame had already been noised
abroad, and the challenge was refused.

"Very well," said the King, who was at the end of his resources. "As my
prospective son-in-law you ought to lead my armies into battle. I will
place my own charger at your disposal, and I look to you to save my
country from defeat."

Here was a pretty kettle of fish! Sponsken had never ridden a horse in
his life, and he had not the slightest knowledge of warfare. To make
matters worse, the steed in question was a notoriously vicious brute
who would allow nobody but his own master to mount him. Already he had
accounted for several grooms and stablemen, whom he had kicked to death.

[Illustration: ALL THE ATTENDANTS FLED AT ONCE]

Sponsken commanded that the steed should be led to the borders of the
forest and tied by the bridle to a tree. He had not the slightest
