intention of trying to mount the brute, and his plan was to wait until
the attendants had gone away and then to slip off unobserved. Fate,
however, was too much for him, for hardly was the horse safely tied up
than couriers came spurring along the road to say that the enemy king
was advancing at the head of his army, and was at that very moment less
than half a mile away.

All the attendants fled at once, and Sponsken himself was so overcome
by terror that, without thinking what he was doing, he jumped upon
the back of the steed, and, forgetting that it was tied to the tree,
dug his sharp spurs into its side. The horse plunged and reared,
champing at the bit and doing its best to dislodge Sponsken from the
saddle, but the lad clung on for dear life. At last, finding all its
efforts unavailing, the horse dragged the tree up by the roots and
charged forward in a straight line towards the advancing enemy. Almost
dislodged from his seat by the sudden jerk, Sponsken stretched out his
hand and grasped the branches of the tree, which swung in a terrifying
manner at his side, promising every moment to hurl him from the saddle,
and the result was that to the enemy army it appeared as though he
were charging down upon them at full speed, bearing a tree as a club.
Filled with dismay at the terrifying sight, the soldiers of the enemy
king fled in all directions and hid themselves in the woods and in the
crevices of the rocks. Sponsken rode on for the simple reason that he
could do nothing else, right into the enemy's camp, where the steed
came to a standstill and our hero was able to jump down from its back.
Entering the king's tent, he helped himself to all the documents and
articles of value he could find; then, having cut the tree from the
bridle, he remounted the horse, which was now quite tame and docile,
and rode back to the palace.

When the King heard that the enemy was routed he was overjoyed, and
he recognized that a man who could perform such a feat single-handed
was not to be treated lightly. His daughter, however, was still firm
in her refusal to marry Sponsken, and so the King made him an offer of
half his kingdom if he would release him from his promise and allow the
Princess to go free. Sponsken accepted his terms and married a girl
who, although she was not a princess, was nevertheless very pretty.
Their wedding was celebrated with great pomp and they lived together
very happily for the rest of their lives.

[Illustration]




[Illustration: THE CAT AND THE SPARROW]

WHY CATS ALWAYS WASH AFTER EATING


A long time ago a cat caught a sparrow, and licked his lips in
anticipation of the delight he would feel in devouring it. After
playing with it for a time, as cats will, he was going to eat it, when
the sparrow spoke to him.

"The Emperor's cat," said the sparrow, "and all his family, never begin
a meal without washing themselves first. Everybody knows that such is
the custom in polite society."

"Really," answered the cat, "well, I will do as the Emperor's cat
does!" And he let go the sparrow and began to wash his face. Feeling
itself free, the sparrow flew away, and alighted safely on the branch
of a tree well out of reach.

"It serves me right," muttered the cat, "for being so easily taken in."

And ever since that time cats have always washed themselves after their
meals.




[Illustration: "I'VE JUST BEEN TURNED OUT OF HOUSE"]

THE CHORISTERS OF ST. GUDULE


The miller of Sandhills had a donkey which had served him well in its
time, but was now too old to work. The miller was a careful man, who
did not believe in feeding useless mouths, so he decided that he would
sell the donkey for the price of its skin. "I do not suppose I shall
get very much for the wretched beast," he said, regarding poor Greyskin
as he stood with hanging head in his stall, "but I shall save the cost
of his corn anyhow, and that is always something."

Left alone, Greyskin reflected sadly upon the fate in store for him.
"Such is the way of the world," he thought. "When I was young and
hearty nothing was too good for me; now I'm old and useless I am to be
cast out. But am I so useless after all? True, I can no longer pull a
cart to market, but I have a magnificent voice still. There must be
a place somewhere for one who can sing as beautifully as I. I'll go
to the Cathedral of St. Gudule, in Brussels, and offer myself as a
chorister."

Greyskin lost no time in acting upon his resolve, but left his
stable immediately and set out on the road to Brussels. Passing the
Burgomaster's house he saw an old hound sitting disconsolately on the
doorstep.

"Hallo, friend!" said he. "What is the matter with you? You seem very
sad this morning."

"The matter is that I am tired of life," answered the dog. "I'm getting
old and stiff and I can no longer hunt hares for my master as I used to
do. The result is that I am reckoned good for nothing and they grudge
me every morsel of food I put into my mouth."

"Come, come, cheer up, my friend," said Greyskin. "Never say die! I
am in a similar case to yourself and have just left my master for
precisely the same reason. My plan is to go to the Cathedral of St.
Gudule and offer my services to the master of the choir. If I may say
so without conceit, I have a lovely voice--one must make the most of
one's gifts, you know--and I ought to be able to command good pay."

"Well, if it comes to that," said the dog, "I can sing too. I sang a
lovely song to the moon last night, and if you'll believe me, all the
people in our street opened their windows to listen. I sang for quite
an hour, and I'd have gone on longer if some malicious person, who was
no doubt jealous, had not thrown an old boot at my head."

"Excellent," said Greyskin. "Come along with me. You shall sing tenor
and I'll sing bass. We'll make a famous pair."

So the dog joined company with Greyskin, and they went on together
towards Brussels. A little farther down the road they saw a cat sitting
on the rubbish-heap outside a miserable hovel. The creature was half
blind with age, and had a face as long as a fiddle.

"Why, what is the matter with you?" asked Greyskin, who had a tender
heart.

"Matter enough," said the cat. "I've just been turned out of house and
home, and all because I took a little piece of bacon from the larder.
Upon my honour, it was no bigger than a baby's fist, but they made
as much fuss as though it had been a whole gammon. I was beaten, and
kicked out to starve. If I could catch mice as I used to do, it would
not matter so much, but the mice are too quick for me nowadays. They
laugh at me. Nothing remains for me but to die, and I hope it may be
soon."

[Illustration: "THEY LAUGH AT ME"]

"Nonsense," said Greyskin. "You shall live to laugh at all your
troubles. Come along with us and sing in the choir at St. Gudule. Your
voice is a little too thin for my own taste, but you'll make a very
good soprano in a trio. What do you say?"

"You give me new hopes," answered the cat. "Of course I'll join you,"
and so the three went on together.

