She is a good calf and you ought to get at least a hundred francs for
her."

Away went Jan, along the road to the market town, with the calf
behind him. He felt quite glad to be out on this fine spring day, and
he hummed a merry tune as he plodded along. Three students who were
lounging at the door of an inn saw him pass, and, marking his air of
simplicity, thought it would be good fun to play a joke upon him, so
one of them went up to him and said:

"Good-morning, friend! How much are you asking for your goat?"

"Goat?" answered the peasant in surprise. "This is not a goat, but a
calf!"

"Indeed!" said the student politely. "And who told you that?"

"It was my wife," answered the peasant. "'Jan,' she said, 'go to the
market and try to sell our calf.' I am sure she said calf. I could not
make a mistake about such a thing!"

"Your wife was playing a joke on you," said the student. "Anybody can
see that is a goat. If you don't believe me, ask the next person you
meet on the road." And he went off, laughing.

Jan continued his walk, a little troubled in his mind, and before very
long he saw the second of the students coming towards him. "Stay a
minute, sir," he cried. "Do you mind looking at this animal of mine and
telling me what sort of a creature it is?"

"Why, a goat, of course," answered the student.

"You're wrong," said the peasant. "It's a calf. My wife says so, and
she could not be mistaken!"

"Have it your own way!" replied the student, "but if you'll take my
advice you won't pretend that animal is a calf when you get to the
market, unless you want to be hooted out of the town!"

"Ah!" said Jan, and he went on his way, muttering to himself, and
casting many a troubled glance at the innocent calf who ambled along
peacefully behind him. "If it is a goat it ought to have horns," he
said to himself. "And it hasn't got any horns. But if it is a calf it
will have horns when it grows to be a cow. Perhaps it is a goat-calf.
I wonder whether goat-calves have horns!" And he continued to puzzle
his poor brains about the matter until he was suddenly interrupted by a
shout from the side of the road. The shout came from the third student,
who had been waiting for him.

"Hallo, you there!" cried the student. "How much do you want for your
goat?"

"Goat? Goat?" murmured the peasant in dismay. "Here, take the thing. If
it's a goat, I don't want it, for I was sent to market to sell a calf.
You may have it for nothing--I'll make you a present of it!" And so
saying, he pushed the cord into the student's hand. Then turning his
back without another word, he retraced his steps towards his home.

[Illustration: "YOU WERE BEING MADE A FOOL OF"]

When his wife heard what had happened she was furious. "You stupid
lout!" she cried, "could you not see that you were being made a fool
of?" And she called him all the names she could lay her tongue to,
until the poor fellow blushed and hung his head for shame. Her anger
did not last long, however, for she was a good woman and she knew
that her husband's simplicity was not his fault, but his misfortune.
Fortunately, she had quite enough wits for them both, and instead of
wasting more time in reproaches, she set to work to think how she might
pay back the practical jokers in their own coin. It did not take her
long to think of a plan, and as the first step towards carrying it
out, she put on her bonnet and went off to the town, where she called
at three inns, paying at each of them for a dinner for four persons,
the dinner to be eaten on the next market day. Returning home, she
explained the plan to her husband and gave him very exact instructions
as to the part he was to play.

When the next market day came round Jan set off for the town, and by
the door of the very first inn on the road he met the three students.
They exchanged a sly smile when they saw him, and one of them said:
"Good morning, good fellow. And how do you find yourself to-day? I
notice that you have no goat with you this time."

"Ha, ha, ha!" laughed Jan, "that was a good joke you played on me, but
I bear you no ill-will for it. Come in and drink a glass of wine. I'm
in funds this morning and I'll willingly stand treat."

The students accepted Jan's offer with enthusiasm, for they belonged
to that class of men who are always thirsty. Accordingly the four went
into the tavern; and Jan called for wine. When the time came to pay for
it, he called the serving-maid, and taking off his cap, spun it round
three times on his finger. "Madam," said he, "everything is paid for,
isn't it?"

"Yes, sir, and thank you very much," answered the serving-maid.

The three students watched this procedure with a good deal of surprise,
but Jan carried off the whole affair as if it were the most natural
thing in the world. "Now, my friends," said he, "the doctors say it is
bad to drink on an empty stomach. What do you say to a good meal?"

"Excellent," cried the students.

"Very well then, come along with me to the next inn, and you shall have
one."

Laughing in their sleeves at the peasant's simplicity, the students
followed. Arrived at the inn, Jan ordered dinner for four, and a heap
of good things were put upon the table. After the repast, he called the
serving-maid to him, took off his cap as before, and twirled it round
three times on his finger. "Now then," said he, "everything is paid
for, isn't that so?"

"Certainly, sir," answered the serving-maid, "and I am very much
obliged to you."

[Illustration: JAN AND THE THREE STUDENTS]

At this the three students opened their eyes even wider than before,
but Jan took not the slightest notice of their astonishment.

"What do you say, friends," he asked, "shall we go on to the town
together and wash the dinner down with a glass of ale apiece?"

"As many as you please," answered the students joyfully, and so they
followed Jan to the town, where he entered a third tavern and ordered
drinks all round. Then, taking off his cap once again, he twirled it
round three times on his finger, and said to the innkeeper: "Everything
is paid for, isn't it, my good man?"

"Certainly, sir," said the innkeeper, bowing.

But this was more than the curiosity of the students could stand.

"Look here, gossip," said one of them, "how is it that you are able to
get food and drink for nothing everywhere you go, simply by twirling
your cap in people's faces?"

"Oh, that's easily explained," answered Jan, "This cap of mine is a
magic cap, which was left to me by my great-great-grandmother, who
was a witch, so I have heard say. If I twirl it on my finger, and
say, 'Everything is paid for,'--well, everything _is_ paid for! You
understand me?"

"Perfectly," said the student. "My faith, but that is a wonderful
cap--the very thing to have when one goes a journey! Will you sell it
to me?"

"How much will you give me for it?" asked Jan.

"Two hundred francs!"
