
Presently the wolf, in his turn, came to the river. He had seen how
the children had managed to cross, and he roared out at the ducks in a
terrible voice, "Come and carry me over, or I'll eat you all up!"

"Very well," answered the ducks, and they swam to the bank, and Garon
balanced himself on four of them, one paw on the back of each. But they
had no intention of carrying the wicked old wolf to the other side, for
they did not love him or any of his tribe, and, moreover, they objected
to his impolite way of asking a favour. So, at a given signal from the
leader, all the ducks dived in midstream, and left old Garon struggling
in the water. Three times he went down and three times he came up, but
the fourth time he sank never to rise any more.

That was the end of old Garon, and a good job, too, say I. I don't know
what became of his Sugar-Candy House, but I dare say, if you could find
the wood, and the sun had not melted the candy, or the rain washed it
away, you might break a bit of it off for yourselves.

[Illustration]




[Illustration: JACO PETER AND HIS FRIEND]

POOR PETER


There was once a man named Jaco Peter who was so poor that he had
not two sous to rub together. His clothes were rags, his boots were
shocking, and as for his house, it was nothing but a miserable hovel
hardly fit for a dog. The only friend poor Peter had in the world was
a big fox who was called Reynard the Red because of the colour of his
hide.

One day as Poor Peter was walking along the road looking out for stray
scraps of food which he could pick up for his dinner, whom should he
meet but Reynard, who was going off to spy round a farmhouse where, he
had been told, there were some fine fat chickens.

"How now, Peter," said Reynard, "you look very miserable to-day! What
is the matter?"

"I have fallen on bad luck," answered Peter gloomily. "I have found
nothing to-day but two cabbage-stalks and a half-gnawed bone, and to
make matters worse, the bone has no marrow in it."

"Why do you eat such stuff?" asked Reynard disgustedly. "Look at me--I
am just as poor as you, yet I live on the fat of the land! And how do I
do it, Peter? Why, by using my wits! Cheer up, my friend, you shall be
a man of fortune yet, for I'll take your case in hand myself!"

Reynard was as good as his word. The same day he called at the King's
palace and asked if he might borrow a bushel measure. Such an unusual
request from a fox caused some amazement and the matter was brought to
the notice of the King himself, who sent for Reynard and asked him what
he wanted with such a thing.

"The fact is," answered Reynard, "that a friend of mine, a certain Lord
Jaco Peter, has come by a good deal of money, and he wishes to measure
it."

"Very well," said the King, "you may take the measure, but I would like
to have it back when you have done with it, if you do not mind."

Off went Reynard with the bushel basket, and the same night, having
stuck a couple of sous to the bottom of it with a bit of grease, he
sent it back with a message to say that it was not large enough, and
might he have another? In reply, the King sent a two-bushel measure,
and after a time Reynard sent this back also, with a request for a
larger one still. "If I have to measure the money with a thing like
this," said he, "I shall be a month over the task."

"That friend of yours must be an enormously wealthy man," said the
King. "Let me see--what did you say his name was? Lord Jaco Peter? I do
not seem to remember a lord of that name in my dominions!"

"He is a foreign noble," said Reynard glibly, "who has only lately
arrived in this country. He will shortly be coming to pay his respects
to your Majesty, for it is his intention to ask for the hand of the
Princess, your daughter, in marriage."

"That is a thing one must consider," replied the King, "but in the
meantime I will gladly give your noble friend an audience."

Away went Reynard in high feather and recounted to Poor Peter all that
had happened. "The affair is as good as finished," said he, "you shall
marry the Princess and sit at the King's right hand!"

[Illustration: "SMEAR YOURSELF FROM HEAD TO FOOT"]

Peter looked down at his clothes, which indeed, were too well
ventilated to be quite seemly, and made a grimace. "A fine lord I
shall look!" said he, "with my toes sticking out of my boots and holes
in my breeches."

"Never mind about that," Reynard answered. "Just leave everything to
me, and all be well."

The next day, when the time came for the pair to set out for the
palace, Reynard said to his friend: "Now pay great attention to what
I have to say. Close by the King's palace there is a big muddy puddle
in the middle of the road. When you come to that puddle I want you to
trip over yourself and fall plump into it. Don't let there be any half
measures! Get right into the mud--wallow in it, and smear yourself from
head to foot!"

"But why...?" asked Peter.

"Never mind about why. Do as I tell you!"

Poor Peter carried out his directions to the letter. When they reached
the puddle he pretended to slip, and fell souse into it, covering
himself with a thick layer of mud. At sight of the disaster Reynard
began to cry out in dismay, and the guards at the King's palace, who
had seen the accident, came running up to offer their aid.

"Did you fall down?" asked one of them politely. Peter was wiping the
mud out of his mouth and could not answer, but the fox cried: "Of
course he has fallen down, oaf! Do you think he sat in the puddle for
amusement. Don't stand gaping there, but run to the palace quickly, and
borrow a change of clothes, for this is Lord Jaco Peter who is on his
way to visit the King. And look you," he added, as the guards ran off,
"see that you bring some robes worthy of my lord's great estate, or it
will be the worse for you!"

Away went the guards, and told the King's Chamberlain about the
catastrophe. A few minutes later they returned bearing with them a
magnificent robe of cloth-of-gold, beautifully embroidered and sewn
with precious stones. Then they led Peter to a chamber, where he bathed
himself and donned his new finery. Unfortunately the Chamberlain had
forgotten to send any shoes, so there was Peter with his toes sticking
out of his boots under his magnificent gown.

[Illustration: REYNARD SEIZED THE OPPORTUNITY TO WARN HIS FRIEND]

"Never mind," said Reynard, "you must keep your feet out of sight," and
he led him before the King, who was immensely taken with his appearance.

"Tell me," he said to Reynard, after greetings had been exchanged, "why
does your friend keep staring at his clothes. One would think he was
not used to them!"

Reynard smiled. "As a matter of fact, your Majesty," he answered, "he
is not. This dress of his came out of your Majesty's wardrobe, for he
had the ill-fortune to spoil his own on the way here, by falling into a
puddle. The gown is good enough, as it goes, of course; but my friend
is used to something far finer. I would wager a thousand crowns he is
thinking this very moment that he has never been so poorly clad before
