can, for my eyes are aching for a sight of Emrik's crown and the suit
of golden armour Emrik wore."

"And forget not the ropes of pearls and the jewelled coronet!" cried
the Queen. "Bring those first!"

"I will bring everything in good time," said Reynard; "trust me for
that. But before I set out on this journey I must go to Rome to ask
absolution of the Pope for all the sins I have committed. Suffer me
first of all to go on this pilgrimage, O King, and, if you will, send
Bellyn and the Hare with me to see that I do not escape. Nothing is
further from my thoughts, but after what has happened I cannot expect
your Majesty to trust my word, and I am content to go in ward."

"Be it so!" said the King. "Set off at once and return as soon as may
be. And now there is another little affair to settle! Where is Bruin,
our would-be king. Stand forth, Bruin, with your precious conspirators,
the Wolf, the Cat, and the Ape." But nobody answered, for seeing how
affairs were going all the four had quietly slipped away, fearing to
stay and face the vengeance of the King.

Reynard smiled maliciously as he put on a pilgrim's cloak and marched
away with Bellyn and the Hare along the road that led from the Court.

For several miles they walked in silence. Then Reynard sighed and said:
"Ah, friends, how I long to see my dear wife and children just once
more before I go on this long journey that lies before us. Let us take
the road that leads past my castle of Malpertuis. It is not much out of
our way, and we can enter there and refresh ourselves."

The Hare was too frightened to dispute the matter, and Bellyn on his
part good-humouredly agreed, so the three of them took the road to
Malpertuis, and before long came to the gate of Reynard's castle.

[Illustration: REYNARD SPRANG AT HIS THROAT]

"Here we are at last, Cousin Bellyn," said Reynard. "Did you ever see
such fine pastures! You must be famished after our long tramp. Take a
rest a while and eat some of this sweet grass, while I and the Hare
go into the house and console my wife for the long separation that is
before her. We shall not stay more than a few minutes."

"Well, hurry up," said Bellyn, who had already begun to graze. "I will
wait for you, but don't stay talking all day!"

So Reynard and the Hare went into the house, where they were met by
Hermeline, Reynard's devoted spouse.

"What, husband," said she, "are you back already? How did things go at
Court?"

"Just as I said they would," answered Reynard. "When the King heard my
tale he acquitted me of the charges that had been brought against me,
and allowed me to return here in honour. The Wolf, the Bear, and the
Cat, who were my most powerful enemies, have fled the Court, so that,
for the time being, they have escaped my vengeance; but I have brought
with me this fellow whom you see at my side, for he was among the
foremost of my accusers!"

When he heard these words the poor Hare trembled with fright, and
turned to flee, but in a moment Reynard sprang at his throat. One
loud cry he gave for help, but Bellyn, peacefully cropping the grass
outside, did not hear, and the next moment the Hare was dead. Then
Reynard and Hermeline and all the little foxes had a splendid feast,
and in less than half an hour nothing was left of the Hare's carcass
but the head.

While they were still feasting there came a loud knocking at the door.
It was Bellyn, who, having eaten his fill, was now impatient with
waiting.

Snatching up the head of the Hare Reynard put it into a bag, which he
carefully sealed. Then, running to the door, he threw it open.

"You have been a long time!" grumbled Bellyn. "Where is the Hare?"

"Oh, he is just inside, playing with my little ones," said Reynard.
"He's a merry fellow, that one, and so fond of children that it is
beautiful to watch him. Leave him alone for a time. He'll be out
presently. While you are waiting, you might run back to the King with
this bag, which he asked me to send him. It contains papers referring
to the conspiracy--papers which involve a great many people at Court,
in fact nearly all of the animals except yourself. Hurry off with it,
and give it into the King's own hands, and, as you value your
life, do not open the bag upon the road, or the King will suspect that
you also are involved and have erased your name on the way."

[Illustration: "YOU HAVE MERITED DEATH A HUNDRED TIMES"]

"Did the King say I was to take back the papers?" asked Bellyn.

"Of course he did!" answered Reynard. "'Send them back by my trusty
Bellyn'--those were his very words, and he whispered in my ear that you
were the only one among the whole court that he could trust. I should
not be surprised if he gave you a handsome reward, and perhaps made you
a peer of the realm!"

"Give me the bag!" cried Bellyn. "I'll take it to the King. I shall not
be long. Wait until I come back, and tell the Hare that he is on no
account to set out without me."

"Never fear," said Reynard. "He'll not stir a step out of my
castle--I'll answer for that. Farewell, good Bellyn. I will be waiting
here when you return!"

Full of pride at his important mission, Bellyn trotted off down the
road, bearing the bag very carefully with him, and Reynard, with a
spiteful smile, stood and watched him till he was out of sight.

In good time Bellyn returned to the Court and handed to the astonished
King the bag which Reynard had sent. The King broke the seal, and
gazed inside, while the Queen pressed close to him, peering over his
shoulder. The next moment he gave a cry of horror, as he drew forth the
head of the poor Hare. The Queen fell to the ground in a dead faint,
and for a time the King remained holding the head in his hands, gazing
at it vacantly. Then he cast it from him, and without a word turned his
steps towards his palace, where he immediately took to his bed, for the
shock of the thing had made him ill. Not for several weeks afterwards,
when he had somewhat recovered, was he able to turn his thoughts to
vengeance. Then he gave orders for a large army to march to Reynard's
castle of Malpertuis to raze it to the ground, and bring back the Fox
in chains.

The army set out, but when they arrived at Malpertuis they found the
birds had flown. Reynard and Hermeline and all the little foxes had
left the country, and were never seen again.

Some people say that they took up their abode in a distant land, where
Reynard soon began once more to play his old tricks, until the King of
that land caught him one day red-handed, and hanged him on the nearest
tree without giving him a chance to say a word. I do not know whether
this story is true, although I hope it is. All that I can say for
certain is that Reynard and his family were never seen in King Nobel's
dominions from that day on.

[Illustration]




[Illustration: CALF AND GOAT]

THE MAGIC CAP


There was once a poor countryman, of whom his neighbours said that he
had no more wits than he was born with, and that was not many. He was,
indeed a simple-minded fellow, and anybody could get the better of him.
One day the countryman's wife said to him: "Jan, put on your best smock
and your soundest clogs, and go to the market to try and sell our calf.
