again and entered the wood. Hardly had he done so than he heard a loud
humming noise, and proceeding in the direction from which it came, he
saw a swarm of bees hanging to the branch of a big tree.

"Here's fine fruit!" said he to himself, laughing. "I'll pluck them.
They may come in useful one of these days!" So he took off the top skin
of his drum, and having skilfully caused the swarm to drop inside the
instrument, replaced the skin and went on his way.

Presently he came to a little house in the wood, and knocked at the
door to ask for shelter for the night. The door was opened by a peasant
woman of comely appearance, but with a very disagreeable expression of
face. She looked the drummer up and down very sourly. "Be off with
you!" she said, "we want no soldiers here. We have seen your kind
before, my man, and do not like them." And so saying, she very rudely
shut the door in his face.

"Now what am I to do?" thought Donatus ruefully. "Night has fallen, and
I am too weary to wander any farther. A plague take that hard-hearted
vixen, who will not take pity on my misfortunes!"

Thus reflecting, he cast his eye about to look for a corner in which
he might rest, and suddenly spied a heap of faggots piled up against
the cottage wall. Climbing to the top of the heap, he found that it
was possible to reach the window of the attic, which fortunately stood
open, so he lost no time in crawling inside, where he stretched himself
out upon the planks to sleep.

Now the attic happened to be directly above the kitchen, and as there
was a knot-hole in the wooden floor, the drummer could see everything
that was going on in the room below. There was the peasant-woman busily
preparing the supper, and the fragrant fumes which rose from the viands
tickled the drummer's nose, and made the water run out of the corners
of his mouth.

After a time there was a loud knock at the house door, and the woman
hurried to open it, admitting a man dressed in a long cloak. He was the
village beadle, and a nephew of the woman's husband, but that good man
had such a hatred of beadles that he could not bear to look at one, and
his nephew never dared to come to the house while the husband was at
home. His visits therefore were few and far between, but when he did
come his aunt always feasted him right royally. This time she bade him
welcome with great tenderness, helped him off with his cloak and sat
him down at the table, upon which she placed a fine roast fowl, with a
gammon of bacon and a bottle of wine.

"Ha, ha!" cried the beadle, rubbing his hands. "You are a famous
hostess, aunt! My walk has given me an appetite, and I am just in a
condition to do justice to your good victuals. Here's health!" And he
filled a glass with wine and drained it to the dregs.

[Illustration: THERE WAS A KNOT-HOLE IN THE WOODEN FLOOR]

"Gr-r, you greedy fellow!" muttered the drummer, who was lying full
length in the attic above with his eye to the knot-hole. "I hope it may
choke you!" And he watched eagerly while the beadle began to fall to
upon the roast fowl.

Suddenly the feast was interrupted by another loud knock at the door.

"My husband!" cried the woman in great agitation. "He has come back
unexpectedly. If he finds you here, something terrible will happen, for
he cannot bear the sight of a beadle. Quick! jump into this chest and
pull down the lid, while I clear away all signs of the supper!"

The beadle, who was just as frightened as his hostess, lost no time in
doing as she bade him. He hopped into the chest and pulled down the
lid, while she hurried to clear the table. All this time the husband
was thundering at the door, very impatient at being kept waiting. When
at last his wife let him in, he flew into a temper and began to scold
her.

"I am very sorry, good man," she answered, "but I did not hear you
knock, I was hard at work in the scullery."

"Bring me something to eat!" growled the man.

"Just as you like," answered his wife. "But if I were you I would not
sup so late--you know how it always gives you indigestion. Wouldn't it
be better to go straight to bed?"

"Hold your peace, woman," said her spouse. "I am not sleepy!" And he
sat himself down at the table.

Hardly had he done so than there came a loud knocking on the floor of
the attic above his head.

"What is that?" he cried, jumping up. "Is there somebody in the attic?"

"Not that I know of," answered his wife. "Nobody has been here all day
except a soldier with a most villainous face, who came begging. I sent
him away with a flea in his ear, I assure you."

"Did you so?" said her husband. "Well, I believe he has managed to get
into the attic. I remember now that I forgot to fasten the window." Off
he went upstairs to see, and sure enough, there was the drummer, who
was not slow in explaining his presence.

"Well, come along downstairs and warm yourself," said the peasant. "My
wife is just about to get my supper, and I expect there will be enough
for two."

Nothing loath, the drummer accompanied his host to the kitchen, and
sat down at the table, paying no heed to the venomous glances which
the woman of the house cast at him as she slammed down a loaf of black
bread and a bowl of milk.

"Ho, ho," said the drummer to himself. "There is fowl for the beadle
and dry bread for the good man and his guest. Well, we shall see!" And
he gave a kick with his foot to the drum which was under the table.

[Illustration: "I DID NOT HEAR YOU KNOCK"]

"What have you there?" asked the peasant, starting up at the sound.

"Oh, that is my oracle," answered the drummer coolly.

"Your oracle! Does he, then, speak to you?"

"Certainly," answered the drummer. "He speaks to me three times a day."

"Faith," said the peasant, "I should very much like to hear him."

So the drummer picked up his drumsticks and beat a lively tattoo upon
the drum, and, aroused by the noise and vibration, the swarm of bees
within began to buzz about in great commotion.

"Wonderful! Wonderful!" cried the peasant delightedly, as he listened
to the humming. "And do you really understand that language? What does
the oracle say?"

"He says," answered the peasant, "that there is no need for us to drink
sour milk, because there is a bottle of wine standing by the wall, just
behind the big chest."

"Ha, ha, ha! that is a good joke!" roared the peasant. "Wine in my
house, indeed! I only wish it were true!"

"Tell your wife to look behind the chest, and I'll warrant you she will
find it."

Very unwillingly the dame went to the place indicated, and came back
with the bottle of wine. She tried to look as surprised as her husband,
but only succeeded in pulling a very wry mouth.

"Bring glasses, wife!" cried the peasant in great good humour. "We must
drink the health of this famous oracle. Do you think you can make him
speak again, friend?"

"Certainly," said the drummer, beating another tattoo upon the drum.
