grease. When he returned the dog asked him the name of the child.

"_Half-Done_," said the wolf.

"Bah!" cried the dog, "that is an even sillier name than the other.
I can't think what parents are coming to--in my time plain Jean or
Jacques was good enough for anybody."

The wolf made no reply, being in fact fast asleep, for he had dined
very well, and was drowsy. A day or two afterwards however, he played
the same trick again, and devoured the last of the fat in the barrel.
This time, when asked the name of the child to whom he had stood
godfather, he answered: "_All-done_."

[Illustration: "WHERE HAS ALL OUR GREASE GONE?"]

The dog had no suspicion of the way he had been deceived, and all went
well until the winter came and food became difficult to procure. Then
one day the dog said: "It seems to me that the time has come to tap our
barrel of grease. What do you say, friend? Weren't we wise to put it
away for a time like this!"

"I believe you," answered the wolf.

"Come then, let us go to the cellar and enjoy the fruits of our
prudence."

So off they went to the cellar, where they found the barrel in the very
place they had left it, but with nothing inside it. The dog looked
at the wolf, and the wolf looked at the dog, and of the two the wolf
seemed the more surprised.

"What's this?" cried the dog. "Where has our grease gone?" Then,
looking at the wolf suspiciously: "This is some of your work, my
friend!"

"Oh, indeed!" said the wolf, "and since when has it been proved that
dogs do not like grease?"

"You mean to accuse me of stealing it?" cried the dog angrily.

"One of the two of us must have taken it, for nobody else knew it was
here!"

"It was certainly not I."

"Well," said the wolf, "it is no use squabbling over the matter.
Fortunately there is a way of discovering which of us is the culprit.
Obviously the one who has eaten all that grease must be absolutely full
of fat. Let us both go to sleep in the sunshine. At the end of an hour
or two the heat will melt the grease which will soak through and show
on the body of the one who is the thief."

Feeling quite secure in his innocence, the dog willingly agreed to this
plan, and the two went out and lay down in a sheltered place, where the
heat of the sun was strong. After a time the dog began to yawn, and
in less than half an hour he was sound asleep, but the wolf had a good
reason for not following his example, and although he closed his eyes
to deceive his friend, he remained wide awake.

Presently, having made sure that the dog was slumbering peacefully, he
arose and tiptoed softly down to the cellar. There he collected with
his long tongue, every bit of the grease that still remained sticking
to the sides and bottom of the barrel, and returning to the sleeper,
carefully smeared the grease over his jaws, back, and thighs. Several
times he did this, until the dog was covered with a thin greasy film.
Then he lay down again and once more pretended to sleep.

A little while afterwards the dog woke up, and found the grease all
over his body. He could not make out how it got there, and while he was
still regarding himself with a look of blank surprise, the wolf cried:
"Ah, now we know who was the thief! The grease has betrayed you, my
friend!"

The poor dog looked very sheepish, and had not a word to say for
himself. He puzzled over the matter until his head ached, and at last
he came to the conclusion that he must have been sleep-walking and have
stolen the grease without knowing it--a conclusion with which the wolf
entirely agreed.

[Illustration]




[Illustration: MRS. BRUIN AND REYNARD]

WHY THE BEAR HAS A STUMPY TAIL


One very cold winter, when the ground was covered with snow and the
ponds and rivers were frozen hard, Reynard the Fox and all the other
animals went out to enjoy themselves by sliding and skating on the
ice. After a time Reynard began to feel hungry, so he wandered off by
himself in search of something to eat. He nosed about here, and he
nosed about there; he lay in wait behind bushes in the hope of being
able to catch a bird; he lurked by the walls of farmhouses ready to
spring out upon any unsuspecting chicken that might show itself, but
all in vain. The birds were wary, and the fowls were all safe in the
hen-houses.

[Illustration: "AFTER A TIME THE FISH WILL COME TO BITE AT IT"]

Disappointed with his lack of success Reynard betook himself to the
river, now covered with a glistening sheet of ice, and there, under
the shelter of a bank, he found a hole in the ice which had not been
frozen over. He sat down to watch the hole, and presently a little
fish popped up its head for a breath of air. Reynard's paw darted, and
the next moment the unfortunate creature lay gasping on the ice. Fish
after fish the fox caught in this way, and when he had quite satisfied
his hunger he strung the remainder on a stick and took his departure,
not forgetting first of all to offer up a prayer for the repose of his
victims.

He had not gone far before he met Mrs. Bruin, who had also come out in
search of something to eat. When she saw Reynard with his fine catch of
fish, she opened her eyes, I can tell you, and said: "Wherever did you
get all those fine fishes from, cousin? They make my mouth water! I am
so hungry that I could bite the head off an iron nail!"

"Ah," said Reynard slyly, "wouldn't you just like to know!"

"It is what I'm asking you," said Mrs. Bruin. "You would surely not be
so mean as to keep the good news to yourself!"

"I don't know so much about that," answered Reynard, "but I have a
certain fondness for you, cousin, so come along with me and I will show
you the place where I caught the fish."

Nothing loath, the bear followed, and presently they came to the hole
in the ice.

"Do you see that hole, cousin?" said Reynard. "That is where the fish
come up to breathe. All you have to do is to sit on the ice and let
your tail hang down into the water. After a time the fish will come to
bite at it, but don't you move. Sit quite still until the evening; then
you will find a score of fishes on your tail and you can pull them out
all together."

Mrs. Bruin was delighted with the plan and immediately sat down and
dipped her tail into the water.

[Illustration: "ALL YOU HAVE TO DO IS TO SIT ON THE ICE"]

"That's the way," said Reynard. "Now I'll just be walking home to
see to my dinner, but I'll be back presently. Be careful to keep quite
still, or you'll spoil everything!"

So for the next three hours Mrs. Bruin sat on the ice with her tail
in the water, and very cold it was, but she consoled herself with the
