these parts has such a magnificent voice as yours, and I simply do not
believe the stories they tell about you."

"Eh, what is that?" said the Cock, stopping at a safe distance and
looking at the Fox with his head on one side. "What do they say?"

"Why," Reynard went on, edging a little nearer, "they tell me that
you can only crow with your eyes open. They say that if you were to
shut your eyes, that clarion call of yours would become only a feeble
piping, like the clucking of a new-born chick. But of course I don't
believe them. Any one can see they are merely jealous."

"I should think so," cried the Cock, bristling with anger. "Crow
with my eyes shut, indeed! Why, I never crow in any other way. Just
look here--I'll prove it to you!" And he raised himself on his toes,
stretched out his neck, closed his eyes, and was just going to crow,
when, _Snap!_ the Fox sprang upon him and caught him in his teeth!

Then began a great to-do! The poor cock flapped his wings and struggled
as the Fox ran off with him. The hens ran about the yard clucking and
squawking, and the noise they made alarmed the farmer's wife, who was
cooking in the kitchen. Out she came running, with the rolling-pin in
her hand, and, seeing the fox with the cock in his mouth, gave chase,
shrieking as she ran. The farm-hands tumbled out of barn and byre armed
with pitch-forks, spades, and sticks. All the beasts began to raise a
clatter, and what with the shouting of the men, the squealing of the
pigs, the neighing of the horses, and the lowing of the cows, to say
nothing of the clucking of the hens and the old woman's screaming, one
would have thought the end of the world was at hand.

The Fox was not a little frightened by all this clatter, but he was not
so frightened as the Cock, who saw that only cunning would save his
life.

"They will catch us in a minute," he said to the Fox, "and, as likely
as not, we shall both be killed by a single blow. Why don't you call
out and tell them I came with you of my own accord?"

"A good idea," thought the Fox, and he opened his mouth to call out to
his pursuers, thereby loosening his grip on the Cock's neck. Then, with
a squirm and a twist and a flutter of his wings, the wily bird wrenched
himself free and flew up to the branches of a tree near by.

[Illustration: "DON'T GO AWAY, MY DEAR FRIEND," SAID THE FOX]

The Fox cast a look at him and saw that he was out of reach; then he
glanced over his shoulder at his pursuers, who were getting perilously
near. "It seems to me," he said, grinning with rage, "I should have
done better to hold my tongue."

"That is true," said the Cock to himself as he smoothed his ruffled
feathers. "And I would have been better advised to keep my weather-eye
open."

[Illustration]




[Illustration: THE SOLDIER, THE FOX, AND THE BEAR]

THE MOST CUNNING ANIMAL


One day the Fox and the Bear began to argue as to which was the most
cunning animal. The Bear said that he thought foxes and bears took
first place.

"You are wrong, my friend," said Reynard. "We are clever, you and I,
but there is one animal that is as far above us as we are above the
rest of creation."

"Oh, indeed," sneered the Bear, "and what is the name of this
marvellous creature?"

"He is called the man-animal," answered Reynard, "and he goes on two
legs instead of four, which is a wonderful thing in itself. Here are
some of the cunning things he can do; first, he can swim in the water
without getting wet; when he is cold he makes yellow flowers grow out
of sticks to warm himself; and he can strike at an enemy a hundred
yards away!"

"I do not believe you," answered the Bear. "This is a fairy-tale you
are telling me. If such a creature as the man-animal really exists, it
is very strange that I have never seen him!"

"Strange, indeed!" grinned the Fox, "but soon remedied. Would you like
to see the man-animal?"

"It would be a sight for sore eyes," said the Bear.

"Very well," said the Fox, "come along with me." And he led the Bear
through the forest until they came to a road leading to a village.
"Now, then," said he, "let us lie down in the ditch and watch the road,
and we shall see what we shall see."

Presently a child from the village came along.

"Look! Look!" whispered the Bear. "An animal walking on two legs! Is
this the creature we seek?"

"No," answered the Fox, "but one of these days it will become a
man-animal."

Shortly afterwards there came along an old woman, all bent and wrinkled.

"Is that one?" asked the Bear.

"No," said the Fox again, "but once upon a time that was the mother of
one!"

At last there came the sound of brisk footsteps on the road, and
peeping out between the bushes the Bear saw a tall soldier in a red
coat marching towards them. He had a sword by his side and a musket
over his shoulder.

"This must surely be the man-animal," said the Bear. "Ugh! what an ugly
creature! I don't believe he is cunning in the least!" But the Fox made
no answer, for at the first sight of the soldier he had fled into the
forest.

"Well, well," muttered the Bear, "I don't see anything to be afraid
of here. Let us have a talk with this wonder!" And hoisting himself
clumsily out of the ditch he lumbered along the road to meet the
soldier.

"Now then, my fine fellow," he growled, "I have heard some wonderful
stories about you. Tell me...."

But before he could get another word out of his mouth the soldier drew
his sword and struck him such a shrewd blow that he cut off his ear.

"Wow!" cried the Bear, "what's that for? Tell me...." But then, seeing
the gleaming steel flash once again, he turned tail and ran off as fast
as he could go. Just as he reached the edge of the wood, he looked
backward and saw the soldier raise his gun to his shoulder. There was
a flash, a loud report, and the Bear felt a terrific blow against his
side. Down he went like a ninepin, but fortunately for him the bullet
had merely glanced off his hide, and he was not seriously hurt. Picking
himself up, he lost no time in gaining the shelter of the trees, and
presently came limping painfully to the place where the Fox was waiting
for him.

"Well, my friend," said Reynard, "did you see the man-animal? And what
did you think of him?"

"You were right," answered poor Bruin sadly. "He is certainly the most
cunning creature in the world. I went up to speak to him and he tore
a rib from his side and cut off my ear. Then I ran away, but before
I could reach the trees he picked up a stick and pointed it at me.
