Then occurred a ferocious fight. With his back to the wall Courtoys
put up a sturdy resistance, but he was very badly mangled indeed
before he managed to escape. With one ear torn off and one eye closed,
bleeding from many wounds and panting with his exertions, he limped
painfully up to where the cat awaited him.

"My poor friend," cried Tybert. "Are you badly hurt? Never mind, the
ham was worth it--it simply melted in the mouth. I have already eaten
my share, and I willingly give you yours!" So saying, he pointed to the
greasy string by which the ham had been suspended, and which was now
all that remained. Courtoys gazed at it blankly.

"You see," explained Tybert calmly, as he prepared to take his
departure, "a cord is worth a good many fishbones!"

[Illustration]




[Illustration: "WHY ARE YOU BLOWING YOUR SOUP?"]

THE PEASANT AND THE SATYRS


One cold winter's day a peasant set out on a journey which led him
through the depths of a forest into which he had not hitherto been. The
result was that he lost his way, and after wandering about for many
hours in the hope of finding it again, he found himself, just as dusk
was coming on, in a little clearing where he was overjoyed to see a
small house with a cheerful light in the window. "Here is a chance of
supper and a bed," thought the peasant, and he made haste to go up to
the cottage door.

Now this house in the clearing was not inhabited by men, but by some
strange forest folk who were called satyrs. If you want to know what
they were like, you must look at the pictures. Certainly the peasant
had never seen anything like them before, although he had often heard
of them, and when he nearly tumbled over the little satyr children
who were playing in the snow outside the house door, he was the most
surprised man in all those parts. It was too late to draw back however,
so he went boldly up to the door and gave a loud knock.

"Come in!" cried a gruff voice, and the peasant accordingly went in and
found himself facing the Father of all the Satyrs, who had a long beard
and a pair of horns jutting from his forehead. The poor fellow's knees
trembled underneath him for fright, especially when he saw all the
other satyrs, the mother and the uncles and the aunts, glowering at him.

"Please forgive me for my intrusion," said he, "but I have lost my way
in the woods, and I am half dead with hunger and cold. It would be an
act of great kindness if you would give me some food and allow me to
take shelter for the night." So saying, to give point to his remarks,
he set to work to blow upon his chilled fingers, which indeed were blue
with the cold.

"Why are you blowing your fingers?" asked the Father of all the Satyrs
curiously.

"Why, to warm them," answered the peasant, and he blew harder than
before.

"Well, sit down," said the Satyr. "As it happens we are just about to
have supper, and you are welcome to share it with us."

So the peasant sat down to supper, and all the Satyr family sat down
too, and watched him with big unblinking eyes, so that he felt very
uncomfortable. A big basin of soup was set before him, and finding it
very hot, he began to blow upon it.

At this all the Satyr family cried out in surprise, and the Father
Satyr said, "Why are you blowing your soup?"

"To cool it," answered the peasant. "It is too hot, and I am afraid it
may scald my mouth."

[Illustration: THE SATYRS' VILLAGE]

[Illustration: "THERE IS NO PLACE IN MY HOUSE FOR A MAN WHO CAN BLOW
HOT AND COLD"]

Another and a louder cry of surprise came from all the Satyrs, but the
Father cried out loudest of all, and seemed very indignant. "Come," he
said, advancing to the peasant and taking him by the collar. "Out you
go! There is no place in my house for a man who can blow hot and cold
with the same breath. That smells too much of sorcery or magic. Out you
go, I say, and practise your spells in the forest."

So the poor peasant had to go supperless and spend the night in the
woods, with no shelter but the trees, and the snow for coverlet.

And, if you wish to know when all this happened, all I can tell you is
that it was a very long time ago, in the days when fishes flew, and
cats had wings.

[Illustration]




[Illustration: THE TWO FRIENDS]

THE TWO FRIENDS AND THE BARREL OF GREASE


A dog and a wolf who were very great friends set up house together,
and agreed to share equally any food they might obtain. One day they
managed to steal a barrel of grease from the house of a countryman
who lived close by, and having no immediate need of it, they decided
to put it away until the winter, when they might be glad of anything
they could get to appease their hunger. So the barrel of grease was
carefully hidden away in the cellar.

All went well for some time, and then the wolf began to think longingly
of the hidden store. Every time he thought of the grease he imagined
himself licking it up, and at last he could withstand the temptation
no longer, so he went to the dog and said: "I shall be out all day
to-morrow. A cousin of mine has just had a little son, and he has sent
for me to go and be godfather at the christening."

"Very well, my friend," answered the dog. "Go by all means. They have
paid you a great honour by asking you, and of course you cannot refuse."

The wolf departed, but he went no farther than the cellar, where he
spent the whole of the day by the barrel of grease, eating and eating
until he could hold no more. Late at night he returned, licking his
chops, and the dog said: "Well, my friend, did everything go off well?"

"Splendidly, thank you!" answered the wolf.

"Good! And what name did they give the child?"

"Oh," said the wolf, thinking of the barrel of grease, "they called him
_Begun_."

"What a strange name!" cried the dog, "I never heard the like of it in
my life. However, every one to his taste!"

A day or two later the wolf once again began to think of the delicious
food in the cellar, so he told the dog that he had just received
another summons from a different cousin, who also had a baby to which
she wished him to stand godfather. "I wish to goodness they would leave
me alone!" he said, pretending to be very much annoyed. "Anybody would
think that I had nothing else to do but to stand godfather to other
people's brats!"

"You shouldn't be so good-natured," laughed the dog. "It is clear that
you make a very good godfather, or you would not be so much in demand."

Away went the wolf and spent a second satisfying day with the barrel of
