
"Nonsense! Do you think I am going to brave my wife's anger for a
paltry two hundred francs?"

"Well then, three hundred."

"Not enough! My wife says it is worth a fortune."

"Four hundred."

Jan shook his head doubtfully, and, seeing his hesitation, the student
cried:

"Come now, we'll give you five hundred, and not a penny more. You'd
better accept, or you'll lose your chance."

"Well then, hand over the money. I don't know what my wife will say,
but...."

"She'll give you a kiss for making such a splendid bargain," cried the
student, pushing a bag of coins into Jan's hand and snatching the magic
cap. "Hurry off home as fast as you can to tell her the good news!"
Then the three went away, laughing, slapping each other on the back in
their joy at having got the better of the simple peasant.

That afternoon the students, eager to take advantage of the qualities
of the magic cap, invited about fifty of their friends to a splendid
feast at the largest inn in the town. Everybody who was invited came,
as you may imagine, and the resources of the innkeeper were taxed to
the utmost to supply the hungry and thirsty crowd with all that they
wanted. When the feast was ended, the student who had Jan's cap called
the host, and twirling it three times round his finger, said: "Now,
sir, everything is paid for, isn't it?"

"Paid for?" cried the innkeeper. "What do you mean? I've not seen the
colour of your money yet."

[Illustration: TWIRLED THE CAP ROUND THREE TIMES ON HIS FINGER]

At this reply the student's face fell, but one of his companions
snatched the cap from his hands. "Idiot," said he, "you twirled the cap
the wrong way! I was watching the peasant carefully, and he twisted it
like this." So saying, he gave the cap a twirl and said: "Now then, my
good sir, I think you will agree that everything is paid for."

"I don't know whether you are trying to play a joke on me?" answered
the innkeeper grimly, "but your idea of humour is not mine. You had
better pay up at once, before I call the police!"

"Here, let me try," cried the third; and in his turn he twirled the
cap, and, fixing the host with his eye, repeated that everything was
paid for.

At this the innkeeper flew into a passion, and made such a fuss that
the room was in an uproar. It was only by promising to pay him at once
that the innkeeper could be quietened down, and prevented from putting
his threat of calling the police into execution. The banquet cost a
good round sum, and as the three students had no money left, their
invited guests were obliged to subscribe the money between them, which
they did with much grumbling. Afterwards they took their three hosts
outside and dipped them into the horse-trough to punish them for their
bad taste in playing practical jokes on their friends.

And a few miles away, in their little cottage, Jan and his wife sat
counting the five hundred francs he had got for his greasy old cap,
which indeed had not been left him by his great-great-grandmother, but
which was as old and ragged as though it had!

[Illustration]

[Illustration: JAN AND JANNETTE]




[Illustration: WERE CARRIED SAFELY OVER TO THE OTHER BANK]

SUGAR-CANDY HOUSE


Jan and Jannette were brother and sister. They lived near a big wood,
and every day they used to go to play there, fishing for sticklebacks
in the streams, and making necklaces of red berries. One day they
wandered farther from their home than usual, and all of a sudden they
came to a brook crossed by a pretty red bridge. On the other side of
the bridge, half hidden among the trees, they espied the roofs of a
little pink cottage, which, when they came closer, they found to be
built entirely of sugar-candy! Here was a delightful find for a little
boy and girl who loved sweetstuff! They lost no time in breaking off
pieces of the roof and popping them into their mouths.

Now in that house there lived an old wolf whose name was Garon. He was
paralysed in one leg, and could not run very fast, but in all other
respects he was as fierce and strong as he had been in his youth. When
he heard Jan and Jannette breaking off bits of his roof he growled out,
"Who is touching my Sugar-Candy House?" Then he came limping out to see
who it was, but by that time the children were safely hidden in the
woods.

"Who dares to touch my Sugar-Candy House?" roared the wolf again.

Then Jan replied:

    "_It's the wind so mild,
    It's the wind so mild,
    That lovable child!_"

This satisfied the old wolf, and back he went to his house, grumbling.

The next day Jan and Jannette once again crossed over the little red
bridge, and broke some more candy from the wolf's house. Out came Garon
again, bristling all over.

"Who is touching my Sugar-Candy House?" he roared.

And Jan and Jannette replied:

    "_It's the wind so mild,
    It's the wind so mild,
    That lovable child!_"

"Very well," said the wolf, and he went back again, but this time there
was a gleam of suspicion in his eye.

The next day was stormy, and hardly had Jan and Jannette reached the
Sugar-Candy House than the wolf came out, and surprised them in the
very act of breaking a piece off his window-sill.

"Oho!" said he. "It was the wind so mild, was it? That lovable child,
eh? Precious lovable children, I must say! Gr-r-r, I'll eat them up!"
And he sprang at Jan and Jannette, who took to their heels and ran off
as fast as their legs could carry them. Garon pursued them at a good
speed in spite of his stiff paw, and although he never gained upon
them, yet he kept them in sight, and refused to give up the chase. The
children looked back once or twice, and saw that the wolf was still
following them, but they were not very much afraid, because they were
confident of their ability to outrun him.

[Illustration:'GR-R-R, I'LL EAT THEM UP!']

All of a sudden they found their way barred by a river. There was no
bridge across it, and the water was very deep. What were they to do?
Nearer and nearer came the wolf!

In the middle of the river some ducks were swimming, and Jan called out
to them: "Little ducks! Little ducks! Carry us over the river on your
backs, for if you do not the wolf will get us!"

So the ducks came swimming up, and Jan and Jannette climbed each on to
the back of one, and were carried safely over to the other bank.
