in the scale of nature can be more easily crossed than in the case of
plants; but the hybrids themselves are, I think, more sterile. I doubt
whether any case of a perfectly fertile hybrid animal can be considered
as thoroughly well authenticated. It should, however, be borne in
mind that, owing to few animals breeding freely under confinement, few
experiments have been fairly tried: for instance, the canary-bird has
been crossed with nine other finches, but as not one of these nine
species breeds freely in confinement, we have no right to expect that
the first crosses between them and the canary, or that their hybrids,
should be perfectly fertile. Again, with respect to the fertility in
successive generations of the more fertile hybrid animals, I hardly know
of an instance in which two families of the same hybrid have been raised
at the same time from different parents, so as to avoid the ill effects
of close interbreeding. On the contrary, brothers and sisters have
usually been crossed in each successive generation, in opposition to the
constantly repeated admonition of every breeder. And in this case, it is
not at all surprising that the inherent sterility in the hybrids should
have gone on increasing. If we were to act thus, and pair brothers and
sisters in the case of any pure animal, which from any cause had the
least tendency to sterility, the breed would assuredly be lost in a very
few generations.

Although I do not know of any thoroughly well-authenticated cases of
perfectly fertile hybrid animals, I have some reason to believe that
the hybrids from Cervulus vaginalis and Reevesii, and from Phasianus
colchicus with P. torquatus and with P. versicolor are perfectly
fertile. The hybrids from the common and Chinese geese (A. cygnoides),
species which are so different that they are generally ranked in
distinct genera, have often bred in this country with either pure
parent, and in one single instance they have bred inter se. This was
effected by Mr. Eyton, who raised two hybrids from the same parents but
from different hatches; and from these two birds he raised no less than
eight hybrids (grandchildren of the pure geese) from one nest. In India,
however, these cross-bred geese must be far more fertile; for I am
assured by two eminently capable judges, namely Mr. Blyth and Capt.
Hutton, that whole flocks of these crossed geese are kept in various
parts of the country; and as they are kept for profit, where neither
pure parent-species exists, they must certainly be highly fertile.

A doctrine which originated with Pallas, has been largely accepted
by modern naturalists; namely, that most of our domestic animals have
descended from two or more aboriginal species, since commingled by
intercrossing. On this view, the aboriginal species must either at first
have produced quite fertile hybrids, or the hybrids must have become in
subsequent generations quite fertile under domestication. This latter
alternative seems to me the most probable, and I am inclined to believe
in its truth, although it rests on no direct evidence. I believe, for
instance, that our dogs have descended from several wild stocks; yet,
with perhaps the exception of certain indigenous domestic dogs of South
America, all are quite fertile together; and analogy makes me greatly
doubt, whether the several aboriginal species would at first have freely
bred together and have produced quite fertile hybrids. So again there
is reason to believe that our European and the humped Indian cattle are
quite fertile together; but from facts communicated to me by Mr. Blyth,
I think they must be considered as distinct species. On this view of
the origin of many of our domestic animals, we must either give up the
belief of the almost universal sterility of distinct species of
animals when crossed; or we must look at sterility, not as an indelible
characteristic, but as one capable of being removed by domestication.

Finally, looking to all the ascertained facts on the intercrossing of
plants and animals, it may be concluded that some degree of sterility,
both in first crosses and in hybrids, is an extremely general result;
but that it cannot, under our present state of knowledge, be considered
as absolutely universal.

LAWS GOVERNING THE STERILITY OF FIRST CROSSES AND OF HYBRIDS.

We will now consider a little more in detail the circumstances and
rules governing the sterility of first crosses and of hybrids. Our chief
object will be to see whether or not the rules indicate that species
have specially been endowed with this quality, in order to prevent their
crossing and blending together in utter confusion. The following rules
and conclusions are chiefly drawn up from Gartner's admirable work on
the hybridisation of plants. I have taken much pains to ascertain how
far the rules apply to animals, and considering how scanty our knowledge
is in regard to hybrid animals, I have been surprised to find how
generally the same rules apply to both kingdoms.

It has been already remarked, that the degree of fertility, both of
first crosses and of hybrids, graduates from zero to perfect fertility.
It is surprising in how many curious ways this gradation can be shown to
exist; but only the barest outline of the facts can here be given. When
pollen from a plant of one family is placed on the stigma of a plant of
a distinct family, it exerts no more influence than so much inorganic
dust. From this absolute zero of fertility, the pollen of different
species of the same genus applied to the stigma of some one species,
yields a perfect gradation in the number of seeds produced, up to nearly
complete or even quite complete fertility; and, as we have seen, in
certain abnormal cases, even to an excess of fertility, beyond that
which the plant's own pollen will produce. So in hybrids themselves,
there are some which never have produced, and probably never would
produce, even with the pollen of either pure parent, a single fertile
seed: but in some of these cases a first trace of fertility may be
detected, by the pollen of one of the pure parent-species causing the
flower of the hybrid to wither earlier than it otherwise would have
done; and the early withering of the flower is well known to be a sign
of incipient fertilisation. From this extreme degree of sterility we
have self-fertilised hybrids producing a greater and greater number of
seeds up to perfect fertility.

Hybrids from two species which are very difficult to cross, and which
rarely produce any offspring, are generally very sterile; but the
parallelism between the difficulty of making a first cross, and the
sterility of the hybrids thus produced--two classes of facts which are
generally confounded together--is by no means strict. There are many
cases, in which two pure species can be united with unusual facility,
and produce numerous hybrid-offspring, yet these hybrids are remarkably
sterile. On the other hand, there are species which can be crossed
very rarely, or with extreme difficulty, but the hybrids, when at last
produced, are very fertile. Even within the limits of the same genus,
for instance in Dianthus, these two opposite cases occur.

The fertility, both of first crosses and of hybrids, is more easily
affected by unfavourable conditions, than is the fertility of pure
species. But the degree of fertility is likewise innately variable; for
it is not always the same when the same two species are crossed under
the same circumstances, but depends in part upon the constitution of the
individuals which happen to have been chosen for the experiment. So it
is with hybrids, for their degree of fertility is often found to differ
greatly in the several individuals raised from seed out of the same
capsule and exposed to exactly the same conditions.

By the term systematic affinity is meant, the resemblance between
species in structure and in constitution, more especially in the
structure of parts which are of high physiological importance and which
differ little in the allied species. Now the fertility of first crosses
between species, and of the hybrids produced from them, is largely
governed by their systematic affinity. This is clearly shown by hybrids
never having been raised between species ranked by systematists in
distinct families; and on the other hand, by very closely allied
species generally uniting with facility. But the correspondence between
systematic affinity and the facility of crossing is by no means strict.
A multitude of cases could be given of very closely allied species which
will not unite, or only with extreme difficulty; and on the other hand
of very distinct species which unite with the utmost facility. In
the same family there may be a genus, as Dianthus, in which very many
species can most readily be crossed; and another genus, as Silene,
in which the most persevering efforts have failed to produce between
extremely close species a single hybrid. Even within the limits of the
same genus, we meet with this same difference; for instance, the many
species of Nicotiana have been more largely crossed than the species of
almost any other genus; but Gartner found that N. acuminata, which is
not a particularly distinct species, obstinately failed to fertilise, or
to be fertilised by, no less than eight other species of Nicotiana. Very
many analogous facts could be given.

No one has been able to point out what kind, or what amount, of
difference in any recognisable character is sufficient to prevent two
species crossing. It can be shown that plants most widely different in
