are identically the same at these distant points of the northern and
southern hemispheres? The answer, as I believe, is, that mammals have
not been able to migrate, whereas some plants, from their varied means
of dispersal, have migrated across the vast and broken interspace. The
great and striking influence which barriers of every kind have had on
distribution, is intelligible only on the view that the great majority
of species have been produced on one side alone, and have not been able
to migrate to the other side. Some few families, many sub-families,
very many genera, and a still greater number of sections of genera
are confined to a single region; and it has been observed by several
naturalists, that the most natural genera, or those genera in which the
species are most closely related to each other, are generally local,
or confined to one area. What a strange anomaly it would be, if, when
coming one step lower in the series, to the individuals of the same
species, a directly opposite rule prevailed; and species were not local,
but had been produced in two or more distinct areas!

Hence it seems to me, as it has to many other naturalists, that the
view of each species having been produced in one area alone, and having
subsequently migrated from that area as far as its powers of migration
and subsistence under past and present conditions permitted, is the most
probable. Undoubtedly many cases occur, in which we cannot explain how
the same species could have passed from one point to the other. But the
geographical and climatal changes, which have certainly occurred within
recent geological times, must have interrupted or rendered discontinuous
the formerly continuous range of many species. So that we are reduced to
consider whether the exceptions to continuity of range are so numerous
and of so grave a nature, that we ought to give up the belief, rendered
probable by general considerations, that each species has been produced
within one area, and has migrated thence as far as it could. It would
be hopelessly tedious to discuss all the exceptional cases of the same
species, now living at distant and separated points; nor do I for a
moment pretend that any explanation could be offered of many such cases.
But after some preliminary remarks, I will discuss a few of the most
striking classes of facts; namely, the existence of the same species
on the summits of distant mountain-ranges, and at distant points in the
arctic and antarctic regions; and secondly (in the following chapter),
the wide distribution of freshwater productions; and thirdly, the
occurrence of the same terrestrial species on islands and on the
mainland, though separated by hundreds of miles of open sea. If the
existence of the same species at distant and isolated points of the
earth's surface, can in many instances be explained on the view of each
species having migrated from a single birthplace; then, considering our
ignorance with respect to former climatal and geographical changes and
various occasional means of transport, the belief that this has been the
universal law, seems to me incomparably the safest.

In discussing this subject, we shall be enabled at the same time to
consider a point equally important for us, namely, whether the several
distinct species of a genus, which on my theory have all descended from
a common progenitor, can have migrated (undergoing modification
during some part of their migration) from the area inhabited by their
progenitor. If it can be shown to be almost invariably the case, that
a region, of which most of its inhabitants are closely related to,
or belong to the same genera with the species of a second region, has
probably received at some former period immigrants from this other
region, my theory will be strengthened; for we can clearly understand,
on the principle of modification, why the inhabitants of a region should
be related to those of another region, whence it has been stocked. A
volcanic island, for instance, upheaved and formed at the distance of a
few hundreds of miles from a continent, would probably receive from it
in the course of time a few colonists, and their descendants, though
modified, would still be plainly related by inheritance to the
inhabitants of the continent. Cases of this nature are common, and are,
as we shall hereafter more fully see, inexplicable on the theory of
independent creation. This view of the relation of species in one region
to those in another, does not differ much (by substituting the word
variety for species) from that lately advanced in an ingenious paper by
Mr. Wallace, in which he concludes, that "every species has come into
existence coincident both in space and time with a pre-existing
closely allied species." And I now know from correspondence, that this
coincidence he attributes to generation with modification.

The previous remarks on "single and multiple centres of creation" do
not directly bear on another allied question,--namely whether all the
individuals of the same species have descended from a single pair, or
single hermaphrodite, or whether, as some authors suppose, from many
individuals simultaneously created. With those organic beings which
never intercross (if such exist), the species, on my theory, must have
descended from a succession of improved varieties, which will never have
blended with other individuals or varieties, but will have supplanted
each other; so that, at each successive stage of modification and
improvement, all the individuals of each variety will have descended
from a single parent. But in the majority of cases, namely, with
all organisms which habitually unite for each birth, or which often
intercross, I believe that during the slow process of modification
the individuals of the species will have been kept nearly uniform by
intercrossing; so that many individuals will have gone on simultaneously
changing, and the whole amount of modification will not have been due,
at each stage, to descent from a single parent. To illustrate what I
mean: our English racehorses differ slightly from the horses of every
other breed; but they do not owe their difference and superiority to
descent from any single pair, but to continued care in selecting and
training many individuals during many generations.

Before discussing the three classes of facts, which I have selected as
presenting the greatest amount of difficulty on the theory of "single
centres of creation," I must say a few words on the means of dispersal.

MEANS OF DISPERSAL.

Sir C. Lyell and other authors have ably treated this subject. I can
give here only the briefest abstract of the more important facts. Change
of climate must have had a powerful influence on migration: a region
when its climate was different may have been a high road for migration,
but now be impassable; I shall, however, presently have to discuss this
branch of the subject in some detail. Changes of level in the land must
also have been highly influential: a narrow isthmus now separates two
marine faunas; submerge it, or let it formerly have been submerged, and
the two faunas will now blend or may formerly have blended: where the
sea now extends, land may at a former period have connected islands or
possibly even continents together, and thus have allowed terrestrial
productions to pass from one to the other. No geologist will dispute
that great mutations of level have occurred within the period of
existing organisms. Edward Forbes insisted that all the islands in the
Atlantic must recently have been connected with Europe or Africa, and
Europe likewise with America. Other authors have thus hypothetically
bridged over every ocean, and have united almost every island to some
mainland. If indeed the arguments used by Forbes are to be trusted,
it must be admitted that scarcely a single island exists which has not
recently been united to some continent. This view cuts the Gordian knot
of the dispersal of the same species to the most distant points, and
removes many a difficulty: but to the best of my judgment we are not
authorized in admitting such enormous geographical changes within
the period of existing species. It seems to me that we have abundant
evidence of great oscillations of level in our continents; but not of
such vast changes in their position and extension, as to have united
them within the recent period to each other and to the several
intervening oceanic islands. I freely admit the former existence of many
islands, now buried beneath the sea, which may have served as halting
places for plants and for many animals during their migration. In the
coral-producing oceans such sunken islands are now marked, as I believe,
by rings of coral or atolls standing over them. Whenever it is fully
admitted, as I believe it will some day be, that each species has
proceeded from a single birthplace, and when in the course of time we
know something definite about the means of distribution, we shall be
enabled to speculate with security on the former extension of the land.
But I do not believe that it will ever be proved that within the recent
period continents which are now quite separate, have been continuously,
or almost continuously, united with each other, and with the many
existing oceanic islands. Several facts in distribution,--such as the
great difference in the marine faunas on the opposite sides of almost
every continent,--the close relation of the tertiary inhabitants of
several lands and even seas to their present inhabitants,--a certain
degree of relation (as we shall hereafter see) between the distribution
of mammals and the depth of the sea,--these and other such facts seem to
me opposed to the admission of such prodigious geographical revolutions
within the recent period, as are necessitated on the view advanced
by Forbes and admitted by his many followers. The nature and relative
proportions of the inhabitants of oceanic islands likewise seem to me
