gone, the relation generally holds good. We see Britain separated by a
shallow channel from Europe, and the mammals are the same on both
sides; we meet with analogous facts on many islands separated by similar
channels from Australia. The West Indian Islands stand on a deeply
submerged bank, nearly  fathoms in depth, and here we find American
forms, but the species and even the genera are distinct. As the amount
of modification in all cases depends to a certain degree on the lapse
of time, and as during changes of level it is obvious that islands
separated by shallow channels are more likely to have been continuously
united within a recent period to the mainland than islands separated
by deeper channels, we can understand the frequent relation between the
depth of the sea and the degree of affinity of the mammalian inhabitants
of islands with those of a neighbouring continent,--an inexplicable
relation on the view of independent acts of creation.

All the foregoing remarks on the inhabitants of oceanic
islands,--namely, the scarcity of kinds--the richness in endemic forms
in particular classes or sections of classes,--the absence of whole
groups, as of batrachians, and of terrestrial mammals notwithstanding
the presence of aerial bats,--the singular proportions of certain
orders of plants,--herbaceous forms having been developed into trees,
etc.,--seem to me to accord better with the view of occasional means of
transport having been largely efficient in the long course of time, than
with the view of all our oceanic islands having been formerly connected
by continuous land with the nearest continent; for on this latter
view the migration would probably have been more complete; and if
modification be admitted, all the forms of life would have been more
equally modified, in accordance with the paramount importance of the
relation of organism to organism.

I do not deny that there are many and grave difficulties in
understanding how several of the inhabitants of the more remote islands,
whether still retaining the same specific form or modified since their
arrival, could have reached their present homes. But the probability of
many islands having existed as halting-places, of which not a wreck now
remains, must not be overlooked. I will here give a single instance of
one of the cases of difficulty. Almost all oceanic islands, even the
most isolated and smallest, are inhabited by land-shells, generally by
endemic species, but sometimes by species found elsewhere. Dr. Aug. A.
Gould has given several interesting cases in regard to the land-shells
of the islands of the Pacific. Now it is notorious that land-shells are
very easily killed by salt; their eggs, at least such as I have tried,
sink in sea-water and are killed by it. Yet there must be, on my view,
some unknown, but highly efficient means for their transportal. Would
the just-hatched young occasionally crawl on and adhere to the feet of
birds roosting on the ground, and thus get transported? It occurred to
me that land-shells, when hybernating and having a membranous diaphragm
over the mouth of the shell, might be floated in chinks of drifted
timber across moderately wide arms of the sea. And I found that several
species did in this state withstand uninjured an immersion in sea-water
during seven days: one of these shells was the Helix pomatia, and after
it had again hybernated I put it in sea-water for twenty days, and it
perfectly recovered. As this species has a thick calcareous operculum,
I removed it, and when it had formed a new membranous one, I immersed it
for fourteen days in sea-water, and it recovered and crawled away:
but more experiments are wanted on this head. The most striking and
important fact for us in regard to the inhabitants of islands, is their
affinity to those of the nearest mainland, without being actually the
same species. Numerous instances could be given of this fact. I will
give only one, that of the Galapagos Archipelago, situated under the
equator, between  and  miles from the shores of South America.
Here almost every product of the land and water bears the unmistakeable
stamp of the American continent. There are twenty-six land birds,
and twenty-five of these are ranked by Mr. Gould as distinct species,
supposed to have been created here; yet the close affinity of most of
these birds to American species in every character, in their habits,
gestures, and tones of voice, was manifest. So it is with the other
animals, and with nearly all the plants, as shown by Dr. Hooker in
his admirable memoir on the Flora of this archipelago. The naturalist,
looking at the inhabitants of these volcanic islands in the Pacific,
distant several hundred miles from the continent, yet feels that he is
standing on American land. Why should this be so? why should the species
which are supposed to have been created in the Galapagos Archipelago,
and nowhere else, bear so plain a stamp of affinity to those created in
America? There is nothing in the conditions of life, in the geological
nature of the islands, in their height or climate, or in the proportions
in which the several classes are associated together, which resembles
closely the conditions of the South American coast: in fact there is
a considerable dissimilarity in all these respects. On the other hand,
there is a considerable degree of resemblance in the volcanic nature
of the soil, in climate, height, and size of the islands, between
the Galapagos and Cape de Verde Archipelagos: but what an entire and
absolute difference in their inhabitants! The inhabitants of the Cape
de Verde Islands are related to those of Africa, like those of the
Galapagos to America. I believe this grand fact can receive no sort of
explanation on the ordinary view of independent creation; whereas on the
view here maintained, it is obvious that the Galapagos Islands would be
likely to receive colonists, whether by occasional means of transport or
by formerly continuous land, from America; and the Cape de Verde
Islands from Africa; and that such colonists would be liable to
modification;--the principle of inheritance still betraying their
original birthplace.

Many analogous facts could be given: indeed it is an almost universal
rule that the endemic productions of islands are related to those of the
nearest continent, or of other near islands. The exceptions are few, and
most of them can be explained. Thus the plants of Kerguelen Land, though
standing nearer to Africa than to America, are related, and that very
closely, as we know from Dr. Hooker's account, to those of America: but
on the view that this island has been mainly stocked by seeds brought
with earth and stones on icebergs, drifted by the prevailing currents,
this anomaly disappears. New Zealand in its endemic plants is much more
closely related to Australia, the nearest mainland, than to any other
region: and this is what might have been expected; but it is also
plainly related to South America, which, although the next nearest
continent, is so enormously remote, that the fact becomes an anomaly.
But this difficulty almost disappears on the view that both New Zealand,
South America, and other southern lands were long ago partially stocked
from a nearly intermediate though distant point, namely from the
antarctic islands, when they were clothed with vegetation, before the
commencement of the Glacial period. The affinity, which, though
feeble, I am assured by Dr. Hooker is real, between the flora of the
south-western corner of Australia and of the Cape of Good Hope, is a far
more remarkable case, and is at present inexplicable: but this affinity
is confined to the plants, and will, I do not doubt, be some day
explained.

The law which causes the inhabitants of an archipelago, though
specifically distinct, to be closely allied to those of the nearest
continent, we sometimes see displayed on a small scale, yet in a most
interesting manner, within the limits of the same archipelago. Thus the
several islands of the Galapagos Archipelago are tenanted, as I have
elsewhere shown, in a quite marvellous manner, by very closely related
species; so that the inhabitants of each separate island, though mostly
distinct, are related in an incomparably closer degree to each other
than to the inhabitants of any other part of the world. And this is just
what might have been expected on my view, for the islands are situated
so near each other that they would almost certainly receive
immigrants from the same original source, or from each other. But this
dissimilarity between the endemic inhabitants of the islands may be
used as an argument against my views; for it may be asked, how has it
happened in the several islands situated within sight of each other,
having the same geological nature, the same height, climate, etc., that
many of the immigrants should have been differently modified, though
only in a small degree. This long appeared to me a great difficulty: but
it arises in chief part from the deeply-seated error of considering
the physical conditions of a country as the most important for its
inhabitants; whereas it cannot, I think, be disputed that the nature of
the other inhabitants, with which each has to compete, is at least as
important, and generally a far more important element of success. Now
if we look to those inhabitants of the Galapagos Archipelago which are
found in other parts of the world (laying on one side for the moment
the endemic species, which cannot be here fairly included, as we are
considering how they have come to be modified since their arrival), we
find a considerable amount of difference in the several islands. This
difference might indeed have been expected on the view of the islands
having been stocked by occasional means of transport--a seed, for
instance, of one plant having been brought to one island, and that of
another plant to another island. Hence when in former times an immigrant
settled on any one or more of the islands, or when it subsequently
