not been used, and only the names of the groups had been written in a
linear series, it would have been still less possible to have given a
natural arrangement; and it is notoriously not possible to represent in
a series, on a flat surface, the affinities which we discover in nature
amongst the beings of the same group. Thus, on the view which I hold,
the natural system is genealogical in its arrangement, like a pedigree;
but the degrees of modification which the different groups have
undergone, have to be expressed by ranking them under different
so-called genera, sub-families, families, sections, orders, and classes.

It may be worth while to illustrate this view of classification, by
taking the case of languages. If we possessed a perfect pedigree of
mankind, a genealogical arrangement of the races of man would afford the
best classification of the various languages now spoken throughout the
world; and if all extinct languages, and all intermediate and slowly
changing dialects, had to be included, such an arrangement would, I
think, be the only possible one. Yet it might be that some very ancient
language had altered little, and had given rise to few new languages,
whilst others (owing to the spreading and subsequent isolation and
states of civilisation of the several races, descended from a common
race) had altered much, and had given rise to many new languages and
dialects. The various degrees of difference in the languages from the
same stock, would have to be expressed by groups subordinate to
groups; but the proper or even only possible arrangement would still be
genealogical; and this would be strictly natural, as it would connect
together all languages, extinct and modern, by the closest affinities,
and would give the filiation and origin of each tongue.

In confirmation of this view, let us glance at the classification
of varieties, which are believed or known to have descended from one
species. These are grouped under species, with sub-varieties under
varieties; and with our domestic productions, several other grades of
difference are requisite, as we have seen with pigeons. The origin
of the existence of groups subordinate to groups, is the same with
varieties as with species, namely, closeness of descent with various
degrees of modification. Nearly the same rules are followed in
classifying varieties, as with species. Authors have insisted on the
necessity of classing varieties on a natural instead of an artificial
system; we are cautioned, for instance, not to class two varieties of
the pine-apple together, merely because their fruit, though the most
important part, happens to be nearly identical; no one puts the swedish
and common turnips together, though the esculent and thickened stems
are so similar. Whatever part is found to be most constant, is used in
classing varieties: thus the great agriculturist Marshall says the horns
are very useful for this purpose with cattle, because they are less
variable than the shape or colour of the body, etc.; whereas with sheep
the horns are much less serviceable, because less constant. In classing
varieties, I apprehend if we had a real pedigree, a genealogical
classification would be universally preferred; and it has been attempted
by some authors. For we might feel sure, whether there had been more
or less modification, the principle of inheritance would keep the forms
together which were allied in the greatest number of points. In tumbler
pigeons, though some sub-varieties differ from the others in the
important character of having a longer beak, yet all are kept together
from having the common habit of tumbling; but the short-faced breed has
nearly or quite lost this habit; nevertheless, without any reasoning
or thinking on the subject, these tumblers are kept in the same group,
because allied in blood and alike in some other respects. If it could be
proved that the Hottentot had descended from the Negro, I think he would
be classed under the Negro group, however much he might differ in colour
and other important characters from negroes.

With species in a state of nature, every naturalist has in fact brought
descent into his classification; for he includes in his lowest grade,
or that of a species, the two sexes; and how enormously these sometimes
differ in the most important characters, is known to every naturalist:
scarcely a single fact can be predicated in common of the males and
hermaphrodites of certain cirripedes, when adult, and yet no one dreams
of separating them. The naturalist includes as one species the several
larval stages of the same individual, however much they may differ from
each other and from the adult; as he likewise includes the so-called
alternate generations of Steenstrup, which can only in a technical sense
be considered as the same individual. He includes monsters; he includes
varieties, not solely because they closely resemble the parent-form, but
because they are descended from it. He who believes that the cowslip
is descended from the primrose, or conversely, ranks them together as
a single species, and gives a single definition. As soon as three
Orchidean forms (Monochanthus, Myanthus, and Catasetum), which had
previously been ranked as three distinct genera, were known to be
sometimes produced on the same spike, they were immediately included as
a single species. But it may be asked, what ought we to do, if it could
be proved that one species of kangaroo had been produced, by a long
course of modification, from a bear? Ought we to rank this one
species with bears, and what should we do with the other species?
The supposition is of course preposterous; and I might answer by the
argumentum ad hominem, and ask what should be done if a perfect kangaroo
were seen to come out of the womb of a bear? According to all analogy,
it would be ranked with bears; but then assuredly all the other species
of the kangaroo family would have to be classed under the bear genus.
The whole case is preposterous; for where there has been close descent
in common, there will certainly be close resemblance or affinity.

As descent has universally been used in classing together the
individuals of the same species, though the males and females and larvae
are sometimes extremely different; and as it has been used in classing
varieties which have undergone a certain, and sometimes a considerable
amount of modification, may not this same element of descent have been
unconsciously used in grouping species under genera, and genera under
higher groups, though in these cases the modification has been greater
in degree, and has taken a longer time to complete? I believe it has
thus been unconsciously used; and only thus can I understand the several
rules and guides which have been followed by our best systematists. We
have no written pedigrees; we have to make out community of descent by
resemblances of any kind. Therefore we choose those characters which,
as far as we can judge, are the least likely to have been modified
in relation to the conditions of life to which each species has been
recently exposed. Rudimentary structures on this view are as good as, or
even sometimes better than, other parts of the organisation. We care not
how trifling a character may be--let it be the mere inflection of
the angle of the jaw, the manner in which an insect's wing is folded,
whether the skin be covered by hair or feathers--if it prevail
throughout many and different species, especially those having very
different habits of life, it assumes high value; for we can account for
its presence in so many forms with such different habits, only by its
inheritance from a common parent. We may err in this respect in regard
to single points of structure, but when several characters, let them
be ever so trifling, occur together throughout a large group of beings
having different habits, we may feel almost sure, on the theory of
descent, that these characters have been inherited from a common
ancestor. And we know that such correlated or aggregated characters have
especial value in classification.

We can understand why a species or a group of species may depart, in
several of its most important characteristics, from its allies, and yet
be safely classed with them. This may be safely done, and is often
done, as long as a sufficient number of characters, let them be ever so
unimportant, betrays the hidden bond of community of descent. Let two
forms have not a single character in common, yet if these extreme forms
are connected together by a chain of intermediate groups, we may at
once infer their community of descent, and we put them all into the same
class. As we find organs of high physiological importance--those
which serve to preserve life under the most diverse conditions of
existence--are generally the most constant, we attach especial value to
them; but if these same organs, in another group or section of a
group, are found to differ much, we at once value them less in
our classification. We shall hereafter, I think, clearly see why
embryological characters are of such high classificatory importance.
Geographical distribution may sometimes be brought usefully into play in
classing large and widely-distributed genera, because all the species of
the same genus, inhabiting any distinct and isolated region, have in all
probability descended from the same parents.

We can understand, on these views, the very important distinction
between real affinities and analogical or adaptive resemblances.
Lamarck first called attention to this distinction, and he has been ably
followed by Macleay and others. The resemblance, in the shape of the
body and in the fin-like anterior limbs, between the dugong, which is a
pachydermatous animal, and the whale, and between both these mammals and
fishes, is analogical. Amongst insects there are innumerable instances:
thus Linnaeus, misled by external appearances, actually classed an
