In a tree we can specify this or that branch, though at the actual fork
the two unite and blend together. We could not, as I have said, define
the several groups; but we could pick out types, or forms, representing
most of the characters of each group, whether large or small, and thus
give a general idea of the value of the differences between them. This
is what we should be driven to, if we were ever to succeed in collecting
all the forms in any class which have lived throughout all time
and space. We shall certainly never succeed in making so perfect a
collection: nevertheless, in certain classes, we are tending in this
direction; and Milne Edwards has lately insisted, in an able paper, on
the high importance of looking to types, whether or not we can separate
and define the groups to which such types belong.

Finally, we have seen that natural selection, which results from the
struggle for existence, and which almost inevitably induces extinction
and divergence of character in the many descendants from one dominant
parent-species, explains that great and universal feature in the
affinities of all organic beings, namely, their subordination in group
under group. We use the element of descent in classing the individuals
of both sexes and of all ages, although having few characters in common,
under one species; we use descent in classing acknowledged varieties,
however different they may be from their parent; and I believe this
element of descent is the hidden bond of connexion which naturalists
have sought under the term of the Natural System. On this idea of the
natural system being, in so far as it has been perfected, genealogical
in its arrangement, with the grades of difference between the
descendants from a common parent, expressed by the terms genera,
families, orders, etc., we can understand the rules which we are
compelled to follow in our classification. We can understand why we
value certain resemblances far more than others; why we are permitted to
use rudimentary and useless organs, or others of trifling physiological
importance; why, in comparing one group with a distinct group, we
summarily reject analogical or adaptive characters, and yet use these
same characters within the limits of the same group. We can clearly see
how it is that all living and extinct forms can be grouped together
in one great system; and how the several members of each class
are connected together by the most complex and radiating lines of
affinities. We shall never, probably, disentangle the inextricable web
of affinities between the members of any one class; but when we have
a distinct object in view, and do not look to some unknown plan of
creation, we may hope to make sure but slow progress.

MORPHOLOGY.

We have seen that the members of the same class, independently of
their habits of life, resemble each other in the general plan of their
organisation. This resemblance is often expressed by the term "unity of
type;" or by saying that the several parts and organs in the different
species of the class are homologous. The whole subject is included under
the general name of Morphology. This is the most interesting department
of natural history, and may be said to be its very soul. What can be
more curious than that the hand of a man, formed for grasping, that of a
mole for digging, the leg of the horse, the paddle of the porpoise, and
the wing of the bat, should all be constructed on the same pattern, and
should include the same bones, in the same relative positions? Geoffroy
St. Hilaire has insisted strongly on the high importance of relative
connexion in homologous organs: the parts may change to almost any
extent in form and size, and yet they always remain connected together
in the same order. We never find, for instance, the bones of the arm and
forearm, or of the thigh and leg, transposed. Hence the same names can
be given to the homologous bones in widely different animals. We see the
same great law in the construction of the mouths of insects: what can
be more different than the immensely long spiral proboscis of a
sphinx-moth, the curious folded one of a bee or bug, and the great jaws
of a beetle?--yet all these organs, serving for such different purposes,
are formed by infinitely numerous modifications of an upper lip,
mandibles, and two pairs of maxillae. Analogous laws govern the
construction of the mouths and limbs of crustaceans. So it is with the
flowers of plants.

Nothing can be more hopeless than to attempt to explain this similarity
of pattern in members of the same class, by utility or by the doctrine
of final causes. The hopelessness of the attempt has been expressly
admitted by Owen in his most interesting work on the 'Nature of Limbs.'
On the ordinary view of the independent creation of each being, we can
only say that so it is;--that it has so pleased the Creator to construct
each animal and plant.

The explanation is manifest on the theory of the natural selection of
successive slight modifications,--each modification being profitable
in some way to the modified form, but often affecting by correlation of
growth other parts of the organisation. In changes of this nature, there
will be little or no tendency to modify the original pattern, or to
transpose parts. The bones of a limb might be shortened and widened to
any extent, and become gradually enveloped in thick membrane, so as to
serve as a fin; or a webbed foot might have all its bones, or certain
bones, lengthened to any extent, and the membrane connecting them
increased to any extent, so as to serve as a wing: yet in all this great
amount of modification there will be no tendency to alter the framework
of bones or the relative connexion of the several parts. If we suppose
that the ancient progenitor, the archetype as it may be called, of all
mammals, had its limbs constructed on the existing general pattern,
for whatever purpose they served, we can at once perceive the plain
signification of the homologous construction of the limbs throughout the
whole class. So with the mouths of insects, we have only to suppose that
their common progenitor had an upper lip, mandibles, and two pair
of maxillae, these parts being perhaps very simple in form; and then
natural selection will account for the infinite diversity in structure
and function of the mouths of insects. Nevertheless, it is conceivable
that the general pattern of an organ might become so much obscured as to
be finally lost, by the atrophy and ultimately by the complete abortion
of certain parts, by the soldering together of other parts, and by the
doubling or multiplication of others,--variations which we know to be
within the limits of possibility. In the paddles of the extinct gigantic
sea-lizards, and in the mouths of certain suctorial crustaceans, the
general pattern seems to have been thus to a certain extent obscured.

There is another and equally curious branch of the present subject;
namely, the comparison not of the same part in different members of a
class, but of the different parts or organs in the same individual.
Most physiologists believe that the bones of the skull are homologous
with--that is correspond in number and in relative connexion with--the
elemental parts of a certain number of vertebrae. The anterior and
posterior limbs in each member of the vertebrate and articulate classes
are plainly homologous. We see the same law in comparing the wonderfully
complex jaws and legs in crustaceans. It is familiar to almost every
one, that in a flower the relative position of the sepals, petals,
stamens, and pistils, as well as their intimate structure, are
intelligible on the view that they consist of metamorphosed leaves,
arranged in a spire. In monstrous plants, we often get direct evidence
of the possibility of one organ being transformed into another; and we
can actually see in embryonic crustaceans and in many other animals, and
in flowers, that organs, which when mature become extremely different,
are at an early stage of growth exactly alike.

How inexplicable are these facts on the ordinary view of creation! Why
should the brain be enclosed in a box composed of such numerous and such
extraordinarily shaped pieces of bone? As Owen has remarked, the
benefit derived from the yielding of the separate pieces in the act of
parturition of mammals, will by no means explain the same construction
in the skulls of birds. Why should similar bones have been created in
the formation of the wing and leg of a bat, used as they are for such
totally different purposes? Why should one crustacean, which has an
extremely complex mouth formed of many parts, consequently always have
fewer legs; or conversely, those with many legs have simpler mouths?
Why should the sepals, petals, stamens, and pistils in any individual
flower, though fitted for such widely different purposes, be all
constructed on the same pattern?

On the theory of natural selection, we can satisfactorily answer these
questions. In the vertebrata, we see a series of internal vertebrae
bearing certain processes and appendages; in the articulata, we see the
body divided into a series of segments, bearing external appendages;
and in flowering plants, we see a series of successive spiral whorls of
leaves. An indefinite repetition of the same part or organ is the common
characteristic (as Owen has observed) of all low or little-modified
forms; therefore we may readily believe that the unknown progenitor of
the vertebrata possessed many vertebrae; the unknown progenitor of
the articulata, many segments; and the unknown progenitor of flowering
plants, many spiral whorls of leaves. We have formerly seen that
