reach the nectar. Hence I have very little doubt, that if the whole
genus of humble-bees became extinct or very rare in England, the
heartsease and red clover would become very rare, or wholly disappear.
The number of humble-bees in any district depends in a great degree on
the number of field-mice, which destroy their combs and nests; and Mr.
H. Newman, who has long attended to the habits of humble-bees, believes
that "more than two thirds of them are thus destroyed all over England."
Now the number of mice is largely dependent, as every one knows, on the
number of cats; and Mr. Newman says, "Near villages and small towns I
have found the nests of humble-bees more numerous than elsewhere, which
I attribute to the number of cats that destroy the mice." Hence it is
quite credible that the presence of a feline animal in large numbers in
a district might determine, through the intervention first of mice and
then of bees, the frequency of certain flowers in that district!

In the case of every species, many different checks, acting at different
periods of life, and during different seasons or years, probably come
into play; some one check or some few being generally the most potent,
but all concurring in determining the average number or even
the existence of the species. In some cases it can be shown that
widely-different checks act on the same species in different districts.
When we look at the plants and bushes clothing an entangled bank, we
are tempted to attribute their proportional numbers and kinds to what we
call chance. But how false a view is this! Every one has heard that when
an American forest is cut down, a very different vegetation springs
up; but it has been observed that the trees now growing on the ancient
Indian mounds, in the Southern United States, display the same beautiful
diversity and proportion of kinds as in the surrounding virgin forests.
What a struggle between the several kinds of trees must here have gone
on during long centuries, each annually scattering its seeds by the
thousand; what war between insect and insect--between insects, snails,
and other animals with birds and beasts of prey--all striving to
increase, and all feeding on each other or on the trees or their seeds
and seedlings, or on the other plants which first clothed the ground and
thus checked the growth of the trees! Throw up a handful of feathers,
and all must fall to the ground according to definite laws; but how
simple is this problem compared to the action and reaction of the
innumerable plants and animals which have determined, in the course of
centuries, the proportional numbers and kinds of trees now growing on
the old Indian ruins!

The dependency of one organic being on another, as of a parasite on its
prey, lies generally between beings remote in the scale of nature. This
is often the case with those which may strictly be said to struggle with
each other for existence, as in the case of locusts and grass-feeding
quadrupeds. But the struggle almost invariably will be most severe
between the individuals of the same species, for they frequent the same
districts, require the same food, and are exposed to the same dangers.
In the case of varieties of the same species, the struggle will
generally be almost equally severe, and we sometimes see the contest
soon decided: for instance, if several varieties of wheat be sown
together, and the mixed seed be resown, some of the varieties which best
suit the soil or climate, or are naturally the most fertile, will beat
the others and so yield more seed, and will consequently in a few years
quite supplant the other varieties. To keep up a mixed stock of even
such extremely close varieties as the variously coloured sweet-peas,
they must be each year harvested separately, and the seed then mixed
in due proportion, otherwise the weaker kinds will steadily decrease in
numbers and disappear. So again with the varieties of sheep: it has
been asserted that certain mountain-varieties will starve out other
mountain-varieties, so that they cannot be kept together. The same
result has followed from keeping together different varieties of the
medicinal leech. It may even be doubted whether the varieties of any
one of our domestic plants or animals have so exactly the same strength,
habits, and constitution, that the original proportions of a mixed stock
could be kept up for half a dozen generations, if they were allowed to
struggle together, like beings in a state of nature, and if the seed or
young were not annually sorted.

As species of the same genus have usually, though by no means
invariably, some similarity in habits and constitution, and always in
structure, the struggle will generally be more severe between species
of the same genus, when they come into competition with each other, than
between species of distinct genera. We see this in the recent extension
over parts of the United States of one species of swallow having
caused the decrease of another species. The recent increase of the
missel-thrush in parts of Scotland has caused the decrease of the
song-thrush. How frequently we hear of one species of rat taking the
place of another species under the most different climates! In Russia
the small Asiatic cockroach has everywhere driven before it its great
congener. One species of charlock will supplant another, and so in
other cases. We can dimly see why the competition should be most severe
between allied forms, which fill nearly the same place in the economy
of nature; but probably in no one case could we precisely say why one
species has been victorious over another in the great battle of life.

A corollary of the highest importance may be deduced from the foregoing
remarks, namely, that the structure of every organic being is related,
in the most essential yet often hidden manner, to that of all other
organic beings, with which it comes into competition for food or
residence, or from which it has to escape, or on which it preys. This
is obvious in the structure of the teeth and talons of the tiger; and in
that of the legs and claws of the parasite which clings to the hair on
the tiger's body. But in the beautifully plumed seed of the dandelion,
and in the flattened and fringed legs of the water-beetle, the relation
seems at first confined to the elements of air and water. Yet the
advantage of plumed seeds no doubt stands in the closest relation to the
land being already thickly clothed by other plants; so that the
seeds may be widely distributed and fall on unoccupied ground. In the
water-beetle, the structure of its legs, so well adapted for diving,
allows it to compete with other aquatic insects, to hunt for its own
prey, and to escape serving as prey to other animals.

The store of nutriment laid up within the seeds of many plants seems at
first sight to have no sort of relation to other plants. But from the
strong growth of young plants produced from such seeds (as peas and
beans), when sown in the midst of long grass, I suspect that the chief
use of the nutriment in the seed is to favour the growth of the young
seedling, whilst struggling with other plants growing vigorously all
around.

Look at a plant in the midst of its range, why does it not double or
quadruple its numbers? We know that it can perfectly well withstand a
little more heat or cold, dampness or dryness, for elsewhere it ranges
into slightly hotter or colder, damper or drier districts. In this case
we can clearly see that if we wished in imagination to give the plant
the power of increasing in number, we should have to give it some
advantage over its competitors, or over the animals which preyed on it.
On the confines of its geographical range, a change of constitution with
respect to climate would clearly be an advantage to our plant; but we
have reason to believe that only a few plants or animals range so far,
that they are destroyed by the rigour of the climate alone. Not until
we reach the extreme confines of life, in the arctic regions or on the
borders of an utter desert, will competition cease. The land may be
extremely cold or dry, yet there will be competition between some few
species, or between the individuals of the same species, for the warmest
or dampest spots.

Hence, also, we can see that when a plant or animal is placed in a new
country amongst new competitors, though the climate may be exactly
the same as in its former home, yet the conditions of its life will
generally be changed in an essential manner. If we wished to increase
its average numbers in its new home, we should have to modify it in a
different way to what we should have done in its native country; for
we should have to give it some advantage over a different set of
competitors or enemies.

It is good thus to try in our imagination to give any form some
advantage over another. Probably in no single instance should we know
what to do, so as to succeed. It will convince us of our ignorance on
the mutual relations of all organic beings; a conviction as necessary,
as it seems to be difficult to acquire. All that we can do, is to keep
steadily in mind that each organic being is striving to increase at a
geometrical ratio; that each at some period of its life, during some
season of the year, during each generation or at intervals, has to
struggle for life, and to suffer great destruction. When we reflect on
this struggle, we may console ourselves with the full belief, that the
war of nature is not incessant, that no fear is felt, that death is
generally prompt, and that the vigorous, the healthy, and the happy
survive and multiply.
