useful only in rather a forced sense. But by far the most important
consideration is that the chief part of the organisation of every
being is simply due to inheritance; and consequently, though each being
assuredly is well fitted for its place in nature, many structures now
have no direct relation to the habits of life of each species. Thus, we
can hardly believe that the webbed feet of the upland goose or of the
frigate-bird are of special use to these birds; we cannot believe that
the same bones in the arm of the monkey, in the fore leg of the horse,
in the wing of the bat, and in the flipper of the seal, are of special
use to these animals. We may safely attribute these structures to
inheritance. But to the progenitor of the upland goose and of the
frigate-bird, webbed feet no doubt were as useful as they now are to the
most aquatic of existing birds. So we may believe that the progenitor of
the seal had not a flipper, but a foot with five toes fitted for walking
or grasping; and we may further venture to believe that the several
bones in the limbs of the monkey, horse, and bat, which have been
inherited from a common progenitor, were formerly of more special use to
that progenitor, or its progenitors, than they now are to these animals
having such widely diversified habits. Therefore we may infer that
these several bones might have been acquired through natural selection,
subjected formerly, as now, to the several laws of inheritance,
reversion, correlation of growth, etc. Hence every detail of structure
in every living creature (making some little allowance for the direct
action of physical conditions) may be viewed, either as having been of
special use to some ancestral form, or as being now of special use to
the descendants of this form--either directly, or indirectly through the
complex laws of growth.

Natural selection cannot possibly produce any modification in any one
species exclusively for the good of another species; though throughout
nature one species incessantly takes advantage of, and profits by, the
structure of another. But natural selection can and does often produce
structures for the direct injury of other species, as we see in the fang
of the adder, and in the ovipositor of the ichneumon, by which its eggs
are deposited in the living bodies of other insects. If it could be
proved that any part of the structure of any one species had been
formed for the exclusive good of another species, it would annihilate my
theory, for such could not have been produced through natural selection.
Although many statements may be found in works on natural history to
this effect, I cannot find even one which seems to me of any weight. It
is admitted that the rattlesnake has a poison-fang for its own defence
and for the destruction of its prey; but some authors suppose that at
the same time this snake is furnished with a rattle for its own injury,
namely, to warn its prey to escape. I would almost as soon believe that
the cat curls the end of its tail when preparing to spring, in order to
warn the doomed mouse. But I have not space here to enter on this and
other such cases.

Natural selection will never produce in a being anything injurious to
itself, for natural selection acts solely by and for the good of each.
No organ will be formed, as Paley has remarked, for the purpose of
causing pain or for doing an injury to its possessor. If a fair balance
be struck between the good and evil caused by each part, each will be
found on the whole advantageous. After the lapse of time, under changing
conditions of life, if any part comes to be injurious, it will be
modified; or if it be not so, the being will become extinct, as myriads
have become extinct.

Natural selection tends only to make each organic being as perfect as,
or slightly more perfect than, the other inhabitants of the same country
with which it has to struggle for existence. And we see that this is the
degree of perfection attained under nature. The endemic productions of
New Zealand, for instance, are perfect one compared with another; but
they are now rapidly yielding before the advancing legions of plants
and animals introduced from Europe. Natural selection will not produce
absolute perfection, nor do we always meet, as far as we can judge, with
this high standard under nature. The correction for the aberration of
light is said, on high authority, not to be perfect even in that most
perfect organ, the eye. If our reason leads us to admire with enthusiasm
a multitude of inimitable contrivances in nature, this same reason tells
us, though we may easily err on both sides, that some other contrivances
are less perfect. Can we consider the sting of the wasp or of the bee
as perfect, which, when used against many attacking animals, cannot be
withdrawn, owing to the backward serratures, and so inevitably causes
the death of the insect by tearing out its viscera?

If we look at the sting of the bee, as having originally existed in a
remote progenitor as a boring and serrated instrument, like that in so
many members of the same great order, and which has been modified
but not perfected for its present purpose, with the poison originally
adapted to cause galls subsequently intensified, we can perhaps
understand how it is that the use of the sting should so often cause the
insect's own death: for if on the whole the power of stinging be
useful to the community, it will fulfil all the requirements of natural
selection, though it may cause the death of some few members. If we
admire the truly wonderful power of scent by which the males of many
insects find their females, can we admire the production for this
single purpose of thousands of drones, which are utterly useless to the
community for any other end, and which are ultimately slaughtered by
their industrious and sterile sisters? It may be difficult, but we ought
to admire the savage instinctive hatred of the queen-bee, which urges
her instantly to destroy the young queens her daughters as soon as born,
or to perish herself in the combat; for undoubtedly this is for the
good of the community; and maternal love or maternal hatred, though
the latter fortunately is most rare, is all the same to the inexorable
principle of natural selection. If we admire the several ingenious
contrivances, by which the flowers of the orchis and of many other
plants are fertilised through insect agency, can we consider as equally
perfect the elaboration by our fir-trees of dense clouds of pollen, in
order that a few granules may be wafted by a chance breeze on to the
ovules?

SUMMARY OF CHAPTER.

We have in this chapter discussed some of the difficulties and
objections which may be urged against my theory. Many of them are very
grave; but I think that in the discussion light has been thrown on
several facts, which on the theory of independent acts of creation are
utterly obscure. We have seen that species at any one period are not
indefinitely variable, and are not linked together by a multitude of
intermediate gradations, partly because the process of natural selection
will always be very slow, and will act, at any one time, only on a very
few forms; and partly because the very process of natural selection
almost implies the continual supplanting and extinction of preceding
and intermediate gradations. Closely allied species, now living on
a continuous area, must often have been formed when the area was not
continuous, and when the conditions of life did not insensibly graduate
away from one part to another. When two varieties are formed in two
districts of a continuous area, an intermediate variety will often be
formed, fitted for an intermediate zone; but from reasons assigned, the
intermediate variety will usually exist in lesser numbers than the two
forms which it connects; consequently the two latter, during the course
of further modification, from existing in greater numbers, will have a
great advantage over the less numerous intermediate variety, and will
thus generally succeed in supplanting and exterminating it.

We have seen in this chapter how cautious we should be in concluding
that the most different habits of life could not graduate into each
other; that a bat, for instance, could not have been formed by natural
selection from an animal which at first could only glide through the
air.

We have seen that a species may under new conditions of life change its
habits, or have diversified habits, with some habits very unlike those
of its nearest congeners. Hence we can understand, bearing in mind that
each organic being is trying to live wherever it can live, how it has
arisen that there are upland geese with webbed feet, ground woodpeckers,
diving thrushes, and petrels with the habits of auks.

Although the belief that an organ so perfect as the eye could have been
formed by natural selection, is more than enough to stagger any one; yet
in the case of any organ, if we know of a long series of gradations in
complexity, each good for its possessor, then, under changing conditions
of life, there is no logical impossibility in the acquirement of any
conceivable degree of perfection through natural selection. In the cases
in which we know of no intermediate or transitional states, we should
be very cautious in concluding that none could have existed, for the
homologies of many organs and their intermediate states show that
wonderful metamorphoses in function are at least possible. For instance,
a swim-bladder has apparently been converted into an air-breathing lung.
