hermaphrodites, as land-mollusca and earth-worms; but these all pair.
As yet I have not found a single case of a terrestrial animal which
fertilises itself. We can understand this remarkable fact, which
offers so strong a contrast with terrestrial plants, on the view of an
occasional cross being indispensable, by considering the medium in which
terrestrial animals live, and the nature of the fertilising element; for
we know of no means, analogous to the action of insects and of the wind
in the case of plants, by which an occasional cross could be effected
with terrestrial animals without the concurrence of two individuals.
Of aquatic animals, there are many self-fertilising hermaphrodites;
but here currents in the water offer an obvious means for an occasional
cross. And, as in the case of flowers, I have as yet failed, after
consultation with one of the highest authorities, namely, Professor
Huxley, to discover a single case of an hermaphrodite animal with the
organs of reproduction so perfectly enclosed within the body, that
access from without and the occasional influence of a distinct
individual can be shown to be physically impossible. Cirripedes long
appeared to me to present a case of very great difficulty under this
point of view; but I have been enabled, by a fortunate chance, elsewhere
to prove that two individuals, though both are self-fertilising
hermaphrodites, do sometimes cross.

It must have struck most naturalists as a strange anomaly that, in the
case of both animals and plants, species of the same family and even of
the same genus, though agreeing closely with each other in almost their
whole organisation, yet are not rarely, some of them hermaphrodites,
and some of them unisexual. But if, in fact, all hermaphrodites do
occasionally intercross with other individuals, the difference between
hermaphrodites and unisexual species, as far as function is concerned,
becomes very small.

From these several considerations and from the many special facts which
I have collected, but which I am not here able to give, I am strongly
inclined to suspect that, both in the vegetable and animal kingdoms, an
occasional intercross with a distinct individual is a law of nature. I
am well aware that there are, on this view, many cases of difficulty,
some of which I am trying to investigate. Finally then, we may conclude
that in many organic beings, a cross between two individuals is an
obvious necessity for each birth; in many others it occurs perhaps only
at long intervals; but in none, as I suspect, can self-fertilisation go
on for perpetuity.

CIRCUMSTANCES FAVOURABLE TO NATURAL SELECTION.

This is an extremely intricate subject. A large amount of inheritable
and diversified variability is favourable, but I believe mere individual
differences suffice for the work. A large number of individuals, by
giving a better chance for the appearance within any given period
of profitable variations, will compensate for a lesser amount of
variability in each individual, and is, I believe, an extremely
important element of success. Though nature grants vast periods of time
for the work of natural selection, she does not grant an indefinite
period; for as all organic beings are striving, it may be said, to seize
on each place in the economy of nature, if any one species does
not become modified and improved in a corresponding degree with its
competitors, it will soon be exterminated.

In man's methodical selection, a breeder selects for some definite
object, and free intercrossing will wholly stop his work. But when many
men, without intending to alter the breed, have a nearly common standard
of perfection, and all try to get and breed from the best animals,
much improvement and modification surely but slowly follow from this
unconscious process of selection, notwithstanding a large amount of
crossing with inferior animals. Thus it will be in nature; for within a
confined area, with some place in its polity not so perfectly occupied
as might be, natural selection will always tend to preserve all the
individuals varying in the right direction, though in different degrees,
so as better to fill up the unoccupied place. But if the area be large,
its several districts will almost certainly present different conditions
of life; and then if natural selection be modifying and improving a
species in the several districts, there will be intercrossing with the
other individuals of the same species on the confines of each. And in
this case the effects of intercrossing can hardly be counterbalanced by
natural selection always tending to modify all the individuals in each
district in exactly the same manner to the conditions of each; for in a
continuous area, the conditions will generally graduate away insensibly
from one district to another. The intercrossing will most affect those
animals which unite for each birth, which wander much, and which do
not breed at a very quick rate. Hence in animals of this nature, for
instance in birds, varieties will generally be confined to separated
countries; and this I believe to be the case. In hermaphrodite organisms
which cross only occasionally, and likewise in animals which unite for
each birth, but which wander little and which can increase at a very
rapid rate, a new and improved variety might be quickly formed on any
one spot, and might there maintain itself in a body, so that whatever
intercrossing took place would be chiefly between the individuals of
the same new variety. A local variety when once thus formed might
subsequently slowly spread to other districts. On the above principle,
nurserymen always prefer getting seed from a large body of plants of
the same variety, as the chance of intercrossing with other varieties is
thus lessened.

Even in the case of slow-breeding animals, which unite for each birth,
we must not overrate the effects of intercrosses in retarding natural
selection; for I can bring a considerable catalogue of facts, showing
that within the same area, varieties of the same animal can long remain
distinct, from haunting different stations, from breeding at slightly
different seasons, or from varieties of the same kind preferring to pair
together.

Intercrossing plays a very important part in nature in keeping the
individuals of the same species, or of the same variety, true and
uniform in character. It will obviously thus act far more efficiently
with those animals which unite for each birth; but I have already
attempted to show that we have reason to believe that occasional
intercrosses take place with all animals and with all plants. Even if
these take place only at long intervals, I am convinced that the
young thus produced will gain so much in vigour and fertility over the
offspring from long-continued self-fertilisation, that they will have a
better chance of surviving and propagating their kind; and thus, in the
long run, the influence of intercrosses, even at rare intervals, will be
great. If there exist organic beings which never intercross, uniformity
of character can be retained amongst them, as long as their conditions
of life remain the same, only through the principle of inheritance, and
through natural selection destroying any which depart from the
proper type; but if their conditions of life change and they undergo
modification, uniformity of character can be given to their modified
offspring, solely by natural selection preserving the same favourable
variations.

Isolation, also, is an important element in the process of natural
selection. In a confined or isolated area, if not very large, the
organic and inorganic conditions of life will generally be in a great
degree uniform; so that natural selection will tend to modify all the
individuals of a varying species throughout the area in the same
manner in relation to the same conditions. Intercrosses, also, with the
individuals of the same species, which otherwise would have inhabited
the surrounding and differently circumstanced districts, will be
prevented. But isolation probably acts more efficiently in checking the
immigration of better adapted organisms, after any physical change, such
as of climate or elevation of the land, etc.; and thus new places in the
natural economy of the country are left open for the old inhabitants
to struggle for, and become adapted to, through modifications in their
structure and constitution. Lastly, isolation, by checking immigration
and consequently competition, will give time for any new variety to
be slowly improved; and this may sometimes be of importance in the
production of new species. If, however, an isolated area be very small,
either from being surrounded by barriers, or from having very peculiar
physical conditions, the total number of the individuals supported on it
will necessarily be very small; and fewness of individuals will greatly
retard the production of new species through natural selection, by
decreasing the chance of the appearance of favourable variations.

If we turn to nature to test the truth of these remarks, and look at
any small isolated area, such as an oceanic island, although the total
number of the species inhabiting it, will be found to be small, as we
shall see in our chapter on geographical distribution; yet of these
species a very large proportion are endemic,--that is, have been
produced there, and nowhere else. Hence an oceanic island at first sight
seems to have been highly favourable for the production of new species.
