parent-species. This point, if it could be cleared up, would be
interesting; if, for instance, it could be shown that the greyhound,
bloodhound, terrier, spaniel, and bull-dog, which we all know propagate
their kind so truly, were the offspring of any single species, then such
facts would have great weight in making us doubt about the immutability
of the many very closely allied and natural species--for instance, of
the many foxes--inhabiting different quarters of the world. I do not
believe, as we shall presently see, that all our dogs have descended
from any one wild species; but, in the case of some other domestic
races, there is presumptive, or even strong, evidence in favour of this
view.

It has often been assumed that man has chosen for domestication animals
and plants having an extraordinary inherent tendency to vary, and
likewise to withstand diverse climates. I do not dispute that these
capacities have added largely to the value of most of our domesticated
productions; but how could a savage possibly know, when he first tamed
an animal, whether it would vary in succeeding generations, and whether
it would endure other climates? Has the little variability of the ass or
guinea-fowl, or the small power of endurance of warmth by the rein-deer,
or of cold by the common camel, prevented their domestication? I
cannot doubt that if other animals and plants, equal in number to our
domesticated productions, and belonging to equally diverse classes and
countries, were taken from a state of nature, and could be made to breed
for an equal number of generations under domestication, they would
vary on an average as largely as the parent species of our existing
domesticated productions have varied.

In the case of most of our anciently domesticated animals and plants, I
do not think it is possible to come to any definite conclusion, whether
they have descended from one or several species. The argument mainly
relied on by those who believe in the multiple origin of our domestic
animals is, that we find in the most ancient records, more especially on
the monuments of Egypt, much diversity in the breeds; and that some of
the breeds closely resemble, perhaps are identical with, those still
existing. Even if this latter fact were found more strictly and
generally true than seems to me to be the case, what does it show, but
that some of our breeds originated there, four or five thousand years
ago? But Mr. Horner's researches have rendered it in some degree
probable that man sufficiently civilized to have manufactured pottery
existed in the valley of the Nile thirteen or fourteen thousand years
ago; and who will pretend to say how long before these ancient periods,
savages, like those of Tierra del Fuego or Australia, who possess a
semi-domestic dog, may not have existed in Egypt?

The whole subject must, I think, remain vague; nevertheless, I may,
without here entering on any details, state that, from geographical and
other considerations, I think it highly probable that our domestic dogs
have descended from several wild species. In regard to sheep and goats
I can form no opinion. I should think, from facts communicated to me by
Mr. Blyth, on the habits, voice, and constitution, etc., of the humped
Indian cattle, that these had descended from a different aboriginal
stock from our European cattle; and several competent judges believe
that these latter have had more than one wild parent. With respect to
horses, from reasons which I cannot give here, I am doubtfully inclined
to believe, in opposition to several authors, that all the races have
descended from one wild stock. Mr. Blyth, whose opinion, from his large
and varied stores of knowledge, I should value more than that of almost
any one, thinks that all the breeds of poultry have proceeded from
the common wild Indian fowl (Gallus bankiva). In regard to ducks and
rabbits, the breeds of which differ considerably from each other in
structure, I do not doubt that they all have descended from the common
wild duck and rabbit.

The doctrine of the origin of our several domestic races from several
aboriginal stocks, has been carried to an absurd extreme by some
authors. They believe that every race which breeds true, let the
distinctive characters be ever so slight, has had its wild prototype.
At this rate there must have existed at least a score of species of wild
cattle, as many sheep, and several goats in Europe alone, and several
even within Great Britain. One author believes that there formerly
existed in Great Britain eleven wild species of sheep peculiar to it!
When we bear in mind that Britain has now hardly one peculiar mammal,
and France but few distinct from those of Germany and conversely, and
so with Hungary, Spain, etc., but that each of these kingdoms possesses
several peculiar breeds of cattle, sheep, etc., we must admit that many
domestic breeds have originated in Europe; for whence could they have
been derived, as these several countries do not possess a number of
peculiar species as distinct parent-stocks? So it is in India. Even in
the case of the domestic dogs of the whole world, which I fully admit
have probably descended from several wild species, I cannot doubt that
there has been an immense amount of inherited variation. Who can believe
that animals closely resembling the Italian greyhound, the bloodhound,
the bull-dog, or Blenheim spaniel, etc.--so unlike all wild
Canidae--ever existed freely in a state of nature? It has often been
loosely said that all our races of dogs have been produced by the
crossing of a few aboriginal species; but by crossing we can get only
forms in some degree intermediate between their parents; and if we
account for our several domestic races by this process, we must
admit the former existence of the most extreme forms, as the Italian
greyhound, bloodhound, bull-dog, etc., in the wild state. Moreover,
the possibility of making distinct races by crossing has been greatly
exaggerated. There can be no doubt that a race may be modified
by occasional crosses, if aided by the careful selection of those
individual mongrels, which present any desired character; but that
a race could be obtained nearly intermediate between two extremely
different races or species, I can hardly believe. Sir J. Sebright
expressly experimentised for this object, and failed. The offspring from
the first cross between two pure breeds is tolerably and sometimes (as I
have found with pigeons) extremely uniform, and everything seems simple
enough; but when these mongrels are crossed one with another for several
generations, hardly two of them will be alike, and then the extreme
difficulty, or rather utter hopelessness, of the task becomes apparent.
Certainly, a breed intermediate between TWO VERY DISTINCT breeds could
not be got without extreme care and long-continued selection; nor can
I find a single case on record of a permanent race having been thus
formed.

ON THE BREEDS OF THE DOMESTIC PIGEON.

Believing that it is always best to study some special group, I have,
after deliberation, taken up domestic pigeons. I have kept every breed
which I could purchase or obtain, and have been most kindly favoured
with skins from several quarters of the world, more especially by the
Honourable W. Elliot from India, and by the Honourable C. Murray from
Persia. Many treatises in different languages have been published on
pigeons, and some of them are very important, as being of considerable
antiquity. I have associated with several eminent fanciers, and have
been permitted to join two of the London Pigeon Clubs. The diversity of
the breeds is something astonishing. Compare the English carrier and the
short-faced tumbler, and see the wonderful difference in their beaks,
entailing corresponding differences in their skulls. The carrier,
more especially the male bird, is also remarkable from the wonderful
development of the carunculated skin about the head, and this is
accompanied by greatly elongated eyelids, very large external orifices
to the nostrils, and a wide gape of mouth. The short-faced tumbler has a
beak in outline almost like that of a finch; and the common tumbler has
the singular and strictly inherited habit of flying at a great height in
a compact flock, and tumbling in the air head over heels. The runt is a
bird of great size, with long, massive beak and large feet; some of the
sub-breeds of runts have very long necks, others very long wings and
tails, others singularly short tails. The barb is allied to the carrier,
but, instead of a very long beak, has a very short and very broad
one. The pouter has a much elongated body, wings, and legs; and its
enormously developed crop, which it glories in inflating, may well
excite astonishment and even laughter. The turbit has a very short and
conical beak, with a line of reversed feathers down the breast; and it
has the habit of continually expanding slightly the upper part of the
oesophagus. The Jacobin has the feathers so much reversed along the back
of the neck that they form a hood, and it has, proportionally to its
size, much elongated wing and tail feathers. The trumpeter and laugher,
as their names express, utter a very different coo from the other
breeds. The fantail has thirty or even forty tail-feathers, instead of
twelve or fourteen, the normal number in all members of the great pigeon
family; and these feathers are kept expanded, and are carried so erect
that in good birds the head and tail touch; the oil-gland is quite
aborted. Several other less distinct breeds might have been specified.

In the skeletons of the several breeds, the development of the bones
of the face in length and breadth and curvature differs enormously. The
