to selection not having been brought into play: in cats, from the
difficulty in pairing them; in donkeys, from only a few being kept by
poor people, and little attention paid to their breeding; in peacocks,
from not being very easily reared and a large stock not kept; in geese,
from being valuable only for two purposes, food and feathers, and more
especially from no pleasure having been felt in the display of distinct
breeds.

To sum up on the origin of our Domestic Races of animals and plants.
I believe that the conditions of life, from their action on the
reproductive system, are so far of the highest importance as causing
variability. I do not believe that variability is an inherent and
necessary contingency, under all circumstances, with all organic beings,
as some authors have thought. The effects of variability are modified by
various degrees of inheritance and of reversion. Variability is governed
by many unknown laws, more especially by that of correlation of growth.
Something may be attributed to the direct action of the conditions of
life. Something must be attributed to use and disuse. The final result
is thus rendered infinitely complex. In some cases, I do not doubt
that the intercrossing of species, aboriginally distinct, has played an
important part in the origin of our domestic productions. When in
any country several domestic breeds have once been established, their
occasional intercrossing, with the aid of selection, has, no doubt,
largely aided in the formation of new sub-breeds; but the importance of
the crossing of varieties has, I believe, been greatly exaggerated, both
in regard to animals and to those plants which are propagated by seed.
In plants which are temporarily propagated by cuttings, buds, etc., the
importance of the crossing both of distinct species and of varieties
is immense; for the cultivator here quite disregards the extreme
variability both of hybrids and mongrels, and the frequent sterility of
hybrids; but the cases of plants not propagated by seed are of little
importance to us, for their endurance is only temporary. Over all
these causes of Change I am convinced that the accumulative action
of Selection, whether applied methodically and more quickly, or
unconsciously and more slowly, but more efficiently, is by far the
predominant Power.




. VARIATION UNDER NATURE.

Variability. Individual differences. Doubtful species. Wide ranging,
much diffused, and common species vary most. Species of the larger
genera in any country vary more than the species of the smaller genera.
Many of the species of the larger genera resemble varieties in being
very closely, but unequally, related to each other, and in having
restricted ranges.

Before applying the principles arrived at in the last chapter to organic
beings in a state of nature, we must briefly discuss whether these
latter are subject to any variation. To treat this subject at all
properly, a long catalogue of dry facts should be given; but these I
shall reserve for my future work. Nor shall I here discuss the various
definitions which have been given of the term species. No one definition
has as yet satisfied all naturalists; yet every naturalist knows vaguely
what he means when he speaks of a species. Generally the term includes
the unknown element of a distinct act of creation. The term "variety"
is almost equally difficult to define; but here community of descent is
almost universally implied, though it can rarely be proved. We have also
what are called monstrosities; but they graduate into varieties. By a
monstrosity I presume is meant some considerable deviation of structure
in one part, either injurious to or not useful to the species, and
not generally propagated. Some authors use the term "variation" in a
technical sense, as implying a modification directly due to the physical
conditions of life; and "variations" in this sense are supposed not to
be inherited: but who can say that the dwarfed condition of shells in
the brackish waters of the Baltic, or dwarfed plants on Alpine summits,
or the thicker fur of an animal from far northwards, would not in some
cases be inherited for at least some few generations? and in this case I
presume that the form would be called a variety.

Again, we have many slight differences which may be called individual
differences, such as are known frequently to appear in the offspring
from the same parents, or which may be presumed to have thus arisen,
from being frequently observed in the individuals of the same species
inhabiting the same confined locality. No one supposes that all the
individuals of the same species are cast in the very same mould. These
individual differences are highly important for us, as they afford
materials for natural selection to accumulate, in the same manner as
man can accumulate in any given direction individual differences in his
domesticated productions. These individual differences generally affect
what naturalists consider unimportant parts; but I could show by a long
catalogue of facts, that parts which must be called important, whether
viewed under a physiological or classificatory point of view, sometimes
vary in the individuals of the same species. I am convinced that the
most experienced naturalist would be surprised at the number of the
cases of variability, even in important parts of structure, which he
could collect on good authority, as I have collected, during a course of
years. It should be remembered that systematists are far from pleased at
finding variability in important characters, and that there are not
many men who will laboriously examine internal and important organs, and
compare them in many specimens of the same species. I should never
have expected that the branching of the main nerves close to the great
central ganglion of an insect would have been variable in the same
species; I should have expected that changes of this nature could have
been effected only by slow degrees: yet quite recently Mr. Lubbock has
shown a degree of variability in these main nerves in Coccus, which may
almost be compared to the irregular branching of the stem of a tree.
This philosophical naturalist, I may add, has also quite recently shown
that the muscles in the larvae of certain insects are very far from
uniform. Authors sometimes argue in a circle when they state that
important organs never vary; for these same authors practically rank
that character as important (as some few naturalists have honestly
confessed) which does not vary; and, under this point of view, no
instance of an important part varying will ever be found: but under any
other point of view many instances assuredly can be given.

There is one point connected with individual differences, which seems
to me extremely perplexing: I refer to those genera which have sometimes
been called "protean" or "polymorphic," in which the species present
an inordinate amount of variation; and hardly two naturalists can agree
which forms to rank as species and which as varieties. We may instance
Rubus, Rosa, and Hieracium amongst plants, several genera of insects,
and several genera of Brachiopod shells. In most polymorphic genera
some of the species have fixed and definite characters. Genera which
are polymorphic in one country seem to be, with some few exceptions,
polymorphic in other countries, and likewise, judging from Brachiopod
shells, at former periods of time. These facts seem to be very
perplexing, for they seem to show that this kind of variability is
independent of the conditions of life. I am inclined to suspect that we
see in these polymorphic genera variations in points of structure which
are of no service or disservice to the species, and which consequently
have not been seized on and rendered definite by natural selection, as
hereafter will be explained.

Those forms which possess in some considerable degree the character of
species, but which are so closely similar to some other forms, or are so
closely linked to them by intermediate gradations, that naturalists do
not like to rank them as distinct species, are in several respects the
most important for us. We have every reason to believe that many of
these doubtful and closely-allied forms have permanently retained their
characters in their own country for a long time; for as long, as far as
we know, as have good and true species. Practically, when a naturalist
can unite two forms together by others having intermediate characters,
he treats the one as a variety of the other, ranking the most common,
but sometimes the one first described, as the species, and the other
as the variety. But cases of great difficulty, which I will not here
enumerate, sometimes occur in deciding whether or not to rank one
form as a variety of another, even when they are closely connected by
intermediate links; nor will the commonly-assumed hybrid nature of the
intermediate links always remove the difficulty. In very many cases,
however, one form is ranked as a variety of another, not because the
intermediate links have actually been found, but because analogy leads
the observer to suppose either that they do now somewhere exist, or may
formerly have existed; and here a wide door for the entry of doubt and
conjecture is opened.

Hence, in determining whether a form should be ranked as a species or
a variety, the opinion of naturalists having sound judgment and wide
