homopterous insect as a moth. We see something of the same kind even
in our domestic varieties, as in the thickened stems of the common and
swedish turnip. The resemblance of the greyhound and racehorse is hardly
more fanciful than the analogies which have been drawn by some authors
between very distinct animals. On my view of characters being of real
importance for classification, only in so far as they reveal descent, we
can clearly understand why analogical or adaptive character, although of
the utmost importance to the welfare of the being, are almost valueless
to the systematist. For animals, belonging to two most distinct lines
of descent, may readily become adapted to similar conditions, and thus
assume a close external resemblance; but such resemblances will not
reveal--will rather tend to conceal their blood-relationship to their
proper lines of descent. We can also understand the apparent paradox,
that the very same characters are analogical when one class or order is
compared with another, but give true affinities when the members of the
same class or order are compared one with another: thus the shape of
the body and fin-like limbs are only analogical when whales are compared
with fishes, being adaptations in both classes for swimming through the
water; but the shape of the body and fin-like limbs serve as characters
exhibiting true affinity between the several members of the whale
family; for these cetaceans agree in so many characters, great and
small, that we cannot doubt that they have inherited their general shape
of body and structure of limbs from a common ancestor. So it is with
fishes.

As members of distinct classes have often been adapted by successive
slight modifications to live under nearly similar circumstances,--to
inhabit for instance the three elements of land, air, and water,--we can
perhaps understand how it is that a numerical parallelism has sometimes
been observed between the sub-groups in distinct classes. A naturalist,
struck by a parallelism of this nature in any one class, by arbitrarily
raising or sinking the value of the groups in other classes (and all our
experience shows that this valuation has hitherto been arbitrary), could
easily extend the parallelism over a wide range; and thus the septenary,
quinary, quaternary, and ternary classifications have probably arisen.

As the modified descendants of dominant species, belonging to the larger
genera, tend to inherit the advantages, which made the groups to which
they belong large and their parents dominant, they are almost sure to
spread widely, and to seize on more and more places in the economy
of nature. The larger and more dominant groups thus tend to go on
increasing in size; and they consequently supplant many smaller and
feebler groups. Thus we can account for the fact that all organisms,
recent and extinct, are included under a few great orders, under still
fewer classes, and all in one great natural system. As showing how
few the higher groups are in number, and how widely spread they are
throughout the world, the fact is striking, that the discovery of
Australia has not added a single insect belonging to a new order; and
that in the vegetable kingdom, as I learn from Dr. Hooker, it has added
only two or three orders of small size.

In the chapter on geological succession I attempted to show, on the
principle of each group having generally diverged much in character
during the long-continued process of modification, how it is that the
more ancient forms of life often present characters in some slight
degree intermediate between existing groups. A few old and intermediate
parent-forms having occasionally transmitted to the present day
descendants but little modified, will give to us our so-called osculant
or aberrant groups. The more aberrant any form is, the greater must be
the number of connecting forms which on my theory have been exterminated
and utterly lost. And we have some evidence of aberrant forms having
suffered severely from extinction, for they are generally represented by
extremely few species; and such species as do occur are generally very
distinct from each other, which again implies extinction. The genera
Ornithorhynchus and Lepidosiren, for example, would not have been less
aberrant had each been represented by a dozen species instead of by
a single one; but such richness in species, as I find after some
investigation, does not commonly fall to the lot of aberrant genera. We
can, I think, account for this fact only by looking at aberrant forms
as failing groups conquered by more successful competitors, with a
few members preserved by some unusual coincidence of favourable
circumstances.

Mr. Waterhouse has remarked that, when a member belonging to one group
of animals exhibits an affinity to a quite distinct group, this affinity
in most cases is general and not special: thus, according to Mr.
Waterhouse, of all Rodents, the bizcacha is most nearly related to
Marsupials; but in the points in which it approaches this order, its
relations are general, and not to any one marsupial species more than
to another. As the points of affinity of the bizcacha to Marsupials are
believed to be real and not merely adaptive, they are due on my theory
to inheritance in common. Therefore we must suppose either that all
Rodents, including the bizcacha, branched off from some very ancient
Marsupial, which will have had a character in some degree intermediate
with respect to all existing Marsupials; or that both Rodents and
Marsupials branched off from a common progenitor, and that both groups
have since undergone much modification in divergent directions.
On either view we may suppose that the bizcacha has retained, by
inheritance, more of the character of its ancient progenitor than have
other Rodents; and therefore it will not be specially related to any one
existing Marsupial, but indirectly to all or nearly all Marsupials, from
having partially retained the character of their common progenitor, or
of an early member of the group. On the other hand, of all Marsupials,
as Mr. Waterhouse has remarked, the phascolomys resembles most nearly,
not any one species, but the general order of Rodents. In this case,
however, it may be strongly suspected that the resemblance is only
analogical, owing to the phascolomys having become adapted to habits
like those of a Rodent. The elder De Candolle has made nearly similar
observations on the general nature of the affinities of distinct orders
of plants.

On the principle of the multiplication and gradual divergence in
character of the species descended from a common parent, together with
their retention by inheritance of some characters in common, we can
understand the excessively complex and radiating affinities by which all
the members of the same family or higher group are connected together.
For the common parent of a whole family of species, now broken up by
extinction into distinct groups and sub-groups, will have transmitted
some of its characters, modified in various ways and degrees, to all;
and the several species will consequently be related to each other by
circuitous lines of affinity of various lengths (as may be seen in the
diagram so often referred to), mounting up through many predecessors.
As it is difficult to show the blood-relationship between the
numerous kindred of any ancient and noble family, even by the aid of a
genealogical tree, and almost impossible to do this without this aid,
we can understand the extraordinary difficulty which naturalists have
experienced in describing, without the aid of a diagram, the various
affinities which they perceive between the many living and extinct
members of the same great natural class.

Extinction, as we have seen in the fourth chapter, has played an
important part in defining and widening the intervals between the
several groups in each class. We may thus account even for the
distinctness of whole classes from each other--for instance, of birds
from all other vertebrate animals--by the belief that many ancient forms
of life have been utterly lost, through which the early progenitors of
birds were formerly connected with the early progenitors of the other
vertebrate classes. There has been less entire extinction of the forms
of life which once connected fishes with batrachians. There has been
still less in some other classes, as in that of the Crustacea, for here
the most wonderfully diverse forms are still tied together by a long,
but broken, chain of affinities. Extinction has only separated groups:
it has by no means made them; for if every form which has ever lived
on this earth were suddenly to reappear, though it would be
quite impossible to give definitions by which each group could be
distinguished from other groups, as all would blend together by steps
as fine as those between the finest existing varieties, nevertheless
a natural classification, or at least a natural arrangement, would be
possible. We shall see this by turning to the diagram: the letters, A
to L, may represent eleven Silurian genera, some of which have produced
large groups of modified descendants. Every intermediate link between
these eleven genera and their primordial parent, and every intermediate
link in each branch and sub-branch of their descendants, may be supposed
to be still alive; and the links to be as fine as those between the
finest varieties. In this case it would be quite impossible to give any
definition by which the several members of the several groups could be
distinguished from their more immediate parents; or these parents from
their ancient and unknown progenitor. Yet the natural arrangement in the
diagram would still hold good; and, on the principle of inheritance, all
the forms descended from A, or from I, would have something in common.
