But we may thus greatly deceive ourselves, for to ascertain whether a
small isolated area, or a large open area like a continent, has been
most favourable for the production of new organic forms, we ought to
make the comparison within equal times; and this we are incapable of
doing.

Although I do not doubt that isolation is of considerable importance
in the production of new species, on the whole I am inclined to believe
that largeness of area is of more importance, more especially in the
production of species, which will prove capable of enduring for a long
period, and of spreading widely. Throughout a great and open area, not
only will there be a better chance of favourable variations arising from
the large number of individuals of the same species there supported, but
the conditions of life are infinitely complex from the large number
of already existing species; and if some of these many species
become modified and improved, others will have to be improved in a
corresponding degree or they will be exterminated. Each new form, also,
as soon as it has been much improved, will be able to spread over the
open and continuous area, and will thus come into competition with many
others. Hence more new places will be formed, and the competition to
fill them will be more severe, on a large than on a small and
isolated area. Moreover, great areas, though now continuous, owing to
oscillations of level, will often have recently existed in a broken
condition, so that the good effects of isolation will generally, to a
certain extent, have concurred. Finally, I conclude that, although small
isolated areas probably have been in some respects highly favourable for
the production of new species, yet that the course of modification
will generally have been more rapid on large areas; and what is more
important, that the new forms produced on large areas, which already
have been victorious over many competitors, will be those that will
spread most widely, will give rise to most new varieties and species,
and will thus play an important part in the changing history of the
organic world.

We can, perhaps, on these views, understand some facts which will
be again alluded to in our chapter on geographical distribution; for
instance, that the productions of the smaller continent of Australia
have formerly yielded, and apparently are now yielding, before those
of the larger Europaeo-Asiatic area. Thus, also, it is that continental
productions have everywhere become so largely naturalised on islands. On
a small island, the race for life will have been less severe, and there
will have been less modification and less extermination. Hence, perhaps,
it comes that the flora of Madeira, according to Oswald Heer, resembles
the extinct tertiary flora of Europe. All fresh-water basins, taken
together, make a small area compared with that of the sea or of the
land; and, consequently, the competition between fresh-water productions
will have been less severe than elsewhere; new forms will have been
more slowly formed, and old forms more slowly exterminated. And it is
in fresh water that we find seven genera of Ganoid fishes, remnants of
a once preponderant order: and in fresh water we find some of the most
anomalous forms now known in the world, as the Ornithorhynchus and
Lepidosiren, which, like fossils, connect to a certain extent orders now
widely separated in the natural scale. These anomalous forms may almost
be called living fossils; they have endured to the present day, from
having inhabited a confined area, and from having thus been exposed to
less severe competition.

To sum up the circumstances favourable and unfavourable to natural
selection, as far as the extreme intricacy of the subject permits. I
conclude, looking to the future, that for terrestrial productions a
large continental area, which will probably undergo many oscillations
of level, and which consequently will exist for long periods in a broken
condition, will be the most favourable for the production of many new
forms of life, likely to endure long and to spread widely. For the area
will first have existed as a continent, and the inhabitants, at this
period numerous in individuals and kinds, will have been subjected
to very severe competition. When converted by subsidence into large
separate islands, there will still exist many individuals of the same
species on each island: intercrossing on the confines of the range of
each species will thus be checked: after physical changes of any kind,
immigration will be prevented, so that new places in the polity of
each island will have to be filled up by modifications of the old
inhabitants; and time will be allowed for the varieties in each to
become well modified and perfected. When, by renewed elevation, the
islands shall be re-converted into a continental area, there will again
be severe competition: the most favoured or improved varieties will be
enabled to spread: there will be much extinction of the less improved
forms, and the relative proportional numbers of the various inhabitants
of the renewed continent will again be changed; and again there will
be a fair field for natural selection to improve still further the
inhabitants, and thus produce new species.

That natural selection will always act with extreme slowness, I fully
admit. Its action depends on there being places in the polity of nature,
which can be better occupied by some of the inhabitants of the country
undergoing modification of some kind. The existence of such places will
often depend on physical changes, which are generally very slow, and
on the immigration of better adapted forms having been checked. But the
action of natural selection will probably still oftener depend on some
of the inhabitants becoming slowly modified; the mutual relations of
many of the other inhabitants being thus disturbed. Nothing can be
effected, unless favourable variations occur, and variation itself is
apparently always a very slow process. The process will often be greatly
retarded by free intercrossing. Many will exclaim that these several
causes are amply sufficient wholly to stop the action of natural
selection. I do not believe so. On the other hand, I do believe that
natural selection will always act very slowly, often only at long
intervals of time, and generally on only a very few of the inhabitants
of the same region at the same time. I further believe, that this very
slow, intermittent action of natural selection accords perfectly
well with what geology tells us of the rate and manner at which the
inhabitants of this world have changed.

Slow though the process of selection may be, if feeble man can do much
by his powers of artificial selection, I can see no limit to the amount
of change, to the beauty and infinite complexity of the coadaptations
between all organic beings, one with another and with their physical
conditions of life, which may be effected in the long course of time by
nature's power of selection.

EXTINCTION.

This subject will be more fully discussed in our chapter on Geology; but
it must be here alluded to from being intimately connected with natural
selection. Natural selection acts solely through the preservation of
variations in some way advantageous, which consequently endure. But as
from the high geometrical powers of increase of all organic beings, each
area is already fully stocked with inhabitants, it follows that as
each selected and favoured form increases in number, so will the less
favoured forms decrease and become rare. Rarity, as geology tells us, is
the precursor to extinction. We can, also, see that any form represented
by few individuals will, during fluctuations in the seasons or in the
number of its enemies, run a good chance of utter extinction. But we may
go further than this; for as new forms are continually and slowly being
produced, unless we believe that the number of specific forms goes on
perpetually and almost indefinitely increasing, numbers inevitably must
become extinct. That the number of specific forms has not indefinitely
increased, geology shows us plainly; and indeed we can see reason why
they should not have thus increased, for the number of places in the
polity of nature is not indefinitely great,--not that we have any means
of knowing that any one region has as yet got its maximum of species.
Probably no region is as yet fully stocked, for at the Cape of Good
Hope, where more species of plants are crowded together than in any
other quarter of the world, some foreign plants have become naturalised,
without causing, as far as we know, the extinction of any natives.

Furthermore, the species which are most numerous in individuals will
have the best chance of producing within any given period favourable
variations. We have evidence of this, in the facts given in the second
chapter, showing that it is the common species which afford the greatest
number of recorded varieties, or incipient species. Hence, rare species
will be less quickly modified or improved within any given period, and
they will consequently be beaten in the race for life by the modified
descendants of the commoner species.

From these several considerations I think it inevitably follows, that as
new species in the course of time are formed through natural selection,
others will become rarer and rarer, and finally extinct. The forms which
stand in closest competition with those undergoing modification and
improvement, will naturally suffer most. And we have seen in the
