nutritious foliage and a copious supply of oil-bearing seeds. When the
seeds in our fruits become atrophied, the fruit itself gains largely in
size and quality. In our poultry, a large tuft of feathers on the head
is generally accompanied by a diminished comb, and a large beard by
diminished wattles. With species in a state of nature it can hardly
be maintained that the law is of universal application; but many good
observers, more especially botanists, believe in its truth. I will
not, however, here give any instances, for I see hardly any way of
distinguishing between the effects, on the one hand, of a part being
largely developed through natural selection and another and adjoining
part being reduced by this same process or by disuse, and, on the other
hand, the actual withdrawal of nutriment from one part owing to the
excess of growth in another and adjoining part.

I suspect, also, that some of the cases of compensation which have been
advanced, and likewise some other facts, may be merged under a more
general principle, namely, that natural selection is continually
trying to economise in every part of the organisation. If under changed
conditions of life a structure before useful becomes less useful, any
diminution, however slight, in its development, will be seized on by
natural selection, for it will profit the individual not to have its
nutriment wasted in building up an useless structure. I can thus
only understand a fact with which I was much struck when examining
cirripedes, and of which many other instances could be given: namely,
that when a cirripede is parasitic within another and is thus protected,
it loses more or less completely its own shell or carapace. This is the
case with the male Ibla, and in a truly extraordinary manner with the
Proteolepas: for the carapace in all other cirripedes consists of
the three highly-important anterior segments of the head enormously
developed, and furnished with great nerves and muscles; but in the
parasitic and protected Proteolepas, the whole anterior part of the
head is reduced to the merest rudiment attached to the bases of the
prehensile antennae. Now the saving of a large and complex structure,
when rendered superfluous by the parasitic habits of the Proteolepas,
though effected by slow steps, would be a decided advantage to each
successive individual of the species; for in the struggle for life to
which every animal is exposed, each individual Proteolepas would have
a better chance of supporting itself, by less nutriment being wasted in
developing a structure now become useless.

Thus, as I believe, natural selection will always succeed in the long
run in reducing and saving every part of the organisation, as soon as it
is rendered superfluous, without by any means causing some other part
to be largely developed in a corresponding degree. And, conversely, that
natural selection may perfectly well succeed in largely developing any
organ, without requiring as a necessary compensation the reduction of
some adjoining part.

It seems to be a rule, as remarked by Is. Geoffroy St. Hilaire, both in
varieties and in species, that when any part or organ is repeated many
times in the structure of the same individual (as the vertebrae in
snakes, and the stamens in polyandrous flowers) the number is variable;
whereas the number of the same part or organ, when it occurs in lesser
numbers, is constant. The same author and some botanists have further
remarked that multiple parts are also very liable to variation in
structure. Inasmuch as this "vegetative repetition," to use Professor
Owen's expression, seems to be a sign of low organisation; the foregoing
remark seems connected with the very general opinion of naturalists,
that beings low in the scale of nature are more variable than those
which are higher. I presume that lowness in this case means that the
several parts of the organisation have been but little specialised
for particular functions; and as long as the same part has to perform
diversified work, we can perhaps see why it should remain variable, that
is, why natural selection should have preserved or rejected each little
deviation of form less carefully than when the part has to serve for one
special purpose alone. In the same way that a knife which has to cut
all sorts of things may be of almost any shape; whilst a tool for
some particular object had better be of some particular shape. Natural
selection, it should never be forgotten, can act on each part of each
being, solely through and for its advantage.

Rudimentary parts, it has been stated by some authors, and I believe
with truth, are apt to be highly variable. We shall have to recur to the
general subject of rudimentary and aborted organs; and I will here only
add that their variability seems to be owing to their uselessness, and
therefore to natural selection having no power to check deviations in
their structure. Thus rudimentary parts are left to the free play of the
various laws of growth, to the effects of long-continued disuse, and to
the tendency to reversion.

A PART DEVELOPED IN ANY SPECIES IN AN EXTRAORDINARY DEGREE OR MANNER,
IN COMPARISON WITH THE SAME PART IN ALLIED SPECIES, TENDS TO BE HIGHLY
VARIABLE.

Several years ago I was much struck with a remark, nearly to the above
effect, published by Mr. Waterhouse. I infer also from an observation
made by Professor Owen, with respect to the length of the arms of the
ourang-outang, that he has come to a nearly similar conclusion. It is
hopeless to attempt to convince any one of the truth of this proposition
without giving the long array of facts which I have collected, and which
cannot possibly be here introduced. I can only state my conviction that
it is a rule of high generality. I am aware of several causes of
error, but I hope that I have made due allowance for them. It should
be understood that the rule by no means applies to any part, however
unusually developed, unless it be unusually developed in comparison with
the same part in closely allied species. Thus, the bat's wing is a most
abnormal structure in the class mammalia; but the rule would not here
apply, because there is a whole group of bats having wings; it would
apply only if some one species of bat had its wings developed in some
remarkable manner in comparison with the other species of the same
genus. The rule applies very strongly in the case of secondary sexual
characters, when displayed in any unusual manner. The term, secondary
sexual characters, used by Hunter, applies to characters which are
attached to one sex, but are not directly connected with the act of
reproduction. The rule applies to males and females; but as females more
rarely offer remarkable secondary sexual characters, it applies more
rarely to them. The rule being so plainly applicable in the case of
secondary sexual characters, may be due to the great variability of
these characters, whether or not displayed in any unusual manner--of
which fact I think there can be little doubt. But that our rule is not
confined to secondary sexual characters is clearly shown in the case
of hermaphrodite cirripedes; and I may here add, that I particularly
attended to Mr. Waterhouse's remark, whilst investigating this Order,
and I am fully convinced that the rule almost invariably holds good
with cirripedes. I shall, in my future work, give a list of the more
remarkable cases; I will here only briefly give one, as it illustrates
the rule in its largest application. The opercular valves of sessile
cirripedes (rock barnacles) are, in every sense of the word, very
important structures, and they differ extremely little even in different
genera; but in the several species of one genus, Pyrgoma, these valves
present a marvellous amount of diversification: the homologous valves
in the different species being sometimes wholly unlike in shape; and the
amount of variation in the individuals of several of the species is so
great, that it is no exaggeration to state that the varieties differ
more from each other in the characters of these important valves than do
other species of distinct genera.

As birds within the same country vary in a remarkably small degree, I
have particularly attended to them, and the rule seems to me certainly
to hold good in this class. I cannot make out that it applies to plants,
and this would seriously have shaken my belief in its truth, had not the
great variability in plants made it particularly difficult to compare
their relative degrees of variability.

When we see any part or organ developed in a remarkable degree or manner
in any species, the fair presumption is that it is of high importance to
that species; nevertheless the part in this case is eminently liable to
variation. Why should this be so? On the view that each species has been
independently created, with all its parts as we now see them, I can see
no explanation. But on the view that groups of species have descended
from other species, and have been modified through natural selection, I
think we can obtain some light. In our domestic animals, if any part,
or the whole animal, be neglected and no selection be applied, that part
(for instance, the comb in the Dorking fowl) or the whole breed will
cease to have a nearly uniform character. The breed will then be said
to have degenerated. In rudimentary organs, and in those which have
been but little specialised for any particular purpose, and perhaps in
polymorphic groups, we see a nearly parallel natural case; for in such
cases natural selection either has not or cannot come into full play,
and thus the organisation is left in a fluctuating condition. But what
