species, which are already extremely different in character, will
generally tend to produce the greatest number of modified descendants;
for these will have the best chance of filling new and widely different
places in the polity of nature: hence in the diagram I have chosen the
extreme species (A), and the nearly extreme species (I), as those which
have largely varied, and have given rise to new varieties and species.
The other nine species (marked by capital letters) of our original
genus, may for a long period continue transmitting unaltered
descendants; and this is shown in the diagram by the dotted lines not
prolonged far upwards from want of space.

But during the process of modification, represented in the diagram,
another of our principles, namely that of extinction, will have played
an important part. As in each fully stocked country natural selection
necessarily acts by the selected form having some advantage in the
struggle for life over other forms, there will be a constant tendency in
the improved descendants of any one species to supplant and exterminate
in each stage of descent their predecessors and their original parent.
For it should be remembered that the competition will generally be most
severe between those forms which are most nearly related to each other
in habits, constitution, and structure. Hence all the intermediate forms
between the earlier and later states, that is between the less and more
improved state of a species, as well as the original parent-species
itself, will generally tend to become extinct. So it probably will be
with many whole collateral lines of descent, which will be conquered by
later and improved lines of descent. If, however, the modified offspring
of a species get into some distinct country, or become quickly adapted
to some quite new station, in which child and parent do not come into
competition, both may continue to exist.

If then our diagram be assumed to represent a considerable amount of
modification, species (A) and all the earlier varieties will have become
extinct, having been replaced by eight new species (a to m); and (I)
will have been replaced by six (n to z) new species.

But we may go further than this. The original species of our genus were
supposed to resemble each other in unequal degrees, as is so generally
the case in nature; species (A) being more nearly related to B, C, and
D, than to the other species; and species (I) more to G, H, K, L, than
to the others. These two species (A) and (I), were also supposed to be
very common and widely diffused species, so that they must originally
have had some advantage over most of the other species of the
genus. Their modified descendants, fourteen in number at the
fourteen-thousandth generation, will probably have inherited some of
the same advantages: they have also been modified and improved in
a diversified manner at each stage of descent, so as to have become
adapted to many related places in the natural economy of their country.
It seems, therefore, to me extremely probable that they will have taken
the places of, and thus exterminated, not only their parents (A) and
(I), but likewise some of the original species which were most nearly
related to their parents. Hence very few of the original species will
have transmitted offspring to the fourteen-thousandth generation. We may
suppose that only one (F), of the two species which were least closely
related to the other nine original species, has transmitted descendants
to this late stage of descent.

The new species in our diagram descended from the original eleven
species, will now be fifteen in number. Owing to the divergent tendency
of natural selection, the extreme amount of difference in character
between species a and z will be much greater than that between
the most different of the original eleven species. The new species,
moreover, will be allied to each other in a widely different manner. Of
the eight descendants from (A) the three marked a, q, p, will be
nearly related from having recently branched off from a; b and
f, from having diverged at an earlier period from a, will be in some
degree distinct from the three first-named species; and lastly, o,
e, and m, will be nearly related one to the other, but from having
diverged at the first commencement of the process of modification, will
be widely different from the other five species, and may constitute a
sub-genus or even a distinct genus.

The six descendants from (I) will form two sub-genera or even genera.
But as the original species (I) differed largely from (A), standing
nearly at the extreme points of the original genus, the six descendants
from (I) will, owing to inheritance, differ considerably from the eight
descendants from (A); the two groups, moreover, are supposed to have
gone on diverging in different directions. The intermediate species,
also (and this is a very important consideration), which connected the
original species (A) and (I), have all become, excepting (F), extinct,
and have left no descendants. Hence the six new species descended from
(I), and the eight descended from (A), will have to be ranked as very
distinct genera, or even as distinct sub-families.

Thus it is, as I believe, that two or more genera are produced by
descent, with modification, from two or more species of the same genus.
And the two or more parent-species are supposed to have descended from
some one species of an earlier genus. In our diagram, this is indicated
by the broken lines, beneath the capital letters, converging in
sub-branches downwards towards a single point; this point representing a
single species, the supposed single parent of our several new sub-genera
and genera.

It is worth while to reflect for a moment on the character of the new
species F, which is supposed not to have diverged much in character,
but to have retained the form of (F), either unaltered or altered only
in a slight degree. In this case, its affinities to the other fourteen
new species will be of a curious and circuitous nature. Having descended
from a form which stood between the two parent-species (A) and (I),
now supposed to be extinct and unknown, it will be in some degree
intermediate in character between the two groups descended from these
species. But as these two groups have gone on diverging in character
from the type of their parents, the new species (F) will not be
directly intermediate between them, but rather between types of the two
groups; and every naturalist will be able to bring some such case before
his mind.

In the diagram, each horizontal line has hitherto been supposed to
represent a thousand generations, but each may represent a million or
hundred million generations, and likewise a section of the successive
strata of the earth's crust including extinct remains. We shall, when we
come to our chapter on Geology, have to refer again to this subject,
and I think we shall then see that the diagram throws light on the
affinities of extinct beings, which, though generally belonging to the
same orders, or families, or genera, with those now living, yet are
often, in some degree, intermediate in character between existing
groups; and we can understand this fact, for the extinct species lived
at very ancient epochs when the branching lines of descent had diverged
less.

I see no reason to limit the process of modification, as now explained,
to the formation of genera alone. If, in our diagram, we suppose the
amount of change represented by each successive group of diverging
dotted lines to be very great, the forms marked a to p, those marked
b and f, and those marked o to m, will form three very distinct
genera. We shall also have two very distinct genera descended from
(I) and as these latter two genera, both from continued divergence of
character and from inheritance from a different parent, will differ
widely from the three genera descended from (A), the two little groups
of genera will form two distinct families, or even orders, according to
the amount of divergent modification supposed to be represented in the
diagram. And the two new families, or orders, will have descended from
two species of the original genus; and these two species are supposed
to have descended from one species of a still more ancient and unknown
genus.

We have seen that in each country it is the species of the larger genera
which oftenest present varieties or incipient species. This, indeed,
might have been expected; for as natural selection acts through one form
having some advantage over other forms in the struggle for existence,
it will chiefly act on those which already have some advantage; and
the largeness of any group shows that its species have inherited from
a common ancestor some advantage in common. Hence, the struggle for the
production of new and modified descendants, will mainly lie between the
larger groups, which are all trying to increase in number. One large
group will slowly conquer another large group, reduce its numbers, and
thus lessen its chance of further variation and improvement. Within the
same large group, the later and more highly perfected sub-groups, from
branching out and seizing on many new places in the polity of Nature,
will constantly tend to supplant and destroy the earlier and less
improved sub-groups. Small and broken groups and sub-groups will finally
