opposed to the belief of their former continuity with continents. Nor
does their almost universally volcanic composition favour the admission
that they are the wrecks of sunken continents;--if they had originally
existed as mountain-ranges on the land, some at least of the islands
would have been formed, like other mountain-summits, of granite,
metamorphic schists, old fossiliferous or other such rocks, instead of
consisting of mere piles of volcanic matter.

I must now say a few words on what are called accidental means, but
which more properly might be called occasional means of distribution.
I shall here confine myself to plants. In botanical works, this or
that plant is stated to be ill adapted for wide dissemination; but for
transport across the sea, the greater or less facilities may be said to
be almost wholly unknown. Until I tried, with Mr. Berkeley's aid, a
few experiments, it was not even known how far seeds could resist the
injurious action of sea-water. To my surprise I found that out of 
kinds,  germinated after an immersion of  days, and a few survived
an immersion of  days. For convenience sake I chiefly tried small
seeds, without the capsule or fruit; and as all of these sank in a few
days, they could not be floated across wide spaces of the sea, whether
or not they were injured by the salt-water. Afterwards I tried some
larger fruits, capsules, etc., and some of these floated for a long
time. It is well known what a difference there is in the buoyancy of
green and seasoned timber; and it occurred to me that floods might wash
down plants or branches, and that these might be dried on the banks, and
then by a fresh rise in the stream be washed into the sea. Hence I was
led to dry stems and branches of  plants with ripe fruit, and to place
them on sea water. The majority sank quickly, but some which whilst
green floated for a very short time, when dried floated much longer; for
instance, ripe hazel-nuts sank immediately, but when dried, they floated
for  days and afterwards when planted they germinated; an asparagus
plant with ripe berries floated for  days, when dried it floated
for  days, and the seeds afterwards germinated: the ripe seeds of
Helosciadium sank in two days, when dried they floated for above 
days, and afterwards germinated. Altogether out of the  dried plants,
 floated for above  days, and some of the  floated for a very much
longer period. So that as / seeds germinated after an immersion
of  days; and as / plants with ripe fruit (but not all the same
species as in the foregoing experiment) floated, after being dried, for
above  days, as far as we may infer anything from these scanty facts,
we may conclude that the seeds of / plants of any country might be
floated by sea-currents during  days, and would retain their power
of germination. In Johnston's Physical Atlas, the average rate of the
several Atlantic currents is  miles per diem (some currents running
at the rate of  miles per diem); on this average, the seeds of /
plants belonging to one country might be floated across  miles of sea
to another country; and when stranded, if blown to a favourable spot by
an inland gale, they would germinate.

Subsequently to my experiments, M. Martens tried similar ones, but in a
much better manner, for he placed the seeds in a box in the actual sea,
so that they were alternately wet and exposed to the air like really
floating plants. He tried  seeds, mostly different from mine; but he
chose many large fruits and likewise seeds from plants which live
near the sea; and this would have favoured the average length of
their flotation and of their resistance to the injurious action of the
salt-water. On the other hand he did not previously dry the plants or
branches with the fruit; and this, as we have seen, would have caused
some of them to have floated much longer. The result was that / of
his seeds floated for  days, and were then capable of germination. But
I do not doubt that plants exposed to the waves would float for a less
time than those protected from violent movement as in our experiments.
Therefore it would perhaps be safer to assume that the seeds of about
/ plants of a flora, after having been dried, could be floated
across a space of sea  miles in width, and would then germinate.
The fact of the larger fruits often floating longer than the small,
is interesting; as plants with large seeds or fruit could hardly be
transported by any other means; and Alph. de Candolle has shown that
such plants generally have restricted ranges.

But seeds may be occasionally transported in another manner. Drift
timber is thrown up on most islands, even on those in the midst of the
widest oceans; and the natives of the coral-islands in the Pacific,
procure stones for their tools, solely from the roots of drifted trees,
these stones being a valuable royal tax. I find on examination, that
when irregularly shaped stones are embedded in the roots of trees, small
parcels of earth are very frequently enclosed in their interstices and
behind them,--so perfectly that not a particle could be washed away in
the longest transport: out of one small portion of earth thus COMPLETELY
enclosed by wood in an oak about  years old, three dicotyledonous
plants germinated: I am certain of the accuracy of this observation.
Again, I can show that the carcasses of birds, when floating on the sea,
sometimes escape being immediately devoured; and seeds of many kinds
in the crops of floating birds long retain their vitality: peas and
vetches, for instance, are killed by even a few days' immersion in
sea-water; but some taken out of the crop of a pigeon, which had
floated on artificial salt-water for  days, to my surprise nearly all
germinated.

Living birds can hardly fail to be highly effective agents in the
transportation of seeds. I could give many facts showing how frequently
birds of many kinds are blown by gales to vast distances across the
ocean. We may I think safely assume that under such circumstances their
rate of flight would often be  miles an hour; and some authors have
given a far higher estimate. I have never seen an instance of nutritious
seeds passing through the intestines of a bird; but hard seeds of fruit
will pass uninjured through even the digestive organs of a turkey. In
the course of two months, I picked up in my garden  kinds of seeds,
out of the excrement of small birds, and these seemed perfect, and
some of them, which I tried, germinated. But the following fact is more
important: the crops of birds do not secrete gastric juice, and do not
in the least injure, as I know by trial, the germination of seeds;
now after a bird has found and devoured a large supply of food, it is
positively asserted that all the grains do not pass into the gizzard for
 or even  hours. A bird in this interval might easily be blown to
the distance of  miles, and hawks are known to look out for tired
birds, and the contents of their torn crops might thus readily get
scattered. Mr. Brent informs me that a friend of his had to give up
flying carrier-pigeons from France to England, as the hawks on the
English coast destroyed so many on their arrival. Some hawks and owls
bolt their prey whole, and after an interval of from twelve to twenty
hours, disgorge pellets, which, as I know from experiments made in the
Zoological Gardens, include seeds capable of germination. Some seeds of
the oat, wheat, millet, canary, hemp, clover, and beet germinated after
having been from twelve to twenty-one hours in the stomachs of different
birds of prey; and two seeds of beet grew after having been thus
retained for two days and fourteen hours. Freshwater fish, I find, eat
seeds of many land and water plants: fish are frequently devoured by
birds, and thus the seeds might be transported from place to place. I
forced many kinds of seeds into the stomachs of dead fish, and then gave
their bodies to fishing-eagles, storks, and pelicans; these birds after
an interval of many hours, either rejected the seeds in pellets or
passed them in their excrement; and several of these seeds retained
their power of germination. Certain seeds, however, were always killed
by this process.

Although the beaks and feet of birds are generally quite clean, I can
show that earth sometimes adheres to them: in one instance I removed
twenty-two grains of dry argillaceous earth from one foot of a
partridge, and in this earth there was a pebble quite as large as the
seed of a vetch. Thus seeds might occasionally be transported to great
distances; for many facts could be given showing that soil almost
everywhere is charged with seeds. Reflect for a moment on the millions
of quails which annually cross the Mediterranean; and can we doubt that
the earth adhering to their feet would sometimes include a few minute
seeds? But I shall presently have to recur to this subject.

As icebergs are known to be sometimes loaded with earth and stones, and
have even carried brushwood, bones, and the nest of a land-bird, I can
hardly doubt that they must occasionally have transported seeds from
one part to another of the arctic and antarctic regions, as suggested by
Lyell; and during the Glacial period from one part of the now temperate
regions to another. In the Azores, from the large number of the species
of plants common to Europe, in comparison with the plants of other
oceanic islands nearer to the mainland, and (as remarked by Mr. H. C.
Watson) from the somewhat northern character of the flora in comparison
with the latitude, I suspected that these islands had been partly
stocked by ice-borne seeds, during the Glacial epoch. At my request Sir
C. Lyell wrote to M. Hartung to inquire whether he had observed erratic
boulders on these islands, and he answered that he had found large
