parts many times repeated are eminently liable to vary in number and
structure; consequently it is quite probable that natural selection,
during a long-continued course of modification, should have seized on
a certain number of the primordially similar elements, many times
repeated, and have adapted them to the most diverse purposes. And as
the whole amount of modification will have been effected by slight
successive steps, we need not wonder at discovering in such parts or
organs, a certain degree of fundamental resemblance, retained by the
strong principle of inheritance.

In the great class of molluscs, though we can homologise the parts of
one species with those of another and distinct species, we can indicate
but few serial homologies; that is, we are seldom enabled to say that
one part or organ is homologous with another in the same individual. And
we can understand this fact; for in molluscs, even in the lowest members
of the class, we do not find nearly so much indefinite repetition of
any one part, as we find in the other great classes of the animal and
vegetable kingdoms.

Naturalists frequently speak of the skull as formed of metamorphosed
vertebrae: the jaws of crabs as metamorphosed legs; the stamens and
pistils of flowers as metamorphosed leaves; but it would in these cases
probably be more correct, as Professor Huxley has remarked, to speak
of both skull and vertebrae, both jaws and legs, etc.,--as having been
metamorphosed, not one from the other, but from some common element.
Naturalists, however, use such language only in a metaphorical sense:
they are far from meaning that during a long course of descent,
primordial organs of any kind--vertebrae in the one case and legs in the
other--have actually been modified into skulls or jaws. Yet so strong
is the appearance of a modification of this nature having occurred,
that naturalists can hardly avoid employing language having this plain
signification. On my view these terms may be used literally; and the
wonderful fact of the jaws, for instance, of a crab retaining numerous
characters, which they would probably have retained through inheritance,
if they had really been metamorphosed during a long course of descent
from true legs, or from some simple appendage, is explained.

EMBRYOLOGY.

It has already been casually remarked that certain organs in the
individual, which when mature become widely different and serve for
different purposes, are in the embryo exactly alike. The embryos, also,
of distinct animals within the same class are often strikingly similar:
a better proof of this cannot be given, than a circumstance mentioned
by Agassiz, namely, that having forgotten to ticket the embryo of some
vertebrate animal, he cannot now tell whether it be that of a mammal,
bird, or reptile. The vermiform larvae of moths, flies, beetles, etc.,
resemble each other much more closely than do the mature insects; but
in the case of larvae, the embryos are active, and have been adapted
for special lines of life. A trace of the law of embryonic resemblance,
sometimes lasts till a rather late age: thus birds of the same genus,
and of closely allied genera, often resemble each other in their first
and second plumage; as we see in the spotted feathers in the thrush
group. In the cat tribe, most of the species are striped or spotted
in lines; and stripes can be plainly distinguished in the whelp of
the lion. We occasionally though rarely see something of this kind in
plants: thus the embryonic leaves of the ulex or furze, and the first
leaves of the phyllodineous acaceas, are pinnate or divided like the
ordinary leaves of the leguminosae.

The points of structure, in which the embryos of widely different
animals of the same class resemble each other, often have no direct
relation to their conditions of existence. We cannot, for instance,
suppose that in the embryos of the vertebrata the peculiar loop-like
course of the arteries near the branchial slits are related to similar
conditions,--in the young mammal which is nourished in the womb of its
mother, in the egg of the bird which is hatched in a nest, and in the
spawn of a frog under water. We have no more reason to believe in such
a relation, than we have to believe that the same bones in the hand of
a man, wing of a bat, and fin of a porpoise, are related to similar
conditions of life. No one will suppose that the stripes on the whelp
of a lion, or the spots on the young blackbird, are of any use to these
animals, or are related to the conditions to which they are exposed.

The case, however, is different when an animal during any part of its
embryonic career is active, and has to provide for itself. The period of
activity may come on earlier or later in life; but whenever it comes on,
the adaptation of the larva to its conditions of life is just as perfect
and as beautiful as in the adult animal. From such special adaptations,
the similarity of the larvae or active embryos of allied animals is
sometimes much obscured; and cases could be given of the larvae of two
species, or of two groups of species, differing quite as much, or
even more, from each other than do their adult parents. In most cases,
however, the larvae, though active, still obey more or less closely the
law of common embryonic resemblance. Cirripedes afford a good instance
of this: even the illustrious Cuvier did not perceive that a barnacle
was, as it certainly is, a crustacean; but a glance at the larva shows
this to be the case in an unmistakeable manner. So again the two main
divisions of cirripedes, the pedunculated and sessile, which differ
widely in external appearance, have larvae in all their several stages
barely distinguishable.

The embryo in the course of development generally rises in organisation:
I use this expression, though I am aware that it is hardly possible to
define clearly what is meant by the organisation being higher or lower.
But no one probably will dispute that the butterfly is higher than the
caterpillar. In some cases, however, the mature animal is generally
considered as lower in the scale than the larva, as with certain
parasitic crustaceans. To refer once again to cirripedes: the larvae in
the first stage have three pairs of legs, a very simple single eye, and
a probosciformed mouth, with which they feed largely, for they increase
much in size. In the second stage, answering to the chrysalis stage of
butterflies, they have six pairs of beautifully constructed natatory
legs, a pair of magnificent compound eyes, and extremely complex
antennae; but they have a closed and imperfect mouth, and cannot feed:
their function at this stage is, to search by their well-developed
organs of sense, and to reach by their active powers of swimming, a
proper place on which to become attached and to undergo their final
metamorphosis. When this is completed they are fixed for life: their
legs are now converted into prehensile organs; they again obtain a
well-constructed mouth; but they have no antennae, and their two eyes
are now reconverted into a minute, single, and very simple eye-spot.
In this last and complete state, cirripedes may be considered as
either more highly or more lowly organised than they were in the larval
condition. But in some genera the larvae become developed either into
hermaphrodites having the ordinary structure, or into what I have called
complemental males: and in the latter, the development has assuredly
been retrograde; for the male is a mere sack, which lives for a short
time, and is destitute of mouth, stomach, or other organ of importance,
excepting for reproduction.

We are so much accustomed to see differences in structure between the
embryo and the adult, and likewise a close similarity in the embryos of
widely different animals within the same class, that we might be led to
look at these facts as necessarily contingent in some manner on growth.
But there is no obvious reason why, for instance, the wing of a bat, or
the fin of a porpoise, should not have been sketched out with all the
parts in proper proportion, as soon as any structure became visible in
the embryo. And in some whole groups of animals and in certain members
of other groups, the embryo does not at any period differ widely from
the adult: thus Owen has remarked in regard to cuttle-fish, "there is no
metamorphosis; the cephalopodic character is manifested long before
the parts of the embryo are completed;" and again in spiders, "there
is nothing worthy to be called a metamorphosis." The larvae of insects,
whether adapted to the most diverse and active habits, or quite
inactive, being fed by their parents or placed in the midst of proper
nutriment, yet nearly all pass through a similar worm-like stage of
development; but in some few cases, as in that of Aphis, if we look to
the admirable drawings by Professor Huxley of the development of this
insect, we see no trace of the vermiform stage.

How, then, can we explain these several facts in embryology,--namely
the very general, but not universal difference in structure between the
embryo and the adult;--of parts in the same individual embryo, which
ultimately become very unlike and serve for diverse purposes, being
at this early period of growth alike;--of embryos of different species
within the same class, generally, but not universally, resembling each
other;--of the structure of the embryo not being closely related to its
conditions of existence, except when the embryo becomes at any period
of life active and has to provide for itself;--of the embryo apparently
