of a group is generally, as we have seen, a slower process than its
production.

With respect to the apparently sudden extermination of whole families
or orders, as of Trilobites at the close of the palaeozoic period and
of Ammonites at the close of the secondary period, we must remember what
has been already said on the probable wide intervals of time between our
consecutive formations; and in these intervals there may have been much
slow extermination. Moreover, when by sudden immigration or by unusually
rapid development, many species of a new group have taken possession
of a new area, they will have exterminated in a correspondingly rapid
manner many of the old inhabitants; and the forms which thus yield
their places will commonly be allied, for they will partake of some
inferiority in common.

Thus, as it seems to me, the manner in which single species and whole
groups of species become extinct, accords well with the theory of
natural selection. We need not marvel at extinction; if we must
marvel, let it be at our presumption in imagining for a moment that we
understand the many complex contingencies, on which the existence of
each species depends. If we forget for an instant, that each species
tends to increase inordinately, and that some check is always in action,
yet seldom perceived by us, the whole economy of nature will be utterly
obscured. Whenever we can precisely say why this species is more
abundant in individuals than that; why this species and not another
can be naturalised in a given country; then, and not till then, we may
justly feel surprise why we cannot account for the extinction of this
particular species or group of species.

ON THE FORMS OF LIFE CHANGING ALMOST SIMULTANEOUSLY THROUGHOUT THE
WORLD.

Scarcely any palaeontological discovery is more striking than the fact,
that the forms of life change almost simultaneously throughout the
world. Thus our European Chalk formation can be recognised in many
distant parts of the world, under the most different climates, where not
a fragment of the mineral chalk itself can be found; namely, in North
America, in equatorial South America, in Tierra del Fuego, at the
Cape of Good Hope, and in the peninsula of India. For at these distant
points, the organic remains in certain beds present an unmistakeable
degree of resemblance to those of the Chalk. It is not that the same
species are met with; for in some cases not one species is identically
the same, but they belong to the same families, genera, and sections
of genera, and sometimes are similarly characterised in such trifling
points as mere superficial sculpture. Moreover other forms, which are
not found in the Chalk of Europe, but which occur in the formations
either above or below, are similarly absent at these distant points of
the world. In the several successive palaeozoic formations of Russia,
Western Europe and North America, a similar parallelism in the forms of
life has been observed by several authors: so it is, according to Lyell,
with the several European and North American tertiary deposits. Even
if the few fossil species which are common to the Old and New Worlds be
kept wholly out of view, the general parallelism in the successive forms
of life, in the stages of the widely separated palaeozoic and tertiary
periods, would still be manifest, and the several formations could be
easily correlated.

These observations, however, relate to the marine inhabitants of distant
parts of the world: we have not sufficient data to judge whether the
productions of the land and of fresh water change at distant points in
the same parallel manner. We may doubt whether they have thus changed:
if the Megatherium, Mylodon, Macrauchenia, and Toxodon had been brought
to Europe from La Plata, without any information in regard to their
geological position, no one would have suspected that they had coexisted
with still living sea-shells; but as these anomalous monsters coexisted
with the Mastodon and Horse, it might at least have been inferred that
they had lived during one of the latter tertiary stages.

When the marine forms of life are spoken of as having changed
simultaneously throughout the world, it must not be supposed that this
expression relates to the same thousandth or hundred-thousandth year, or
even that it has a very strict geological sense; for if all the marine
animals which live at the present day in Europe, and all those that
lived in Europe during the pleistocene period (an enormously remote
period as measured by years, including the whole glacial epoch), were to
be compared with those now living in South America or in Australia, the
most skilful naturalist would hardly be able to say whether the existing
or the pleistocene inhabitants of Europe resembled most closely those of
the southern hemisphere. So, again, several highly competent observers
believe that the existing productions of the United States are more
closely related to those which lived in Europe during certain later
tertiary stages, than to those which now live here; and if this be so,
it is evident that fossiliferous beds deposited at the present day on
the shores of North America would hereafter be liable to be classed with
somewhat older European beds. Nevertheless, looking to a remotely future
epoch, there can, I think, be little doubt that all the more modern
MARINE formations, namely, the upper pliocene, the pleistocene and
strictly modern beds, of Europe, North and South America, and Australia,
from containing fossil remains in some degree allied, and from not
including those forms which are only found in the older underlying
deposits, would be correctly ranked as simultaneous in a geological
sense.

The fact of the forms of life changing simultaneously, in the above
large sense, at distant parts of the world, has greatly struck those
admirable observers, MM. de Verneuil and d'Archiac. After referring
to the parallelism of the palaeozoic forms of life in various parts
of Europe, they add, "If struck by this strange sequence, we turn our
attention to North America, and there discover a series of analogous
phenomena, it will appear certain that all these modifications of
species, their extinction, and the introduction of new ones, cannot be
owing to mere changes in marine currents or other causes more or less
local and temporary, but depend on general laws which govern the whole
animal kingdom." M. Barrande has made forcible remarks to precisely the
same effect. It is, indeed, quite futile to look to changes of currents,
climate, or other physical conditions, as the cause of these great
mutations in the forms of life throughout the world, under the most
different climates. We must, as Barrande has remarked, look to some
special law. We shall see this more clearly when we treat of the present
distribution of organic beings, and find how slight is the relation
between the physical conditions of various countries, and the nature of
their inhabitants.

This great fact of the parallel succession of the forms of life
throughout the world, is explicable on the theory of natural selection.
New species are formed by new varieties arising, which have some
advantage over older forms; and those forms, which are already dominant,
or have some advantage over the other forms in their own country, would
naturally oftenest give rise to new varieties or incipient species; for
these latter must be victorious in a still higher degree in order to be
preserved and to survive. We have distinct evidence on this head, in
the plants which are dominant, that is, which are commonest in their own
homes, and are most widely diffused, having produced the greatest number
of new varieties. It is also natural that the dominant, varying, and
far-spreading species, which already have invaded to a certain extent
the territories of other species, should be those which would have
the best chance of spreading still further, and of giving rise in new
countries to new varieties and species. The process of diffusion
may often be very slow, being dependent on climatal and geographical
changes, or on strange accidents, but in the long run the dominant
forms will generally succeed in spreading. The diffusion would, it
is probable, be slower with the terrestrial inhabitants of distinct
continents than with the marine inhabitants of the continuous sea. We
might therefore expect to find, as we apparently do find, a less strict
degree of parallel succession in the productions of the land than of the
sea.

Dominant species spreading from any region might encounter still more
dominant species, and then their triumphant course, or even their
existence, would cease. We know not at all precisely what are all the
conditions most favourable for the multiplication of new and dominant
species; but we can, I think, clearly see that a number of individuals,
from giving a better chance of the appearance of favourable variations,
and that severe competition with many already existing forms, would
be highly favourable, as would be the power of spreading into new
territories. A certain amount of isolation, recurring at long intervals
of time, would probably be also favourable, as before explained. One
quarter of the world may have been most favourable for the production
of new and dominant species on the land, and another for those in the
waters of the sea. If two great regions had been for a long period
