before specified) to those on the surrounding low lands and dry lands,
though these stations are so different--the very close relation of the
distinct species which inhabit the islets of the same archipelago,--and
especially the striking relation of the inhabitants of each whole
archipelago or island to those of the nearest mainland,--are, I think,
utterly inexplicable on the ordinary view of the independent creation
of each species, but are explicable on the view of colonisation from the
nearest and readiest source, together with the subsequent modification
and better adaptation of the colonists to their new homes.

SUMMARY OF LAST AND PRESENT CHAPTERS.

In these chapters I have endeavoured to show, that if we make due
allowance for our ignorance of the full effects of all the changes of
climate and of the level of the land, which have certainly occurred
within the recent period, and of other similar changes which may have
occurred within the same period; if we remember how profoundly ignorant
we are with respect to the many and curious means of occasional
transport,--a subject which has hardly ever been properly experimentised
on; if we bear in mind how often a species may have ranged continuously
over a wide area, and then have become extinct in the intermediate
tracts, I think the difficulties in believing that all the individuals
of the same species, wherever located, have descended from the same
parents, are not insuperable. And we are led to this conclusion, which
has been arrived at by many naturalists under the designation of single
centres of creation, by some general considerations, more especially
from the importance of barriers and from the analogical distribution of
sub-genera, genera, and families.

With respect to the distinct species of the same genus, which on my
theory must have spread from one parent-source; if we make the same
allowances as before for our ignorance, and remember that some forms of
life change most slowly, enormous periods of time being thus granted for
their migration, I do not think that the difficulties are insuperable;
though they often are in this case, and in that of the individuals of
the same species, extremely grave.

As exemplifying the effects of climatal changes on distribution, I have
attempted to show how important has been the influence of the modern
Glacial period, which I am fully convinced simultaneously affected
the whole world, or at least great meridional belts. As showing how
diversified are the means of occasional transport, I have discussed at
some little length the means of dispersal of fresh-water productions.

If the difficulties be not insuperable in admitting that in the long
course of time the individuals of the same species, and likewise of
allied species, have proceeded from some one source; then I think all
the grand leading facts of geographical distribution are explicable on
the theory of migration (generally of the more dominant forms of life),
together with subsequent modification and the multiplication of new
forms. We can thus understand the high importance of barriers, whether
of land or water, which separate our several zoological and botanical
provinces. We can thus understand the localisation of sub-genera,
genera, and families; and how it is that under different latitudes, for
instance in South America, the inhabitants of the plains and mountains,
of the forests, marshes, and deserts, are in so mysterious a manner
linked together by affinity, and are likewise linked to the extinct
beings which formerly inhabited the same continent. Bearing in mind
that the mutual relations of organism to organism are of the highest
importance, we can see why two areas having nearly the same physical
conditions should often be inhabited by very different forms of
life; for according to the length of time which has elapsed since
new inhabitants entered one region; according to the nature of the
communication which allowed certain forms and not others to enter,
either in greater or lesser numbers; according or not, as those which
entered happened to come in more or less direct competition with each
other and with the aborigines; and according as the immigrants were
capable of varying more or less rapidly, there would ensue in different
regions, independently of their physical conditions, infinitely
diversified conditions of life,--there would be an almost endless amount
of organic action and reaction,--and we should find, as we do find,
some groups of beings greatly, and some only slightly modified,--some
developed in great force, some existing in scanty numbers--in the
different great geographical provinces of the world.

On these same principles, we can understand, as I have endeavoured to
show, why oceanic islands should have few inhabitants, but of these a
great number should be endemic or peculiar; and why, in relation to the
means of migration, one group of beings, even within the same class,
should have all its species endemic, and another group should have all
its species common to other quarters of the world. We can see why whole
groups of organisms, as batrachians and terrestrial mammals, should be
absent from oceanic islands, whilst the most isolated islands possess
their own peculiar species of aerial mammals or bats. We can see why
there should be some relation between the presence of mammals, in a more
or less modified condition, and the depth of the sea between an island
and the mainland. We can clearly see why all the inhabitants of an
archipelago, though specifically distinct on the several islets, should
be closely related to each other, and likewise be related, but less
closely, to those of the nearest continent or other source whence
immigrants were probably derived. We can see why in two areas, however
distant from each other, there should be a correlation, in the presence
of identical species, of varieties, of doubtful species, and of distinct
but representative species.

As the late Edward Forbes often insisted, there is a striking
parallelism in the laws of life throughout time and space: the laws
governing the succession of forms in past times being nearly the same
with those governing at the present time the differences in different
areas. We see this in many facts. The endurance of each species and
group of species is continuous in time; for the exceptions to the rule
are so few, that they may fairly be attributed to our not having as
yet discovered in an intermediate deposit the forms which are therein
absent, but which occur above and below: so in space, it certainly is
the general rule that the area inhabited by a single species, or by a
group of species, is continuous; and the exceptions, which are not rare,
may, as I have attempted to show, be accounted for by migration at
some former period under different conditions or by occasional means of
transport, and by the species having become extinct in the intermediate
tracts. Both in time and space, species and groups of species have their
points of maximum development. Groups of species, belonging either to a
certain period of time, or to a certain area, are often characterised by
trifling characters in common, as of sculpture or colour. In looking
to the long succession of ages, as in now looking to distant provinces
throughout the world, we find that some organisms differ little, whilst
others belonging to a different class, or to a different order, or even
only to a different family of the same order, differ greatly. In both
time and space the lower members of each class generally change less
than the higher; but there are in both cases marked exceptions to the
rule. On my theory these several relations throughout time and space
are intelligible; for whether we look to the forms of life which have
changed during successive ages within the same quarter of the world, or
to those which have changed after having migrated into distant quarters,
in both cases the forms within each class have been connected by the
same bond of ordinary generation; and the more nearly any two forms are
related in blood, the nearer they will generally stand to each other in
time and space; in both cases the laws of variation have been the same,
and modifications have been accumulated by the same power of natural
selection.




. MUTUAL AFFINITIES OF ORGANIC BEINGS: MORPHOLOGY:
EMBRYOLOGY: RUDIMENTARY ORGANS.

CLASSIFICATION, groups subordinate to groups. Natural system. Rules and
difficulties in classification, explained on the theory of descent
with modification. Classification of varieties. Descent always used in
classification. Analogical or adaptive characters. Affinities, general,
complex and radiating. Extinction separates and defines groups.
MORPHOLOGY, between members of the same class, between parts of the same
individual. EMBRYOLOGY, laws of, explained by variations not supervening
at an early age, and being inherited at a corresponding age. RUDIMENTARY
ORGANS; their origin explained. Summary.

From the first dawn of life, all organic beings are found to resemble
each other in descending degrees, so that they can be classed in groups
under groups. This classification is evidently not arbitrary like the
grouping of the stars in constellations. The existence of groups would
