hair or feathers, in the Vertebrata. If the Ornithorhynchus had been
covered with feathers instead of hair, this external and trifling
character would, I think, have been considered by naturalists as
important an aid in determining the degree of affinity of this strange
creature to birds and reptiles, as an approach in structure in any one
internal and important organ.

The importance, for classification, of trifling characters, mainly
depends on their being correlated with several other characters of more
or less importance. The value indeed of an aggregate of characters is
very evident in natural history. Hence, as has often been remarked, a
species may depart from its allies in several characters, both of high
physiological importance and of almost universal prevalence, and yet
leave us in no doubt where it should be ranked. Hence, also, it has been
found, that a classification founded on any single character,
however important that may be, has always failed; for no part of the
organisation is universally constant. The importance of an aggregate of
characters, even when none are important, alone explains, I think, that
saying of Linnaeus, that the characters do not give the genus, but
the genus gives the characters; for this saying seems founded on an
appreciation of many trifling points of resemblance, too slight to be
defined. Certain plants, belonging to the Malpighiaceae, bear perfect
and degraded flowers; in the latter, as A. de Jussieu has remarked, "the
greater number of the characters proper to the species, to the genus,
to the family, to the class, disappear, and thus laugh at our
classification." But when Aspicarpa produced in France, during several
years, only degraded flowers, departing so wonderfully in a number
of the most important points of structure from the proper type of the
order, yet M. Richard sagaciously saw, as Jussieu observes, that this
genus should still be retained amongst the Malpighiaceae. This case
seems to me well to illustrate the spirit with which our classifications
are sometimes necessarily founded.

Practically when naturalists are at work, they do not trouble themselves
about the physiological value of the characters which they use in
defining a group, or in allocating any particular species. If they find
a character nearly uniform, and common to a great number of forms, and
not common to others, they use it as one of high value; if common to
some lesser number, they use it as of subordinate value. This principle
has been broadly confessed by some naturalists to be the true one; and
by none more clearly than by that excellent botanist, Aug. St. Hilaire.
If certain characters are always found correlated with others, though
no apparent bond of connexion can be discovered between them, especial
value is set on them. As in most groups of animals, important organs,
such as those for propelling the blood, or for aerating it, or those for
propagating the race, are found nearly uniform, they are considered as
highly serviceable in classification; but in some groups of animals all
these, the most important vital organs, are found to offer characters of
quite subordinate value.

We can see why characters derived from the embryo should be of equal
importance with those derived from the adult, for our classifications of
course include all ages of each species. But it is by no means obvious,
on the ordinary view, why the structure of the embryo should be more
important for this purpose than that of the adult, which alone plays its
full part in the economy of nature. Yet it has been strongly urged
by those great naturalists, Milne Edwards and Agassiz, that embryonic
characters are the most important of any in the classification of
animals; and this doctrine has very generally been admitted as true.
The same fact holds good with flowering plants, of which the two main
divisions have been founded on characters derived from the embryo,--on
the number and position of the embryonic leaves or cotyledons, and on
the mode of development of the plumule and radicle. In our discussion
on embryology, we shall see why such characters are so valuable, on the
view of classification tacitly including the idea of descent.

Our classifications are often plainly influenced by chains of
affinities. Nothing can be easier than to define a number of characters
common to all birds; but in the case of crustaceans, such definition has
hitherto been found impossible. There are crustaceans at the opposite
ends of the series, which have hardly a character in common; yet the
species at both ends, from being plainly allied to others, and these to
others, and so onwards, can be recognised as unequivocally belonging to
this, and to no other class of the Articulata.

Geographical distribution has often been used, though perhaps not quite
logically, in classification, more especially in very large groups of
closely allied forms. Temminck insists on the utility or even necessity
of this practice in certain groups of birds; and it has been followed by
several entomologists and botanists.

Finally, with respect to the comparative value of the various groups of
species, such as orders, sub-orders, families, sub-families, and genera,
they seem to be, at least at present, almost arbitrary. Several of the
best botanists, such as Mr. Bentham and others, have strongly insisted
on their arbitrary value. Instances could be given amongst plants and
insects, of a group of forms, first ranked by practised naturalists as
only a genus, and then raised to the rank of a sub-family or family; and
this has been done, not because further research has detected important
structural differences, at first overlooked, but because numerous
allied species, with slightly different grades of difference, have been
subsequently discovered.

All the foregoing rules and aids and difficulties in classification
are explained, if I do not greatly deceive myself, on the view that
the natural system is founded on descent with modification; that the
characters which naturalists consider as showing true affinity between
any two or more species, are those which have been inherited from a
common parent, and, in so far, all true classification is genealogical;
that community of descent is the hidden bond which naturalists have been
unconsciously seeking, and not some unknown plan of creation, or the
enunciation of general propositions, and the mere putting together and
separating objects more or less alike.

But I must explain my meaning more fully. I believe that the ARRANGEMENT
of the groups within each class, in due subordination and relation to
the other groups, must be strictly genealogical in order to be natural;
but that the AMOUNT of difference in the several branches or groups,
though allied in the same degree in blood to their common progenitor,
may differ greatly, being due to the different degrees of modification
which they have undergone; and this is expressed by the forms being
ranked under different genera, families, sections, or orders. The reader
will best understand what is meant, if he will take the trouble of
referring to the diagram in the fourth chapter. We will suppose the
letters A to L to represent allied genera, which lived during the
Silurian epoch, and these have descended from a species which existed at
an unknown anterior period. Species of three of these genera (A, F, and
I) have transmitted modified descendants to the present day, represented
by the fifteen genera (a to z) on the uppermost horizontal line. Now
all these modified descendants from a single species, are represented as
related in blood or descent to the same degree; they may metaphorically
be called cousins to the same millionth degree; yet they differ widely
and in different degrees from each other. The forms descended from A,
now broken up into two or three families, constitute a distinct order
from those descended from I, also broken up into two families. Nor can
the existing species, descended from A, be ranked in the same genus with
the parent A; or those from I, with the parent I. But the existing genus
F may be supposed to have been but slightly modified; and it will
then rank with the parent-genus F; just as some few still living organic
beings belong to Silurian genera. So that the amount or value of the
differences between organic beings all related to each other in the same
degree in blood, has come to be widely different. Nevertheless their
genealogical ARRANGEMENT remains strictly true, not only at the present
time, but at each successive period of descent. All the modified
descendants from A will have inherited something in common from their
common parent, as will all the descendants from I; so will it be with
each subordinate branch of descendants, at each successive period. If,
however, we choose to suppose that any of the descendants of A or of
I have been so much modified as to have more or less completely lost
traces of their parentage, in this case, their places in a natural
classification will have been more or less completely lost,--as
sometimes seems to have occurred with existing organisms. All the
descendants of the genus F, along its whole line of descent, are
supposed to have been but little modified, and they yet form a single
genus. But this genus, though much isolated, will still occupy its
proper intermediate position; for F originally was intermediate in
character between A and I, and the several genera descended from these
two genera will have inherited to a certain extent their characters.
This natural arrangement is shown, as far as is possible on paper, in
the diagram, but in much too simple a manner. If a branching diagram had
