shape, as well as the breadth and length of the ramus of the lower
jaw, varies in a highly remarkable manner. The number of the caudal and
sacral vertebrae vary; as does the number of the ribs, together with
their relative breadth and the presence of processes. The size and shape
of the apertures in the sternum are highly variable; so is the degree
of divergence and relative size of the two arms of the furcula. The
proportional width of the gape of mouth, the proportional length of the
eyelids, of the orifice of the nostrils, of the tongue (not always in
strict correlation with the length of beak), the size of the crop and
of the upper part of the oesophagus; the development and abortion of
the oil-gland; the number of the primary wing and caudal feathers; the
relative length of wing and tail to each other and to the body; the
relative length of leg and of the feet; the number of scutellae on
the toes, the development of skin between the toes, are all points of
structure which are variable. The period at which the perfect plumage is
acquired varies, as does the state of the down with which the nestling
birds are clothed when hatched. The shape and size of the eggs vary. The
manner of flight differs remarkably; as does in some breeds the voice
and disposition. Lastly, in certain breeds, the males and females have
come to differ to a slight degree from each other.

Altogether at least a score of pigeons might be chosen, which if shown
to an ornithologist, and he were told that they were wild birds, would
certainly, I think, be ranked by him as well-defined species. Moreover,
I do not believe that any ornithologist would place the English carrier,
the short-faced tumbler, the runt, the barb, pouter, and fantail in
the same genus; more especially as in each of these breeds several
truly-inherited sub-breeds, or species as he might have called them,
could be shown him.

Great as the differences are between the breeds of pigeons, I am fully
convinced that the common opinion of naturalists is correct, namely,
that all have descended from the rock-pigeon (Columba livia), including
under this term several geographical races or sub-species, which differ
from each other in the most trifling respects. As several of the reasons
which have led me to this belief are in some degree applicable in other
cases, I will here briefly give them. If the several breeds are not
varieties, and have not proceeded from the rock-pigeon, they must have
descended from at least seven or eight aboriginal stocks; for it is
impossible to make the present domestic breeds by the crossing of any
lesser number: how, for instance, could a pouter be produced by crossing
two breeds unless one of the parent-stocks possessed the characteristic
enormous crop? The supposed aboriginal stocks must all have been
rock-pigeons, that is, not breeding or willingly perching on trees. But
besides C. livia, with its geographical sub-species, only two or three
other species of rock-pigeons are known; and these have not any of the
characters of the domestic breeds. Hence the supposed aboriginal stocks
must either still exist in the countries where they were originally
domesticated, and yet be unknown to ornithologists; and this,
considering their size, habits, and remarkable characters, seems very
improbable; or they must have become extinct in the wild state. But
birds breeding on precipices, and good fliers, are unlikely to be
exterminated; and the common rock-pigeon, which has the same habits with
the domestic breeds, has not been exterminated even on several of the
smaller British islets, or on the shores of the Mediterranean. Hence the
supposed extermination of so many species having similar habits with the
rock-pigeon seems to me a very rash assumption. Moreover, the several
above-named domesticated breeds have been transported to all parts of
the world, and, therefore, some of them must have been carried back
again into their native country; but not one has ever become wild or
feral, though the dovecot-pigeon, which is the rock-pigeon in a very
slightly altered state, has become feral in several places. Again, all
recent experience shows that it is most difficult to get any wild
animal to breed freely under domestication; yet on the hypothesis of the
multiple origin of our pigeons, it must be assumed that at least seven
or eight species were so thoroughly domesticated in ancient times by
half-civilized man, as to be quite prolific under confinement.

An argument, as it seems to me, of great weight, and applicable in
several other cases, is, that the above-specified breeds, though
agreeing generally in constitution, habits, voice, colouring, and
in most parts of their structure, with the wild rock-pigeon, yet are
certainly highly abnormal in other parts of their structure: we may look
in vain throughout the whole great family of Columbidae for a beak like
that of the English carrier, or that of the short-faced tumbler, or
barb; for reversed feathers like those of the jacobin; for a crop like
that of the pouter; for tail-feathers like those of the fantail.
Hence it must be assumed not only that half-civilized man succeeded in
thoroughly domesticating several species, but that he intentionally or
by chance picked out extraordinarily abnormal species; and further, that
these very species have since all become extinct or unknown. So many
strange contingencies seem to me improbable in the highest degree.

Some facts in regard to the colouring of pigeons well deserve
consideration. The rock-pigeon is of a slaty-blue, and has a white rump
(the Indian sub-species, C. intermedia of Strickland, having it bluish);
the tail has a terminal dark bar, with the bases of the outer feathers
externally edged with white; the wings have two black bars; some
semi-domestic breeds and some apparently truly wild breeds have, besides
the two black bars, the wings chequered with black. These several marks
do not occur together in any other species of the whole family. Now, in
every one of the domestic breeds, taking thoroughly well-bred birds, all
the above marks, even to the white edging of the outer tail-feathers,
sometimes concur perfectly developed. Moreover, when two birds belonging
to two distinct breeds are crossed, neither of which is blue or has
any of the above-specified marks, the mongrel offspring are very apt
suddenly to acquire these characters; for instance, I crossed some
uniformly white fantails with some uniformly black barbs, and they
produced mottled brown and black birds; these I again crossed together,
and one grandchild of the pure white fantail and pure black barb was of
as beautiful a blue colour, with the white rump, double black wing-bar,
and barred and white-edged tail-feathers, as any wild rock-pigeon! We
can understand these facts, on the well-known principle of reversion to
ancestral characters, if all the domestic breeds have descended from the
rock-pigeon. But if we deny this, we must make one of the two following
highly improbable suppositions. Either, firstly, that all the
several imagined aboriginal stocks were coloured and marked like the
rock-pigeon, although no other existing species is thus coloured and
marked, so that in each separate breed there might be a tendency to
revert to the very same colours and markings. Or, secondly, that each
breed, even the purest, has within a dozen or, at most, within a score
of generations, been crossed by the rock-pigeon: I say within a dozen or
twenty generations, for we know of no fact countenancing the belief that
the child ever reverts to some one ancestor, removed by a greater number
of generations. In a breed which has been crossed only once with some
distinct breed, the tendency to reversion to any character derived from
such cross will naturally become less and less, as in each succeeding
generation there will be less of the foreign blood; but when there has
been no cross with a distinct breed, and there is a tendency in both
parents to revert to a character, which has been lost during some former
generation, this tendency, for all that we can see to the contrary, may
be transmitted undiminished for an indefinite number of generations.
These two distinct cases are often confounded in treatises on
inheritance.

Lastly, the hybrids or mongrels from between all the domestic breeds
of pigeons are perfectly fertile. I can state this from my own
observations, purposely made on the most distinct breeds. Now, it is
difficult, perhaps impossible, to bring forward one case of the hybrid
offspring of two animals CLEARLY DISTINCT being themselves perfectly
fertile. Some authors believe that long-continued domestication
eliminates this strong tendency to sterility: from the history of the
dog I think there is some probability in this hypothesis, if applied to
species closely related together, though it is unsupported by a single
experiment. But to extend the hypothesis so far as to suppose that
species, aboriginally as distinct as carriers, tumblers, pouters, and
fantails now are, should yield offspring perfectly fertile, inter se,
seems to me rash in the extreme.

From these several reasons, namely, the improbability of man having
formerly got seven or eight supposed species of pigeons to breed freely
under domestication; these supposed species being quite unknown in a
wild state, and their becoming nowhere feral; these species having very
abnormal characters in certain respects, as compared with all other
Columbidae, though so like in most other respects to the rock-pigeon;
the blue colour and various marks occasionally appearing in all the
breeds, both when kept pure and when crossed; the mongrel offspring
being perfectly fertile;--from these several reasons, taken together, I
can feel no doubt that all our domestic breeds have descended from the
Columba livia with its geographical sub-species.
