treatises on many kinds of cultivated plants, certain varieties are
said to withstand certain climates better than others: this is very
strikingly shown in works on fruit trees published in the United States,
in which certain varieties are habitually recommended for the northern,
and others for the southern States; and as most of these varieties are
of recent origin, they cannot owe their constitutional differences to
habit. The case of the Jerusalem artichoke, which is never propagated
by seed, and of which consequently new varieties have not been produced,
has even been advanced--for it is now as tender as ever it was--as
proving that acclimatisation cannot be effected! The case, also, of the
kidney-bean has been often cited for a similar purpose, and with
much greater weight; but until some one will sow, during a score of
generations, his kidney-beans so early that a very large proportion are
destroyed by frost, and then collect seed from the few survivors, with
care to prevent accidental crosses, and then again get seed from these
seedlings, with the same precautions, the experiment cannot be said to
have been even tried. Nor let it be supposed that no differences in the
constitution of seedling kidney-beans ever appear, for an account has
been published how much more hardy some seedlings appeared to be than
others.

On the whole, I think we may conclude that habit, use, and disuse, have,
in some cases, played a considerable part in the modification of the
constitution, and of the structure of various organs; but that the
effects of use and disuse have often been largely combined with, and
sometimes overmastered by, the natural selection of innate differences.

CORRELATION OF GROWTH.

I mean by this expression that the whole organisation is so tied
together during its growth and development, that when slight variations
in any one part occur, and are accumulated through natural selection,
other parts become modified. This is a very important subject, most
imperfectly understood. The most obvious case is, that modifications
accumulated solely for the good of the young or larva, will, it may
safely be concluded, affect the structure of the adult; in the same
manner as any malconformation affecting the early embryo, seriously
affects the whole organisation of the adult. The several parts of the
body which are homologous, and which, at an early embryonic period, are
alike, seem liable to vary in an allied manner: we see this in the right
and left sides of the body varying in the same manner; in the front and
hind legs, and even in the jaws and limbs, varying together, for the
lower jaw is believed to be homologous with the limbs. These tendencies,
I do not doubt, may be mastered more or less completely by natural
selection: thus a family of stags once existed with an antler only on
one side; and if this had been of any great use to the breed it might
probably have been rendered permanent by natural selection.

Homologous parts, as has been remarked by some authors, tend to cohere;
this is often seen in monstrous plants; and nothing is more common than
the union of homologous parts in normal structures, as the union of the
petals of the corolla into a tube. Hard parts seem to affect the form of
adjoining soft parts; it is believed by some authors that the diversity
in the shape of the pelvis in birds causes the remarkable diversity in
the shape of their kidneys. Others believe that the shape of the pelvis
in the human mother influences by pressure the shape of the head of the
child. In snakes, according to Schlegel, the shape of the body and
the manner of swallowing determine the position of several of the most
important viscera.

The nature of the bond of correlation is very frequently quite obscure.
M. Is. Geoffroy St. Hilaire has forcibly remarked, that certain
malconformations very frequently, and that others rarely coexist,
without our being able to assign any reason. What can be more singular
than the relation between blue eyes and deafness in cats, and the
tortoise-shell colour with the female sex; the feathered feet and skin
between the outer toes in pigeons, and the presence of more or less down
on the young birds when first hatched, with the future colour of their
plumage; or, again, the relation between the hair and teeth in the naked
Turkish dog, though here probably homology comes into play? With respect
to this latter case of correlation, I think it can hardly be accidental,
that if we pick out the two orders of mammalia which are most
abnormal in their dermal coverings, viz. Cetacea (whales) and Edentata
(armadilloes, scaly ant-eaters, etc.), that these are likewise the most
abnormal in their teeth.

I know of no case better adapted to show the importance of the laws of
correlation in modifying important structures, independently of utility
and, therefore, of natural selection, than that of the difference
between the outer and inner flowers in some Compositous and
Umbelliferous plants. Every one knows the difference in the ray and
central florets of, for instance, the daisy, and this difference is
often accompanied with the abortion of parts of the flower. But, in some
Compositous plants, the seeds also differ in shape and sculpture; and
even the ovary itself, with its accessory parts, differs, as has been
described by Cassini. These differences have been attributed by some
authors to pressure, and the shape of the seeds in the ray-florets in
some Compositae countenances this idea; but, in the case of the corolla
of the Umbelliferae, it is by no means, as Dr. Hooker informs me, in
species with the densest heads that the inner and outer flowers most
frequently differ. It might have been thought that the development of
the ray-petals by drawing nourishment from certain other parts of the
flower had caused their abortion; but in some Compositae there is a
difference in the seeds of the outer and inner florets without any
difference in the corolla. Possibly, these several differences may be
connected with some difference in the flow of nutriment towards the
central and external flowers: we know, at least, that in irregular
flowers, those nearest to the axis are oftenest subject to peloria, and
become regular. I may add, as an instance of this, and of a striking
case of correlation, that I have recently observed in some garden
pelargoniums, that the central flower of the truss often loses the
patches of darker colour in the two upper petals; and that when this
occurs, the adherent nectary is quite aborted; when the colour is
absent from only one of the two upper petals, the nectary is only much
shortened.

With respect to the difference in the corolla of the central and
exterior flowers of a head or umbel, I do not feel at all sure that C.
C. Sprengel's idea that the ray-florets serve to attract insects, whose
agency is highly advantageous in the fertilisation of plants of these
two orders, is so far-fetched, as it may at first appear: and if it be
advantageous, natural selection may have come into play. But in regard
to the differences both in the internal and external structure of the
seeds, which are not always correlated with any differences in the
flowers, it seems impossible that they can be in any way advantageous
to the plant: yet in the Umbelliferae these differences are of such
apparent importance--the seeds being in some cases, according to Tausch,
orthospermous in the exterior flowers and coelospermous in the central
flowers,--that the elder De Candolle founded his main divisions of
the order on analogous differences. Hence we see that modifications of
structure, viewed by systematists as of high value, may be wholly due to
unknown laws of correlated growth, and without being, as far as we can
see, of the slightest service to the species.

We may often falsely attribute to correlation of growth, structures
which are common to whole groups of species, and which in truth are
simply due to inheritance; for an ancient progenitor may have acquired
through natural selection some one modification in structure, and, after
thousands of generations, some other and independent modification; and
these two modifications, having been transmitted to a whole group
of descendants with diverse habits, would naturally be thought to be
correlated in some necessary manner. So, again, I do not doubt that some
apparent correlations, occurring throughout whole orders, are entirely
due to the manner alone in which natural selection can act. For
instance, Alph. De Candolle has remarked that winged seeds are never
found in fruits which do not open: I should explain the rule by the fact
that seeds could not gradually become winged through natural selection,
except in fruits which opened; so that the individual plants producing
seeds which were a little better fitted to be wafted further, might get
an advantage over those producing seed less fitted for dispersal; and
this process could not possibly go on in fruit which did not open.

The elder Geoffroy and Goethe propounded, at about the same period,
their law of compensation or balancement of growth; or, as Goethe
expressed it, "in order to spend on one side, nature is forced to
economise on the other side." I think this holds true to a certain
extent with our domestic productions: if nourishment flows to one part
or organ in excess, it rarely flows, at least in excess, to another
part; thus it is difficult to get a cow to give much milk and to fatten
readily. The same varieties of the cabbage do not yield abundant and
