new forms in any one area and formation; that widely ranging species
are those which have varied most, and have oftenest given rise to new
species; and that varieties have at first often been local. All these
causes taken conjointly, must have tended to make the geological record
extremely imperfect, and will to a large extent explain why we do not
find interminable varieties, connecting together all the extinct and
existing forms of life by the finest graduated steps.

He who rejects these views on the nature of the geological record, will
rightly reject my whole theory. For he may ask in vain where are the
numberless transitional links which must formerly have connected the
closely allied or representative species, found in the several stages of
the same great formation. He may disbelieve in the enormous intervals
of time which have elapsed between our consecutive formations; he may
overlook how important a part migration must have played, when the
formations of any one great region alone, as that of Europe, are
considered; he may urge the apparent, but often falsely apparent, sudden
coming in of whole groups of species. He may ask where are the remains
of those infinitely numerous organisms which must have existed long
before the first bed of the Silurian system was deposited: I can answer
this latter question only hypothetically, by saying that as far as we
can see, where our oceans now extend they have for an enormous period
extended, and where our oscillating continents now stand they have stood
ever since the Silurian epoch; but that long before that period, the
world may have presented a wholly different aspect; and that the older
continents, formed of formations older than any known to us, may now all
be in a metamorphosed condition, or may lie buried under the ocean.

Passing from these difficulties, all the other great leading facts in
palaeontology seem to me simply to follow on the theory of descent with
modification through natural selection. We can thus understand how it
is that new species come in slowly and successively; how species of
different classes do not necessarily change together, or at the same
rate, or in the same degree; yet in the long run that all undergo
modification to some extent. The extinction of old forms is the almost
inevitable consequence of the production of new forms. We can understand
why when a species has once disappeared it never reappears. Groups of
species increase in numbers slowly, and endure for unequal periods of
time; for the process of modification is necessarily slow, and depends
on many complex contingencies. The dominant species of the larger
dominant groups tend to leave many modified descendants, and thus new
sub-groups and groups are formed. As these are formed, the species of
the less vigorous groups, from their inferiority inherited from a common
progenitor, tend to become extinct together, and to leave no modified
offspring on the face of the earth. But the utter extinction of a whole
group of species may often be a very slow process, from the survival of
a few descendants, lingering in protected and isolated situations. When
a group has once wholly disappeared, it does not reappear; for the link
of generation has been broken.

We can understand how the spreading of the dominant forms of life, which
are those that oftenest vary, will in the long run tend to people the
world with allied, but modified, descendants; and these will generally
succeed in taking the places of those groups of species which are their
inferiors in the struggle for existence. Hence, after long intervals
of time, the productions of the world will appear to have changed
simultaneously.

We can understand how it is that all the forms of life, ancient and
recent, make together one grand system; for all are connected by
generation. We can understand, from the continued tendency to divergence
of character, why the more ancient a form is, the more it generally
differs from those now living. Why ancient and extinct forms often tend
to fill up gaps between existing forms, sometimes blending two groups
previously classed as distinct into one; but more commonly only bringing
them a little closer together. The more ancient a form is, the more
often, apparently, it displays characters in some degree intermediate
between groups now distinct; for the more ancient a form is, the more
nearly it will be related to, and consequently resemble, the common
progenitor of groups, since become widely divergent. Extinct forms
are seldom directly intermediate between existing forms; but are
intermediate only by a long and circuitous course through many extinct
and very different forms. We can clearly see why the organic remains of
closely consecutive formations are more closely allied to each other,
than are those of remote formations; for the forms are more closely
linked together by generation: we can clearly see why the remains of an
intermediate formation are intermediate in character.

The inhabitants of each successive period in the world's history have
beaten their predecessors in the race for life, and are, in so far,
higher in the scale of nature; and this may account for that vague yet
ill-defined sentiment, felt by many palaeontologists, that organisation
on the whole has progressed. If it should hereafter be proved that
ancient animals resemble to a certain extent the embryos of more recent
animals of the same class, the fact will be intelligible. The succession
of the same types of structure within the same areas during the later
geological periods ceases to be mysterious, and is simply explained by
inheritance.

If then the geological record be as imperfect as I believe it to be, and
it may at least be asserted that the record cannot be proved to be much
more perfect, the main objections to the theory of natural selection are
greatly diminished or disappear. On the other hand, all the chief laws
of palaeontology plainly proclaim, as it seems to me, that species have
been produced by ordinary generation: old forms having been supplanted
by new and improved forms of life, produced by the laws of variation
still acting round us, and preserved by Natural Selection.




. GEOGRAPHICAL DISTRIBUTION.

Present distribution cannot be accounted for by differences in physical
conditions. Importance of barriers. Affinity of the productions of the
same continent. Centres of creation. Means of dispersal, by changes of
climate and of the level of the land, and by occasional means. Dispersal
during the Glacial period co-extensive with the world.

In considering the distribution of organic beings over the face of
the globe, the first great fact which strikes us is, that neither the
similarity nor the dissimilarity of the inhabitants of various regions
can be accounted for by their climatal and other physical conditions. Of
late, almost every author who has studied the subject has come to this
conclusion. The case of America alone would almost suffice to prove its
truth: for if we exclude the northern parts where the circumpolar land
is almost continuous, all authors agree that one of the most fundamental
divisions in geographical distribution is that between the New and Old
Worlds; yet if we travel over the vast American continent, from the
central parts of the United States to its extreme southern point, we
meet with the most diversified conditions; the most humid districts,
arid deserts, lofty mountains, grassy plains, forests, marshes, lakes,
and great rivers, under almost every temperature. There is hardly a
climate or condition in the Old World which cannot be paralleled in the
New--at least as closely as the same species generally require; for it
is a most rare case to find a group of organisms confined to any small
spot, having conditions peculiar in only a slight degree; for instance,
small areas in the Old World could be pointed out hotter than any in
the New World, yet these are not inhabited by a peculiar fauna or flora.
Notwithstanding this parallelism in the conditions of the Old and New
Worlds, how widely different are their living productions!

In the southern hemisphere, if we compare large tracts of land in
Australia, South Africa, and western South America, between latitudes
 deg and  deg, we shall find parts extremely similar in all their
conditions, yet it would not be possible to point out three faunas and
floras more utterly dissimilar. Or again we may compare the productions
of South America south of lat.  deg with those north of  deg, which
consequently inhabit a considerably different climate, and they will be
found incomparably more closely related to each other, than they are to
the productions of Australia or Africa under nearly the same climate.
Analogous facts could be given with respect to the inhabitants of the
sea.

A second great fact which strikes us in our general review is, that
barriers of any kind, or obstacles to free migration, are related in a
close and important manner to the differences between the productions of
various regions. We see this in the great difference of nearly all the
terrestrial productions of the New and Old Worlds, excepting in the
northern parts, where the land almost joins, and where, under a slightly
