period near the mouth of the Mississippi, within that limit of depth at
which marine animals can flourish; for we know what vast geographical
changes occurred in other parts of America during this space of time.
When such beds as were deposited in shallow water near the mouth of
the Mississippi during some part of the glacial period shall have been
upraised, organic remains will probably first appear and disappear at
different levels, owing to the migration of species and to geographical
changes. And in the distant future, a geologist examining these beds,
might be tempted to conclude that the average duration of life of the
embedded fossils had been less than that of the glacial period, instead
of having been really far greater, that is extending from before the
glacial epoch to the present day.

In order to get a perfect gradation between two forms in the upper
and lower parts of the same formation, the deposit must have gone on
accumulating for a very long period, in order to have given sufficient
time for the slow process of variation; hence the deposit will generally
have to be a very thick one; and the species undergoing modification
will have had to live on the same area throughout this whole time.
But we have seen that a thick fossiliferous formation can only be
accumulated during a period of subsidence; and to keep the depth
approximately the same, which is necessary in order to enable the same
species to live on the same space, the supply of sediment must nearly
have counterbalanced the amount of subsidence. But this same movement
of subsidence will often tend to sink the area whence the sediment
is derived, and thus diminish the supply whilst the downward movement
continues. In fact, this nearly exact balancing between the supply of
sediment and the amount of subsidence is probably a rare contingency;
for it has been observed by more than one palaeontologist, that very
thick deposits are usually barren of organic remains, except near their
upper or lower limits.

It would seem that each separate formation, like the whole pile of
formations in any country, has generally been intermittent in its
accumulation. When we see, as is so often the case, a formation composed
of beds of different mineralogical composition, we may reasonably
suspect that the process of deposition has been much interrupted, as
a change in the currents of the sea and a supply of sediment of a
different nature will generally have been due to geographical changes
requiring much time. Nor will the closest inspection of a formation give
any idea of the time which its deposition has consumed. Many instances
could be given of beds only a few feet in thickness, representing
formations, elsewhere thousands of feet in thickness, and which must
have required an enormous period for their accumulation; yet no one
ignorant of this fact would have suspected the vast lapse of time
represented by the thinner formation. Many cases could be given of the
lower beds of a formation having been upraised, denuded, submerged, and
then re-covered by the upper beds of the same formation,--facts,
showing what wide, yet easily overlooked, intervals have occurred in
its accumulation. In other cases we have the plainest evidence in great
fossilised trees, still standing upright as they grew, of many long
intervals of time and changes of level during the process of deposition,
which would never even have been suspected, had not the trees chanced to
have been preserved: thus, Messrs. Lyell and Dawson found carboniferous
beds  feet thick in Nova Scotia, with ancient root-bearing strata,
one above the other, at no less than sixty-eight different levels.
Hence, when the same species occur at the bottom, middle, and top of a
formation, the probability is that they have not lived on the same
spot during the whole period of deposition, but have disappeared and
reappeared, perhaps many times, during the same geological period.
So that if such species were to undergo a considerable amount of
modification during any one geological period, a section would not
probably include all the fine intermediate gradations which must on
my theory have existed between them, but abrupt, though perhaps very
slight, changes of form.

It is all-important to remember that naturalists have no golden rule
by which to distinguish species and varieties; they grant some little
variability to each species, but when they meet with a somewhat greater
amount of difference between any two forms, they rank both as species,
unless they are enabled to connect them together by close intermediate
gradations. And this from the reasons just assigned we can seldom hope
to effect in any one geological section. Supposing B and C to be two
species, and a third, A, to be found in an underlying bed; even if A
were strictly intermediate between B and C, it would simply be ranked as
a third and distinct species, unless at the same time it could be
most closely connected with either one or both forms by intermediate
varieties. Nor should it be forgotten, as before explained, that A
might be the actual progenitor of B and C, and yet might not at all
necessarily be strictly intermediate between them in all points of
structure. So that we might obtain the parent-species and its several
modified descendants from the lower and upper beds of a formation,
and unless we obtained numerous transitional gradations, we should not
recognise their relationship, and should consequently be compelled to
rank them all as distinct species.

It is notorious on what excessively slight differences many
palaeontologists have founded their species; and they do this the more
readily if the specimens come from different sub-stages of the same
formation. Some experienced conchologists are now sinking many of the
very fine species of D'Orbigny and others into the rank of varieties;
and on this view we do find the kind of evidence of change which on my
theory we ought to find. Moreover, if we look to rather wider intervals,
namely, to distinct but consecutive stages of the same great formation,
we find that the embedded fossils, though almost universally ranked as
specifically different, yet are far more closely allied to each other
than are the species found in more widely separated formations; but to
this subject I shall have to return in the following chapter.

One other consideration is worth notice: with animals and plants that
can propagate rapidly and are not highly locomotive, there is reason to
suspect, as we have formerly seen, that their varieties are generally
at first local; and that such local varieties do not spread widely and
supplant their parent-forms until they have been modified and perfected
in some considerable degree. According to this view, the chance of
discovering in a formation in any one country all the early stages of
transition between any two forms, is small, for the successive changes
are supposed to have been local or confined to some one spot. Most
marine animals have a wide range; and we have seen that with plants it
is those which have the widest range, that oftenest present varieties;
so that with shells and other marine animals, it is probably those
which have had the widest range, far exceeding the limits of the known
geological formations of Europe, which have oftenest given rise, first
to local varieties and ultimately to new species; and this again would
greatly lessen the chance of our being able to trace the stages of
transition in any one geological formation.

It should not be forgotten, that at the present day, with perfect
specimens for examination, two forms can seldom be connected by
intermediate varieties and thus proved to be the same species, until
many specimens have been collected from many places; and in the case
of fossil species this could rarely be effected by palaeontologists. We
shall, perhaps, best perceive the improbability of our being enabled to
connect species by numerous, fine, intermediate, fossil links, by asking
ourselves whether, for instance, geologists at some future period will
be able to prove, that our different breeds of cattle, sheep, horses,
and dogs have descended from a single stock or from several aboriginal
stocks; or, again, whether certain sea-shells inhabiting the shores
of North America, which are ranked by some conchologists as distinct
species from their European representatives, and by other conchologists
as only varieties, are really varieties or are, as it is called,
specifically distinct. This could be effected only by the future
geologist discovering in a fossil state numerous intermediate
gradations; and such success seems to me improbable in the highest
degree.

Geological research, though it has added numerous species to existing
and extinct genera, and has made the intervals between some few groups
less wide than they otherwise would have been, yet has done scarcely
anything in breaking down the distinction between species, by connecting
them together by numerous, fine, intermediate varieties; and this not
having been effected, is probably the gravest and most obvious of all
the many objections which may be urged against my views. Hence it will
be worth while to sum up the foregoing remarks, under an imaginary
illustration. The Malay Archipelago is of about the size of Europe from
the North Cape to the Mediterranean, and from Britain to Russia; and
therefore equals all the geological formations which have been examined
with any accuracy, excepting those of the United States of America. I
fully agree with Mr. Godwin-Austen, that the present condition of the
Malay Archipelago, with its numerous large islands separated by wide and
