strictly accords with my theory. For as all the species of the same
group have descended from some one species, it is clear that as long as
any species of the group have appeared in the long succession of ages,
so long must its members have continuously existed, in order to have
generated either new and modified or the same old and unmodified forms.
Species of the genus Lingula, for instance, must have continuously
existed by an unbroken succession of generations, from the lowest
Silurian stratum to the present day.

We have seen in the last chapter that the species of a group sometimes
falsely appear to have come in abruptly; and I have attempted to give
an explanation of this fact, which if true would have been fatal to my
views. But such cases are certainly exceptional; the general rule being
a gradual increase in number, till the group reaches its maximum, and
then, sooner or later, it gradually decreases. If the number of
the species of a genus, or the number of the genera of a family, be
represented by a vertical line of varying thickness, crossing the
successive geological formations in which the species are found, the
line will sometimes falsely appear to begin at its lower end, not in a
sharp point, but abruptly; it then gradually thickens upwards, sometimes
keeping for a space of equal thickness, and ultimately thins out in the
upper beds, marking the decrease and final extinction of the species.
This gradual increase in number of the species of a group is strictly
conformable with my theory; as the species of the same genus, and the
genera of the same family, can increase only slowly and progressively;
for the process of modification and the production of a number of allied
forms must be slow and gradual,--one species giving rise first to two
or three varieties, these being slowly converted into species, which in
their turn produce by equally slow steps other species, and so on, like
the branching of a great tree from a single stem, till the group becomes
large.

ON EXTINCTION.

We have as yet spoken only incidentally of the disappearance of species
and of groups of species. On the theory of natural selection the
extinction of old forms and the production of new and improved forms are
intimately connected together. The old notion of all the inhabitants of
the earth having been swept away at successive periods by catastrophes,
is very generally given up, even by those geologists, as Elie de
Beaumont, Murchison, Barrande, etc., whose general views would naturally
lead them to this conclusion. On the contrary, we have every reason to
believe, from the study of the tertiary formations, that species and
groups of species gradually disappear, one after another, first from one
spot, then from another, and finally from the world. Both single species
and whole groups of species last for very unequal periods; some groups,
as we have seen, having endured from the earliest known dawn of life
to the present day; some having disappeared before the close of the
palaeozoic period. No fixed law seems to determine the length of time
during which any single species or any single genus endures. There is
reason to believe that the complete extinction of the species of a group
is generally a slower process than their production: if the appearance
and disappearance of a group of species be represented, as before, by
a vertical line of varying thickness, the line is found to taper more
gradually at its upper end, which marks the progress of extermination,
than at its lower end, which marks the first appearance and increase
in numbers of the species. In some cases, however, the extermination
of whole groups of beings, as of ammonites towards the close of the
secondary period, has been wonderfully sudden.

The whole subject of the extinction of species has been involved in the
most gratuitous mystery. Some authors have even supposed that as the
individual has a definite length of life, so have species a definite
duration. No one I think can have marvelled more at the extinction of
species, than I have done. When I found in La Plata the tooth of a horse
embedded with the remains of Mastodon, Megatherium, Toxodon, and other
extinct monsters, which all co-existed with still living shells at a
very late geological period, I was filled with astonishment; for seeing
that the horse, since its introduction by the Spaniards into South
America, has run wild over the whole country and has increased in
numbers at an unparalleled rate, I asked myself what could so recently
have exterminated the former horse under conditions of life apparently
so favourable. But how utterly groundless was my astonishment! Professor
Owen soon perceived that the tooth, though so like that of the existing
horse, belonged to an extinct species. Had this horse been still
living, but in some degree rare, no naturalist would have felt the least
surprise at its rarity; for rarity is the attribute of a vast number of
species of all classes, in all countries. If we ask ourselves why this
or that species is rare, we answer that something is unfavourable in its
conditions of life; but what that something is, we can hardly ever tell.
On the supposition of the fossil horse still existing as a rare species,
we might have felt certain from the analogy of all other mammals,
even of the slow-breeding elephant, and from the history of the
naturalisation of the domestic horse in South America, that under more
favourable conditions it would in a very few years have stocked the
whole continent. But we could not have told what the unfavourable
conditions were which checked its increase, whether some one or several
contingencies, and at what period of the horse's life, and in what
degree, they severally acted. If the conditions had gone on, however
slowly, becoming less and less favourable, we assuredly should not have
perceived the fact, yet the fossil horse would certainly have become
rarer and rarer, and finally extinct;--its place being seized on by some
more successful competitor.

It is most difficult always to remember that the increase of every
living being is constantly being checked by unperceived injurious
agencies; and that these same unperceived agencies are amply sufficient
to cause rarity, and finally extinction. We see in many cases in the
more recent tertiary formations, that rarity precedes extinction; and we
know that this has been the progress of events with those animals which
have been exterminated, either locally or wholly, through man's agency.
I may repeat what I published in , namely, that to admit that
species generally become rare before they become extinct--to feel no
surprise at the rarity of a species, and yet to marvel greatly when
it ceases to exist, is much the same as to admit that sickness in the
individual is the forerunner of death--to feel no surprise at sickness,
but when the sick man dies, to wonder and to suspect that he died by
some unknown deed of violence.

The theory of natural selection is grounded on the belief that each new
variety, and ultimately each new species, is produced and maintained by
having some advantage over those with which it comes into competition;
and the consequent extinction of less-favoured forms almost inevitably
follows. It is the same with our domestic productions: when a new and
slightly improved variety has been raised, it at first supplants the
less improved varieties in the same neighbourhood; when much improved it
is transported far and near, like our short-horn cattle, and takes the
place of other breeds in other countries. Thus the appearance of new
forms and the disappearance of old forms, both natural and artificial,
are bound together. In certain flourishing groups, the number of new
specific forms which have been produced within a given time is probably
greater than that of the old forms which have been exterminated; but we
know that the number of species has not gone on indefinitely increasing,
at least during the later geological periods, so that looking to later
times we may believe that the production of new forms has caused the
extinction of about the same number of old forms.

The competition will generally be most severe, as formerly explained
and illustrated by examples, between the forms which are most like each
other in all respects. Hence the improved and modified descendants of
a species will generally cause the extermination of the parent-species;
and if many new forms have been developed from any one species, the
nearest allies of that species, i.e. the species of the same genus, will
be the most liable to extermination. Thus, as I believe, a number of
new species descended from one species, that is a new genus, comes to
supplant an old genus, belonging to the same family. But it must often
have happened that a new species belonging to some one group will have
seized on the place occupied by a species belonging to a distinct group,
and thus caused its extermination; and if many allied forms be developed
from the successful intruder, many will have to yield their places; and
it will generally be allied forms, which will suffer from some inherited
inferiority in common. But whether it be species belonging to the same
or to a distinct class, which yield their places to other species which
have been modified and improved, a few of the sufferers may often long
be preserved, from being fitted to some peculiar line of life, or from
inhabiting some distant and isolated station, where they have escaped
severe competition. For instance, a single species of Trigonia, a great
genus of shells in the secondary formations, survives in the Australian
seas; and a few members of the great and almost extinct group of Ganoid
fishes still inhabit our fresh waters. Therefore the utter extinction
