should all the parts and organs of many independent beings, each
supposed to have been separately created for its proper place in nature,
be so invariably linked together by graduated steps? Why should not
Nature have taken a leap from structure to structure? On the theory of
natural selection, we can clearly understand why she should not; for
natural selection can act only by taking advantage of slight successive
variations; she can never take a leap, but must advance by the shortest
and slowest steps.

ORGANS OF LITTLE APPARENT IMPORTANCE.

As natural selection acts by life and death,--by the preservation of
individuals with any favourable variation, and by the destruction of
those with any unfavourable deviation of structure,--I have sometimes
felt much difficulty in understanding the origin of simple parts, of
which the importance does not seem sufficient to cause the preservation
of successively varying individuals. I have sometimes felt as much
difficulty, though of a very different kind, on this head, as in the
case of an organ as perfect and complex as the eye.

In the first place, we are much too ignorant in regard to the whole
economy of any one organic being, to say what slight modifications would
be of importance or not. In a former chapter I have given instances of
most trifling characters, such as the down on fruit and the colour of
the flesh, which, from determining the attacks of insects or from being
correlated with constitutional differences, might assuredly be acted on
by natural selection. The tail of the giraffe looks like an artificially
constructed fly-flapper; and it seems at first incredible that this
could have been adapted for its present purpose by successive slight
modifications, each better and better, for so trifling an object as
driving away flies; yet we should pause before being too positive even
in this case, for we know that the distribution and existence of cattle
and other animals in South America absolutely depends on their power of
resisting the attacks of insects: so that individuals which could by any
means defend themselves from these small enemies, would be able to range
into new pastures and thus gain a great advantage. It is not that the
larger quadrupeds are actually destroyed (except in some rare cases) by
the flies, but they are incessantly harassed and their strength reduced,
so that they are more subject to disease, or not so well enabled in a
coming dearth to search for food, or to escape from beasts of prey.

Organs now of trifling importance have probably in some cases been of
high importance to an early progenitor, and, after having been slowly
perfected at a former period, have been transmitted in nearly the
same state, although now become of very slight use; and any actually
injurious deviations in their structure will always have been checked by
natural selection. Seeing how important an organ of locomotion the
tail is in most aquatic animals, its general presence and use for many
purposes in so many land animals, which in their lungs or modified
swim-bladders betray their aquatic origin, may perhaps be thus accounted
for. A well-developed tail having been formed in an aquatic animal, it
might subsequently come to be worked in for all sorts of purposes, as
a fly-flapper, an organ of prehension, or as an aid in turning, as with
the dog, though the aid must be slight, for the hare, with hardly any
tail, can double quickly enough.

In the second place, we may sometimes attribute importance to characters
which are really of very little importance, and which have originated
from quite secondary causes, independently of natural selection. We
should remember that climate, food, etc., probably have some little
direct influence on the organisation; that characters reappear from
the law of reversion; that correlation of growth will have had a most
important influence in modifying various structures; and finally,
that sexual selection will often have largely modified the external
characters of animals having a will, to give one male an advantage
in fighting with another or in charming the females. Moreover when a
modification of structure has primarily arisen from the above or
other unknown causes, it may at first have been of no advantage to
the species, but may subsequently have been taken advantage of by the
descendants of the species under new conditions of life and with newly
acquired habits.

To give a few instances to illustrate these latter remarks. If green
woodpeckers alone had existed, and we did not know that there were many
black and pied kinds, I dare say that we should have thought that the
green colour was a beautiful adaptation to hide this tree-frequenting
bird from its enemies; and consequently that it was a character of
importance and might have been acquired through natural selection; as it
is, I have no doubt that the colour is due to some quite distinct cause,
probably to sexual selection. A trailing bamboo in the Malay Archipelago
climbs the loftiest trees by the aid of exquisitely constructed hooks
clustered around the ends of the branches, and this contrivance, no
doubt, is of the highest service to the plant; but as we see nearly
similar hooks on many trees which are not climbers, the hooks on the
bamboo may have arisen from unknown laws of growth, and have been
subsequently taken advantage of by the plant undergoing further
modification and becoming a climber. The naked skin on the head of a
vulture is generally looked at as a direct adaptation for wallowing in
putridity; and so it may be, or it may possibly be due to the direct
action of putrid matter; but we should be very cautious in drawing
any such inference, when we see that the skin on the head of the
clean-feeding male turkey is likewise naked. The sutures in the skulls
of young mammals have been advanced as a beautiful adaptation for aiding
parturition, and no doubt they facilitate, or may be indispensable
for this act; but as sutures occur in the skulls of young birds and
reptiles, which have only to escape from a broken egg, we may infer that
this structure has arisen from the laws of growth, and has been taken
advantage of in the parturition of the higher animals.

We are profoundly ignorant of the causes producing slight and
unimportant variations; and we are immediately made conscious of this by
reflecting on the differences in the breeds of our domesticated animals
in different countries,--more especially in the less civilized countries
where there has been but little artificial selection. Careful observers
are convinced that a damp climate affects the growth of the hair, and
that with the hair the horns are correlated. Mountain breeds always
differ from lowland breeds; and a mountainous country would probably
affect the hind limbs from exercising them more, and possibly even the
form of the pelvis; and then by the law of homologous variation, the
front limbs and even the head would probably be affected. The shape,
also, of the pelvis might affect by pressure the shape of the head of
the young in the womb. The laborious breathing necessary in high regions
would, we have some reason to believe, increase the size of the chest;
and again correlation would come into play. Animals kept by savages in
different countries often have to struggle for their own subsistence,
and would be exposed to a certain extent to natural selection, and
individuals with slightly different constitutions would succeed
best under different climates; and there is reason to believe that
constitution and colour are correlated. A good observer, also, states
that in cattle susceptibility to the attacks of flies is correlated with
colour, as is the liability to be poisoned by certain plants; so that
colour would be thus subjected to the action of natural selection. But
we are far too ignorant to speculate on the relative importance of the
several known and unknown laws of variation; and I have here alluded
to them only to show that, if we are unable to account for the
characteristic differences of our domestic breeds, which nevertheless we
generally admit to have arisen through ordinary generation, we ought
not to lay too much stress on our ignorance of the precise cause of the
slight analogous differences between species. I might have adduced for
this same purpose the differences between the races of man, which are
so strongly marked; I may add that some little light can apparently
be thrown on the origin of these differences, chiefly through sexual
selection of a particular kind, but without here entering on copious
details my reasoning would appear frivolous.

The foregoing remarks lead me to say a few words on the protest lately
made by some naturalists, against the utilitarian doctrine that every
detail of structure has been produced for the good of its possessor.
They believe that very many structures have been created for beauty in
the eyes of man, or for mere variety. This doctrine, if true, would be
absolutely fatal to my theory. Yet I fully admit that many structures
are of no direct use to their possessors. Physical conditions probably
have had some little effect on structure, quite independently of any
good thus gained. Correlation of growth has no doubt played a most
important part, and a useful modification of one part will often have
entailed on other parts diversified changes of no direct use. So again
characters which formerly were useful, or which formerly had arisen from
correlation of growth, or from other unknown cause, may reappear from
the law of reversion, though now of no direct use. The effects of sexual
selection, when displayed in beauty to charm the females, can be called
