to what may be called correlation of growth. Any change in the embryo
or larva will almost certainly entail changes in the mature animal. In
monstrosities, the correlations between quite distinct parts are very
curious; and many instances are given in Isidore Geoffroy St. Hilaire's
great work on this subject. Breeders believe that long limbs are almost
always accompanied by an elongated head. Some instances of correlation
are quite whimsical; thus cats with blue eyes are invariably deaf;
colour and constitutional peculiarities go together, of which many
remarkable cases could be given amongst animals and plants. From the
facts collected by Heusinger, it appears that white sheep and pigs are
differently affected from coloured individuals by certain vegetable
poisons. Hairless dogs have imperfect teeth; long-haired and
coarse-haired animals are apt to have, as is asserted, long or many
horns; pigeons with feathered feet have skin between their outer toes;
pigeons with short beaks have small feet, and those with long beaks
large feet. Hence, if man goes on selecting, and thus augmenting, any
peculiarity, he will almost certainly unconsciously modify other parts
of the structure, owing to the mysterious laws of the correlation of
growth.

The result of the various, quite unknown, or dimly seen laws of
variation is infinitely complex and diversified. It is well worth while
carefully to study the several treatises published on some of our old
cultivated plants, as on the hyacinth, potato, even the dahlia, etc.;
and it is really surprising to note the endless points in structure and
constitution in which the varieties and sub-varieties differ slightly
from each other. The whole organisation seems to have become plastic,
and tends to depart in some small degree from that of the parental type.

Any variation which is not inherited is unimportant for us. But the
number and diversity of inheritable deviations of structure, both
those of slight and those of considerable physiological importance,
is endless. Dr. Prosper Lucas's treatise, in two large volumes, is the
fullest and the best on this subject. No breeder doubts how strong
is the tendency to inheritance: like produces like is his fundamental
belief: doubts have been thrown on this principle by theoretical writers
alone. When a deviation appears not unfrequently, and we see it in the
father and child, we cannot tell whether it may not be due to the same
original cause acting on both; but when amongst individuals, apparently
exposed to the same conditions, any very rare deviation, due to some
extraordinary combination of circumstances, appears in the parent--say,
once amongst several million individuals--and it reappears in the
child, the mere doctrine of chances almost compels us to attribute
its reappearance to inheritance. Every one must have heard of cases of
albinism, prickly skin, hairy bodies, etc., appearing in several members
of the same family. If strange and rare deviations of structure are
truly inherited, less strange and commoner deviations may be freely
admitted to be inheritable. Perhaps the correct way of viewing the
whole subject, would be, to look at the inheritance of every character
whatever as the rule, and non-inheritance as the anomaly.

The laws governing inheritance are quite unknown; no one can say why the
same peculiarity in different individuals of the same species, and in
individuals of different species, is sometimes inherited and sometimes
not so; why the child often reverts in certain characters to its
grandfather or grandmother or other much more remote ancestor; why a
peculiarity is often transmitted from one sex to both sexes or to one
sex alone, more commonly but not exclusively to the like sex. It is a
fact of some little importance to us, that peculiarities appearing
in the males of our domestic breeds are often transmitted either
exclusively, or in a much greater degree, to males alone. A much more
important rule, which I think may be trusted, is that, at whatever
period of life a peculiarity first appears, it tends to appear in the
offspring at a corresponding age, though sometimes earlier. In many
cases this could not be otherwise: thus the inherited peculiarities
in the horns of cattle could appear only in the offspring when nearly
mature; peculiarities in the silkworm are known to appear at the
corresponding caterpillar or cocoon stage. But hereditary diseases and
some other facts make me believe that the rule has a wider extension,
and that when there is no apparent reason why a peculiarity should
appear at any particular age, yet that it does tend to appear in the
offspring at the same period at which it first appeared in the parent. I
believe this rule to be of the highest importance in explaining the
laws of embryology. These remarks are of course confined to the first
APPEARANCE of the peculiarity, and not to its primary cause, which may
have acted on the ovules or male element; in nearly the same manner as
in the crossed offspring from a short-horned cow by a long-horned bull,
the greater length of horn, though appearing late in life, is clearly
due to the male element.

Having alluded to the subject of reversion, I may here refer to
a statement often made by naturalists--namely, that our domestic
varieties, when run wild, gradually but certainly revert in character to
their aboriginal stocks. Hence it has been argued that no deductions can
be drawn from domestic races to species in a state of nature. I have in
vain endeavoured to discover on what decisive facts the above statement
has so often and so boldly been made. There would be great difficulty
in proving its truth: we may safely conclude that very many of the most
strongly-marked domestic varieties could not possibly live in a wild
state. In many cases we do not know what the aboriginal stock was, and
so could not tell whether or not nearly perfect reversion had ensued.
It would be quite necessary, in order to prevent the effects of
intercrossing, that only a single variety should be turned loose in
its new home. Nevertheless, as our varieties certainly do occasionally
revert in some of their characters to ancestral forms, it seems to me
not improbable, that if we could succeed in naturalising, or were to
cultivate, during many generations, the several races, for instance,
of the cabbage, in very poor soil (in which case, however, some effect
would have to be attributed to the direct action of the poor soil),
that they would to a large extent, or even wholly, revert to the wild
aboriginal stock. Whether or not the experiment would succeed, is not of
great importance for our line of argument; for by the experiment itself
the conditions of life are changed. If it could be shown that our
domestic varieties manifested a strong tendency to reversion,--that
is, to lose their acquired characters, whilst kept under unchanged
conditions, and whilst kept in a considerable body, so that free
intercrossing might check, by blending together, any slight deviations
of structure, in such case, I grant that we could deduce nothing from
domestic varieties in regard to species. But there is not a shadow of
evidence in favour of this view: to assert that we could not breed
our cart and race-horses, long and short-horned cattle, and poultry of
various breeds, and esculent vegetables, for an almost infinite number
of generations, would be opposed to all experience. I may add, that when
under nature the conditions of life do change, variations and reversions
of character probably do occur; but natural selection, as will hereafter
be explained, will determine how far the new characters thus arising
shall be preserved.

When we look to the hereditary varieties or races of our domestic
animals and plants, and compare them with species closely allied
together, we generally perceive in each domestic race, as already
remarked, less uniformity of character than in true species. Domestic
races of the same species, also, often have a somewhat monstrous
character; by which I mean, that, although differing from each other,
and from the other species of the same genus, in several trifling
respects, they often differ in an extreme degree in some one part, both
when compared one with another, and more especially when compared with
all the species in nature to which they are nearest allied. With these
exceptions (and with that of the perfect fertility of varieties when
crossed,--a subject hereafter to be discussed), domestic races of the
same species differ from each other in the same manner as, only in most
cases in a lesser degree than, do closely-allied species of the same
genus in a state of nature. I think this must be admitted, when we find
that there are hardly any domestic races, either amongst animals or
plants, which have not been ranked by some competent judges as
mere varieties, and by other competent judges as the descendants of
aboriginally distinct species. If any marked distinction existed
between domestic races and species, this source of doubt could not so
perpetually recur. It has often been stated that domestic races do not
differ from each other in characters of generic value. I think it could
be shown that this statement is hardly correct; but naturalists differ
most widely in determining what characters are of generic value; all
such valuations being at present empirical. Moreover, on the view of
the origin of genera which I shall presently give, we have no right
to expect often to meet with generic differences in our domesticated
productions.

When we attempt to estimate the amount of structural difference between
the domestic races of the same species, we are soon involved in doubt,
from not knowing whether they have descended from one or several
