life, to which the parents and their more remote ancestors have been
exposed during several generations. I have remarked in the first
chapter--but a long catalogue of facts which cannot be here given would
be necessary to show the truth of the remark--that the reproductive
system is eminently susceptible to changes in the conditions of life;
and to this system being functionally disturbed in the parents, I
chiefly attribute the varying or plastic condition of the offspring. The
male and female sexual elements seem to be affected before that union
takes place which is to form a new being. In the case of "sporting"
plants, the bud, which in its earliest condition does not apparently
differ essentially from an ovule, is alone affected. But why, because
the reproductive system is disturbed, this or that part should vary more
or less, we are profoundly ignorant. Nevertheless, we can here and there
dimly catch a faint ray of light, and we may feel sure that there must
be some cause for each deviation of structure, however slight.

How much direct effect difference of climate, food, etc., produces on
any being is extremely doubtful. My impression is, that the effect is
extremely small in the case of animals, but perhaps rather more in that
of plants. We may, at least, safely conclude that such influences cannot
have produced the many striking and complex co-adaptations of structure
between one organic being and another, which we see everywhere
throughout nature. Some little influence may be attributed to climate,
food, etc.: thus, E. Forbes speaks confidently that shells at their
southern limit, and when living in shallow water, are more brightly
coloured than those of the same species further north or from greater
depths. Gould believes that birds of the same species are more brightly
coloured under a clear atmosphere, than when living on islands or near
the coast. So with insects, Wollaston is convinced that residence near
the sea affects their colours. Moquin-Tandon gives a list of plants
which when growing near the sea-shore have their leaves in some degree
fleshy, though not elsewhere fleshy. Several other such cases could be
given.

The fact of varieties of one species, when they range into the zone of
habitation of other species, often acquiring in a very slight degree
some of the characters of such species, accords with our view that
species of all kinds are only well-marked and permanent varieties. Thus
the species of shells which are confined to tropical and shallow seas
are generally brighter-coloured than those confined to cold and deeper
seas. The birds which are confined to continents are, according to
Mr. Gould, brighter-coloured than those of islands. The insect-species
confined to sea-coasts, as every collector knows, are often brassy or
lurid. Plants which live exclusively on the sea-side are very apt to
have fleshy leaves. He who believes in the creation of each species,
will have to say that this shell, for instance, was created with bright
colours for a warm sea; but that this other shell became bright-coloured
by variation when it ranged into warmer or shallower waters.

When a variation is of the slightest use to a being, we cannot tell how
much of it to attribute to the accumulative action of natural selection,
and how much to the conditions of life. Thus, it is well known to
furriers that animals of the same species have thicker and better fur
the more severe the climate is under which they have lived; but who
can tell how much of this difference may be due to the warmest-clad
individuals having been favoured and preserved during many generations,
and how much to the direct action of the severe climate? for it would
appear that climate has some direct action on the hair of our domestic
quadrupeds.

Instances could be given of the same variety being produced under
conditions of life as different as can well be conceived; and, on the
other hand, of different varieties being produced from the same species
under the same conditions. Such facts show how indirectly the conditions
of life must act. Again, innumerable instances are known to every
naturalist of species keeping true, or not varying at all, although
living under the most opposite climates. Such considerations as these
incline me to lay very little weight on the direct action of the
conditions of life. Indirectly, as already remarked, they seem to play
an important part in affecting the reproductive system, and in thus
inducing variability; and natural selection will then accumulate
all profitable variations, however slight, until they become plainly
developed and appreciable by us.

EFFECTS OF USE AND DISUSE.

From the facts alluded to in the first chapter, I think there can be
little doubt that use in our domestic animals strengthens and enlarges
certain parts, and disuse diminishes them; and that such modifications
are inherited. Under free nature, we can have no standard of comparison,
by which to judge of the effects of long-continued use or disuse, for we
know not the parent-forms; but many animals have structures which can
be explained by the effects of disuse. As Professor Owen has remarked,
there is no greater anomaly in nature than a bird that cannot fly; yet
there are several in this state. The logger-headed duck of South America
can only flap along the surface of the water, and has its wings in
nearly the same condition as the domestic Aylesbury duck. As the larger
ground-feeding birds seldom take flight except to escape danger, I
believe that the nearly wingless condition of several birds, which now
inhabit or have lately inhabited several oceanic islands, tenanted by
no beast of prey, has been caused by disuse. The ostrich indeed inhabits
continents and is exposed to danger from which it cannot escape by
flight, but by kicking it can defend itself from enemies, as well as any
of the smaller quadrupeds. We may imagine that the early progenitor
of the ostrich had habits like those of a bustard, and that as natural
selection increased in successive generations the size and weight of
its body, its legs were used more, and its wings less, until they became
incapable of flight.

Kirby has remarked (and I have observed the same fact) that the anterior
tarsi, or feet, of many male dung-feeding beetles are very often broken
off; he examined seventeen specimens in his own collection, and not one
had even a relic left. In the Onites apelles the tarsi are so habitually
lost, that the insect has been described as not having them. In some
other genera they are present, but in a rudimentary condition. In the
Ateuchus or sacred beetle of the Egyptians, they are totally deficient.
There is not sufficient evidence to induce us to believe that
mutilations are ever inherited; and I should prefer explaining the
entire absence of the anterior tarsi in Ateuchus, and their rudimentary
condition in some other genera, by the long-continued effects of disuse
in their progenitors; for as the tarsi are almost always lost in many
dung-feeding beetles, they must be lost early in life, and therefore
cannot be much used by these insects.

In some cases we might easily put down to disuse modifications of
structure which are wholly, or mainly, due to natural selection. Mr.
Wollaston has discovered the remarkable fact that  beetles, out of
the  species inhabiting Madeira, are so far deficient in wings that
they cannot fly; and that of the twenty-nine endemic genera, no less
than twenty-three genera have all their species in this condition!
Several facts, namely, that beetles in many parts of the world are very
frequently blown to sea and perish; that the beetles in Madeira, as
observed by Mr. Wollaston, lie much concealed, until the wind lulls and
the sun shines; that the proportion of wingless beetles is larger on
the exposed Dezertas than in Madeira itself; and especially the
extraordinary fact, so strongly insisted on by Mr. Wollaston, of the
almost entire absence of certain large groups of beetles, elsewhere
excessively numerous, and which groups have habits of life almost
necessitating frequent flight;--these several considerations have made
me believe that the wingless condition of so many Madeira beetles is
mainly due to the action of natural selection, but combined probably
with disuse. For during thousands of successive generations each
individual beetle which flew least, either from its wings having been
ever so little less perfectly developed or from indolent habit, will
have had the best chance of surviving from not being blown out to sea;
and, on the other hand, those beetles which most readily took to flight
will oftenest have been blown to sea and thus have been destroyed.

The insects in Madeira which are not ground-feeders, and which, as the
flower-feeding coleoptera and lepidoptera, must habitually use their
wings to gain their subsistence, have, as Mr. Wollaston suspects, their
wings not at all reduced, but even enlarged. This is quite compatible
with the action of natural selection. For when a new insect first
arrived on the island, the tendency of natural selection to enlarge
or to reduce the wings, would depend on whether a greater number of
individuals were saved by successfully battling with the winds, or
by giving up the attempt and rarely or never flying. As with mariners
shipwrecked near a coast, it would have been better for the good
swimmers if they had been able to swim still further, whereas it would
have been better for the bad swimmers if they had not been able to swim
