
A struggle for existence inevitably follows from the high rate at which
all organic beings tend to increase. Every being, which during its
natural lifetime produces several eggs or seeds, must suffer destruction
during some period of its life, and during some season or occasional
year, otherwise, on the principle of geometrical increase, its numbers
would quickly become so inordinately great that no country could support
the product. Hence, as more individuals are produced than can possibly
survive, there must in every case be a struggle for existence, either
one individual with another of the same species, or with the individuals
of distinct species, or with the physical conditions of life. It is the
doctrine of Malthus applied with manifold force to the whole animal and
vegetable kingdoms; for in this case there can be no artificial increase
of food, and no prudential restraint from marriage. Although some
species may be now increasing, more or less rapidly, in numbers, all
cannot do so, for the world would not hold them.

There is no exception to the rule that every organic being naturally
increases at so high a rate, that if not destroyed, the earth would soon
be covered by the progeny of a single pair. Even slow-breeding man has
doubled in twenty-five years, and at this rate, in a few thousand years,
there would literally not be standing room for his progeny. Linnaeus has
calculated that if an annual plant produced only two seeds--and there is
no plant so unproductive as this--and their seedlings next year produced
two, and so on, then in twenty years there would be a million plants.
The elephant is reckoned to be the slowest breeder of all known animals,
and I have taken some pains to estimate its probable minimum rate of
natural increase: it will be under the mark to assume that it breeds
when thirty years old, and goes on breeding till ninety years old,
bringing forth three pair of young in this interval; if this be so,
at the end of the fifth century there would be alive fifteen million
elephants, descended from the first pair.

But we have better evidence on this subject than mere theoretical
calculations, namely, the numerous recorded cases of the astonishingly
rapid increase of various animals in a state of nature, when
circumstances have been favourable to them during two or three following
seasons. Still more striking is the evidence from our domestic animals
of many kinds which have run wild in several parts of the world: if the
statements of the rate of increase of slow-breeding cattle and horses
in South America, and latterly in Australia, had not been well
authenticated, they would have been quite incredible. So it is with
plants: cases could be given of introduced plants which have become
common throughout whole islands in a period of less than ten years.
Several of the plants now most numerous over the wide plains of La
Plata, clothing square leagues of surface almost to the exclusion of
all other plants, have been introduced from Europe; and there are plants
which now range in India, as I hear from Dr. Falconer, from Cape
Comorin to the Himalaya, which have been imported from America since its
discovery. In such cases, and endless instances could be given, no one
supposes that the fertility of these animals or plants has been
suddenly and temporarily increased in any sensible degree. The obvious
explanation is that the conditions of life have been very favourable,
and that there has consequently been less destruction of the old and
young, and that nearly all the young have been enabled to breed. In such
cases the geometrical ratio of increase, the result of which never fails
to be surprising, simply explains the extraordinarily rapid increase and
wide diffusion of naturalised productions in their new homes.

In a state of nature almost every plant produces seed, and amongst
animals there are very few which do not annually pair. Hence we may
confidently assert, that all plants and animals are tending to increase
at a geometrical ratio, that all would most rapidly stock every station
in which they could any how exist, and that the geometrical tendency
to increase must be checked by destruction at some period of life. Our
familiarity with the larger domestic animals tends, I think, to mislead
us: we see no great destruction falling on them, and we forget that
thousands are annually slaughtered for food, and that in a state of
nature an equal number would have somehow to be disposed of.

The only difference between organisms which annually produce eggs or
seeds by the thousand, and those which produce extremely few, is,
that the slow-breeders would require a few more years to people, under
favourable conditions, a whole district, let it be ever so large. The
condor lays a couple of eggs and the ostrich a score, and yet in the
same country the condor may be the more numerous of the two: the Fulmar
petrel lays but one egg, yet it is believed to be the most numerous bird
in the world. One fly deposits hundreds of eggs, and another, like the
hippobosca, a single one; but this difference does not determine how
many individuals of the two species can be supported in a district.
A large number of eggs is of some importance to those species, which
depend on a rapidly fluctuating amount of food, for it allows them
rapidly to increase in number. But the real importance of a large number
of eggs or seeds is to make up for much destruction at some period of
life; and this period in the great majority of cases is an early one. If
an animal can in any way protect its own eggs or young, a small number
may be produced, and yet the average stock be fully kept up; but if many
eggs or young are destroyed, many must be produced, or the species will
become extinct. It would suffice to keep up the full number of a tree,
which lived on an average for a thousand years, if a single seed were
produced once in a thousand years, supposing that this seed were never
destroyed, and could be ensured to germinate in a fitting place. So that
in all cases, the average number of any animal or plant depends only
indirectly on the number of its eggs or seeds.

In looking at Nature, it is most necessary to keep the foregoing
considerations always in mind--never to forget that every single organic
being around us may be said to be striving to the utmost to increase in
numbers; that each lives by a struggle at some period of its life; that
heavy destruction inevitably falls either on the young or old, during
each generation or at recurrent intervals. Lighten any check, mitigate
the destruction ever so little, and the number of the species will
almost instantaneously increase to any amount. The face of Nature may
be compared to a yielding surface, with ten thousand sharp wedges packed
close together and driven inwards by incessant blows, sometimes one
wedge being struck, and then another with greater force.

What checks the natural tendency of each species to increase in number
is most obscure. Look at the most vigorous species; by as much as it
swarms in numbers, by so much will its tendency to increase be still
further increased. We know not exactly what the checks are in even
one single instance. Nor will this surprise any one who reflects how
ignorant we are on this head, even in regard to mankind, so incomparably
better known than any other animal. This subject has been ably treated
by several authors, and I shall, in my future work, discuss some of the
checks at considerable length, more especially in regard to the feral
animals of South America. Here I will make only a few remarks, just to
recall to the reader's mind some of the chief points. Eggs or very young
animals seem generally to suffer most, but this is not invariably the
case. With plants there is a vast destruction of seeds, but, from some
observations which I have made, I believe that it is the seedlings which
suffer most from germinating in ground already thickly stocked with
other plants. Seedlings, also, are destroyed in vast numbers by various
enemies; for instance, on a piece of ground three feet long and two
wide, dug and cleared, and where there could be no choking from other
plants, I marked all the seedlings of our native weeds as they came up,
and out of the  no less than  were destroyed, chiefly by slugs
and insects. If turf which has long been mown, and the case would be the
same with turf closely browsed by quadrupeds, be let to grow, the more
vigorous plants gradually kill the less vigorous, though fully grown,
plants: thus out of twenty species growing on a little plot of turf
(three feet by four) nine species perished from the other species being
allowed to grow up freely.

The amount of food for each species of course gives the extreme limit
to which each can increase; but very frequently it is not the obtaining
food, but the serving as prey to other animals, which determines the
average numbers of a species. Thus, there seems to be little doubt that
the stock of partridges, grouse, and hares on any large estate depends
chiefly on the destruction of vermin. If not one head of game were shot
during the next twenty years in England, and, at the same time, if no
vermin were destroyed, there would, in all probability, be less game
than at present, although hundreds of thousands of game animals are now
annually killed. On the other hand, in some cases, as with the elephant
and rhinoceros, none are destroyed by beasts of prey: even the tiger in
India most rarely dares to attack a young elephant protected by its dam.

Climate plays an important part in determining the average numbers of a
species, and periodical seasons of extreme cold or drought, I believe
to be the most effective of all checks. I estimated that the winter of
