chapter on the Struggle for Existence that it is the most closely-allied
forms,--varieties of the same species, and species of the same genus
or of related genera,--which, from having nearly the same structure,
constitution, and habits, generally come into the severest competition
with each other. Consequently, each new variety or species, during the
progress of its formation, will generally press hardest on its nearest
kindred, and tend to exterminate them. We see the same process of
extermination amongst our domesticated productions, through the
selection of improved forms by man. Many curious instances could
be given showing how quickly new breeds of cattle, sheep, and other
animals, and varieties of flowers, take the place of older and inferior
kinds. In Yorkshire, it is historically known that the ancient black
cattle were displaced by the long-horns, and that these "were swept away
by the short-horns" (I quote the words of an agricultural writer) "as if
by some murderous pestilence."

DIVERGENCE OF CHARACTER.

The principle, which I have designated by this term, is of high
importance on my theory, and explains, as I believe, several important
facts. In the first place, varieties, even strongly-marked ones, though
having somewhat of the character of species--as is shown by the hopeless
doubts in many cases how to rank them--yet certainly differ from
each other far less than do good and distinct species. Nevertheless,
according to my view, varieties are species in the process of formation,
or are, as I have called them, incipient species. How, then, does the
lesser difference between varieties become augmented into the greater
difference between species? That this does habitually happen, we must
infer from most of the innumerable species throughout nature presenting
well-marked differences; whereas varieties, the supposed prototypes and
parents of future well-marked species, present slight and ill-defined
differences. Mere chance, as we may call it, might cause one variety
to differ in some character from its parents, and the offspring of this
variety again to differ from its parent in the very same character and
in a greater degree; but this alone would never account for so habitual
and large an amount of difference as that between varieties of the same
species and species of the same genus.

As has always been my practice, let us seek light on this head from our
domestic productions. We shall here find something analogous. A fancier
is struck by a pigeon having a slightly shorter beak; another fancier is
struck by a pigeon having a rather longer beak; and on the acknowledged
principle that "fanciers do not and will not admire a medium standard,
but like extremes," they both go on (as has actually occurred with
tumbler-pigeons) choosing and breeding from birds with longer and longer
beaks, or with shorter and shorter beaks. Again, we may suppose that at
an early period one man preferred swifter horses; another stronger and
more bulky horses. The early differences would be very slight; in the
course of time, from the continued selection of swifter horses by some
breeders, and of stronger ones by others, the differences would become
greater, and would be noted as forming two sub-breeds; finally, after
the lapse of centuries, the sub-breeds would become converted into two
well-established and distinct breeds. As the differences slowly become
greater, the inferior animals with intermediate characters, being
neither very swift nor very strong, will have been neglected, and will
have tended to disappear. Here, then, we see in man's productions
the action of what may be called the principle of divergence, causing
differences, at first barely appreciable, steadily to increase, and
the breeds to diverge in character both from each other and from their
common parent.

But how, it may be asked, can any analogous principle apply in nature?
I believe it can and does apply most efficiently, from the simple
circumstance that the more diversified the descendants from any one
species become in structure, constitution, and habits, by so much will
they be better enabled to seize on many and widely diversified places in
the polity of nature, and so be enabled to increase in numbers.

We can clearly see this in the case of animals with simple habits. Take
the case of a carnivorous quadruped, of which the number that can be
supported in any country has long ago arrived at its full average. If
its natural powers of increase be allowed to act, it can succeed in
increasing (the country not undergoing any change in its conditions)
only by its varying descendants seizing on places at present occupied by
other animals: some of them, for instance, being enabled to feed on
new kinds of prey, either dead or alive; some inhabiting new stations,
climbing trees, frequenting water, and some perhaps becoming less
carnivorous. The more diversified in habits and structure the
descendants of our carnivorous animal became, the more places they would
be enabled to occupy. What applies to one animal will apply throughout
all time to all animals--that is, if they vary--for otherwise natural
selection can do nothing. So it will be with plants. It has been
experimentally proved, that if a plot of ground be sown with one species
of grass, and a similar plot be sown with several distinct genera of
grasses, a greater number of plants and a greater weight of dry herbage
can thus be raised. The same has been found to hold good when first
one variety and then several mixed varieties of wheat have been sown on
equal spaces of ground. Hence, if any one species of grass were to go
on varying, and those varieties were continually selected which differed
from each other in at all the same manner as distinct species and genera
of grasses differ from each other, a greater number of individual plants
of this species of grass, including its modified descendants, would
succeed in living on the same piece of ground. And we well know that
each species and each variety of grass is annually sowing almost
countless seeds; and thus, as it may be said, is striving its utmost to
increase its numbers. Consequently, I cannot doubt that in the course
of many thousands of generations, the most distinct varieties of any one
species of grass would always have the best chance of succeeding and
of increasing in numbers, and thus of supplanting the less distinct
varieties; and varieties, when rendered very distinct from each other,
take the rank of species.

The truth of the principle, that the greatest amount of life can be
supported by great diversification of structure, is seen under many
natural circumstances. In an extremely small area, especially if freely
open to immigration, and where the contest between individual and
individual must be severe, we always find great diversity in its
inhabitants. For instance, I found that a piece of turf, three feet by
four in size, which had been exposed for many years to exactly the same
conditions, supported twenty species of plants, and these belonged to
eighteen genera and to eight orders, which shows how much these plants
differed from each other. So it is with the plants and insects on small
and uniform islets; and so in small ponds of fresh water. Farmers find
that they can raise most food by a rotation of plants belonging to the
most different orders: nature follows what may be called a simultaneous
rotation. Most of the animals and plants which live close round any
small piece of ground, could live on it (supposing it not to be in
any way peculiar in its nature), and may be said to be striving to the
utmost to live there; but, it is seen, that where they come into the
closest competition with each other, the advantages of diversification
of structure, with the accompanying differences of habit and
constitution, determine that the inhabitants, which thus jostle each
other most closely, shall, as a general rule, belong to what we call
different genera and orders.

The same principle is seen in the naturalisation of plants through man's
agency in foreign lands. It might have been expected that the plants
which have succeeded in becoming naturalised in any land would generally
have been closely allied to the indigenes; for these are commonly looked
at as specially created and adapted for their own country. It might,
also, perhaps have been expected that naturalised plants would have
belonged to a few groups more especially adapted to certain stations in
their new homes. But the case is very different; and Alph. De Candolle
has well remarked in his great and admirable work, that floras gain by
naturalisation, proportionally with the number of the native genera and
species, far more in new genera than in new species. To give a single
instance: in the last edition of Dr. Asa Gray's 'Manual of the Flora of
the Northern United States,'  naturalised plants are enumerated, and
these belong to  genera. We thus see that these naturalised plants
are of a highly diversified nature. They differ, moreover, to a large
extent from the indigenes, for out of the  genera, no less than 
genera are not there indigenous, and thus a large proportional addition
is made to the genera of these States.

By considering the nature of the plants or animals which have struggled
successfully with the indigenes of any country, and have there become
naturalised, we can gain some crude idea in what manner some of the
natives would have had to be modified, in order to have gained an
advantage over the other natives; and we may, I think, at least safely
infer that diversification of structure, amounting to new generic
