pollen being brought to it by insects from other plants. Nearly all the
plants experimentised on by Gartner were potted, and apparently were
kept in a chamber in his house. That these processes are often injurious
to the fertility of a plant cannot be doubted; for Gartner gives in
his table about a score of cases of plants which he castrated, and
artificially fertilised with their own pollen, and (excluding all cases
such as the Leguminosae, in which there is an acknowledged difficulty
in the manipulation) half of these twenty plants had their fertility
in some degree impaired. Moreover, as Gartner during several years
repeatedly crossed the primrose and cowslip, which we have such good
reason to believe to be varieties, and only once or twice succeeded in
getting fertile seed; as he found the common red and blue pimpernels
(Anagallis arvensis and coerulea), which the best botanists rank as
varieties, absolutely sterile together; and as he came to the same
conclusion in several other analogous cases; it seems to me that we
may well be permitted to doubt whether many other species are really so
sterile, when intercrossed, as Gartner believes.

It is certain, on the one hand, that the sterility of various species
when crossed is so different in degree and graduates away so insensibly,
and, on the other hand, that the fertility of pure species is so easily
affected by various circumstances, that for all practical purposes it is
most difficult to say where perfect fertility ends and sterility begins.
I think no better evidence of this can be required than that the two
most experienced observers who have ever lived, namely, Kolreuter and
Gartner, should have arrived at diametrically opposite conclusions
in regard to the very same species. It is also most instructive to
compare--but I have not space here to enter on details--the evidence
advanced by our best botanists on the question whether certain doubtful
forms should be ranked as species or varieties, with the evidence from
fertility adduced by different hybridisers, or by the same author,
from experiments made during different years. It can thus be shown that
neither sterility nor fertility affords any clear distinction between
species and varieties; but that the evidence from this source graduates
away, and is doubtful in the same degree as is the evidence derived from
other constitutional and structural differences.

In regard to the sterility of hybrids in successive generations; though
Gartner was enabled to rear some hybrids, carefully guarding them from a
cross with either pure parent, for six or seven, and in one case for
ten generations, yet he asserts positively that their fertility never
increased, but generally greatly decreased. I do not doubt that this is
usually the case, and that the fertility often suddenly decreases in
the first few generations. Nevertheless I believe that in all these
experiments the fertility has been diminished by an independent cause,
namely, from close interbreeding. I have collected so large a body of
facts, showing that close interbreeding lessens fertility, and, on
the other hand, that an occasional cross with a distinct individual or
variety increases fertility, that I cannot doubt the correctness of this
almost universal belief amongst breeders. Hybrids are seldom raised by
experimentalists in great numbers; and as the parent-species, or other
allied hybrids, generally grow in the same garden, the visits of insects
must be carefully prevented during the flowering season: hence hybrids
will generally be fertilised during each generation by their own
individual pollen; and I am convinced that this would be injurious
to their fertility, already lessened by their hybrid origin. I am
strengthened in this conviction by a remarkable statement repeatedly
made by Gartner, namely, that if even the less fertile hybrids be
artificially fertilised with hybrid pollen of the same kind, their
fertility, notwithstanding the frequent ill effects of manipulation,
sometimes decidedly increases, and goes on increasing. Now, in
artificial fertilisation pollen is as often taken by chance (as I know
from my own experience) from the anthers of another flower, as from the
anthers of the flower itself which is to be fertilised; so that a cross
between two flowers, though probably on the same plant, would be thus
effected. Moreover, whenever complicated experiments are in progress,
so careful an observer as Gartner would have castrated his hybrids, and
this would have insured in each generation a cross with the pollen from
a distinct flower, either from the same plant or from another plant of
the same hybrid nature. And thus, the strange fact of the increase
of fertility in the successive generations of ARTIFICIALLY FERTILISED
hybrids may, I believe, be accounted for by close interbreeding having
been avoided.

Now let us turn to the results arrived at by the third most experienced
hybridiser, namely, the Honourable and Reverend W. Herbert. He is as
emphatic in his conclusion that some hybrids are perfectly fertile--as
fertile as the pure parent-species--as are Kolreuter and Gartner that
some degree of sterility between distinct species is a universal law
of nature. He experimentised on some of the very same species as did
Gartner. The difference in their results may, I think, be in part
accounted for by Herbert's great horticultural skill, and by his having
hothouses at his command. Of his many important statements I will here
give only a single one as an example, namely, that "every ovule in a pod
of Crinum capense fertilised by C. revolutum produced a plant, which
(he says) I never saw to occur in a case of its natural fecundation." So
that we here have perfect, or even more than commonly perfect, fertility
in a first cross between two distinct species.

This case of the Crinum leads me to refer to a most singular fact,
namely, that there are individual plants, as with certain species of
Lobelia, and with all the species of the genus Hippeastrum, which can
be far more easily fertilised by the pollen of another and distinct
species, than by their own pollen. For these plants have been found to
yield seed to the pollen of a distinct species, though quite sterile
with their own pollen, notwithstanding that their own pollen was found
to be perfectly good, for it fertilised distinct species. So that
certain individual plants and all the individuals of certain species
can actually be hybridised much more readily than they can be
self-fertilised! For instance, a bulb of Hippeastrum aulicum produced
four flowers; three were fertilised by Herbert with their own pollen,
and the fourth was subsequently fertilised by the pollen of a compound
hybrid descended from three other and distinct species: the result was
that "the ovaries of the three first flowers soon ceased to grow, and
after a few days perished entirely, whereas the pod impregnated by
the pollen of the hybrid made vigorous growth and rapid progress to
maturity, and bore good seed, which vegetated freely." In a letter to
me, in , Mr. Herbert told me that he had then tried the experiment
during five years, and he continued to try it during several subsequent
years, and always with the same result. This result has, also, been
confirmed by other observers in the case of Hippeastrum with its
sub-genera, and in the case of some other genera, as Lobelia, Passiflora
and Verbascum. Although the plants in these experiments appeared
perfectly healthy, and although both the ovules and pollen of the same
flower were perfectly good with respect to other species, yet as they
were functionally imperfect in their mutual self-action, we must infer
that the plants were in an unnatural state. Nevertheless these facts
show on what slight and mysterious causes the lesser or greater
fertility of species when crossed, in comparison with the same species
when self-fertilised, sometimes depends.

The practical experiments of horticulturists, though not made with
scientific precision, deserve some notice. It is notorious in how
complicated a manner the species of Pelargonium, Fuchsia, Calceolaria,
Petunia, Rhododendron, etc., have been crossed, yet many of these
hybrids seed freely. For instance, Herbert asserts that a hybrid from
Calceolaria integrifolia and plantaginea, species most widely dissimilar
in general habit, "reproduced itself as perfectly as if it had been a
natural species from the mountains of Chile." I have taken some pains
to ascertain the degree of fertility of some of the complex crosses of
Rhododendrons, and I am assured that many of them are perfectly fertile.
Mr. C. Noble, for instance, informs me that he raises stocks for
grafting from a hybrid between Rhododendron Ponticum and Catawbiense,
and that this hybrid "seeds as freely as it is possible to imagine." Had
hybrids, when fairly treated, gone on decreasing in fertility in each
successive generation, as Gartner believes to be the case, the fact
would have been notorious to nurserymen. Horticulturists raise large
beds of the same hybrids, and such alone are fairly treated, for by
insect agency the several individuals of the same hybrid variety are
allowed to freely cross with each other, and the injurious influence
of close interbreeding is thus prevented. Any one may readily convince
himself of the efficiency of insect-agency by examining the flowers of
the more sterile kinds of hybrid rhododendrons, which produce no pollen,
for he will find on their stigmas plenty of pollen brought from other
flowers.

In regard to animals, much fewer experiments have been carefully tried
than with plants. If our systematic arrangements can be trusted, that
is if the genera of animals are as distinct from each other, as are the
genera of plants, then we may infer that animals more widely separated
