we follow them in nature, it is difficult to avoid believing that
they are closely consecutive. But we know, for instance, from Sir R.
Murchison's great work on Russia, what wide gaps there are in that
country between the superimposed formations; so it is in North America,
and in many other parts of the world. The most skilful geologist, if
his attention had been exclusively confined to these large territories,
would never have suspected that during the periods which were blank and
barren in his own country, great piles of sediment, charged with new and
peculiar forms of life, had elsewhere been accumulated. And if in each
separate territory, hardly any idea can be formed of the length of time
which has elapsed between the consecutive formations, we may infer that
this could nowhere be ascertained. The frequent and great changes in the
mineralogical composition of consecutive formations, generally implying
great changes in the geography of the surrounding lands, whence the
sediment has been derived, accords with the belief of vast intervals of
time having elapsed between each formation.

But we can, I think, see why the geological formations of each region
are almost invariably intermittent; that is, have not followed each
other in close sequence. Scarcely any fact struck me more when examining
many hundred miles of the South American coasts, which have been
upraised several hundred feet within the recent period, than the absence
of any recent deposits sufficiently extensive to last for even a short
geological period. Along the whole west coast, which is inhabited by a
peculiar marine fauna, tertiary beds are so scantily developed, that no
record of several successive and peculiar marine faunas will probably be
preserved to a distant age. A little reflection will explain why along
the rising coast of the western side of South America, no extensive
formations with recent or tertiary remains can anywhere be found, though
the supply of sediment must for ages have been great, from the enormous
degradation of the coast-rocks and from muddy streams entering the
sea. The explanation, no doubt, is, that the littoral and sub-littoral
deposits are continually worn away, as soon as they are brought up by
the slow and gradual rising of the land within the grinding action of
the coast-waves.

We may, I think, safely conclude that sediment must be accumulated in
extremely thick, solid, or extensive masses, in order to withstand the
incessant action of the waves, when first upraised and during subsequent
oscillations of level. Such thick and extensive accumulations of
sediment may be formed in two ways; either, in profound depths of the
sea, in which case, judging from the researches of E. Forbes, we may
conclude that the bottom will be inhabited by extremely few animals, and
the mass when upraised will give a most imperfect record of the forms
of life which then existed; or, sediment may be accumulated to any
thickness and extent over a shallow bottom, if it continue slowly to
subside. In this latter case, as long as the rate of subsidence and
supply of sediment nearly balance each other, the sea will remain
shallow and favourable for life, and thus a fossiliferous formation
thick enough, when upraised, to resist any amount of degradation, may be
formed.

I am convinced that all our ancient formations, which are rich in
fossils, have thus been formed during subsidence. Since publishing my
views on this subject in , I have watched the progress of Geology,
and have been surprised to note how author after author, in treating
of this or that great formation, has come to the conclusion that it was
accumulated during subsidence. I may add, that the only ancient tertiary
formation on the west coast of South America, which has been bulky
enough to resist such degradation as it has as yet suffered, but which
will hardly last to a distant geological age, was certainly deposited
during a downward oscillation of level, and thus gained considerable
thickness.

All geological facts tell us plainly that each area has undergone
numerous slow oscillations of level, and apparently these oscillations
have affected wide spaces. Consequently formations rich in fossils and
sufficiently thick and extensive to resist subsequent degradation, may
have been formed over wide spaces during periods of subsidence, but only
where the supply of sediment was sufficient to keep the sea shallow and
to embed and preserve the remains before they had time to decay. On the
other hand, as long as the bed of the sea remained stationary, THICK
deposits could not have been accumulated in the shallow parts, which are
the most favourable to life. Still less could this have happened during
the alternate periods of elevation; or, to speak more accurately, the
beds which were then accumulated will have been destroyed by being
upraised and brought within the limits of the coast-action.

Thus the geological record will almost necessarily be rendered
intermittent. I feel much confidence in the truth of these views, for
they are in strict accordance with the general principles inculcated
by Sir C. Lyell; and E. Forbes independently arrived at a similar
conclusion.

One remark is here worth a passing notice. During periods of elevation
the area of the land and of the adjoining shoal parts of the sea will
be increased, and new stations will often be formed;--all circumstances
most favourable, as previously explained, for the formation of new
varieties and species; but during such periods there will generally be
a blank in the geological record. On the other hand, during subsidence,
the inhabited area and number of inhabitants will decrease (excepting
the productions on the shores of a continent when first broken up into
an archipelago), and consequently during subsidence, though there will
be much extinction, fewer new varieties or species will be formed; and
it is during these very periods of subsidence, that our great deposits
rich in fossils have been accumulated. Nature may almost be said to have
guarded against the frequent discovery of her transitional or linking
forms.

From the foregoing considerations it cannot be doubted that the
geological record, viewed as a whole, is extremely imperfect; but if we
confine our attention to any one formation, it becomes more difficult
to understand, why we do not therein find closely graduated varieties
between the allied species which lived at its commencement and at its
close. Some cases are on record of the same species presenting distinct
varieties in the upper and lower parts of the same formation, but, as
they are rare, they may be here passed over. Although each formation has
indisputably required a vast number of years for its deposition, I can
see several reasons why each should not include a graduated series
of links between the species which then lived; but I can by no
means pretend to assign due proportional weight to the following
considerations.

Although each formation may mark a very long lapse of years, each
perhaps is short compared with the period requisite to change one
species into another. I am aware that two palaeontologists, whose
opinions are worthy of much deference, namely Bronn and Woodward, have
concluded that the average duration of each formation is twice or thrice
as long as the average duration of specific forms. But insuperable
difficulties, as it seems to me, prevent us coming to any just
conclusion on this head. When we see a species first appearing in the
middle of any formation, it would be rash in the extreme to infer that
it had not elsewhere previously existed. So again when we find a species
disappearing before the uppermost layers have been deposited, it would
be equally rash to suppose that it then became wholly extinct. We forget
how small the area of Europe is compared with the rest of the world;
nor have the several stages of the same formation throughout Europe been
correlated with perfect accuracy.

With marine animals of all kinds, we may safely infer a large amount of
migration during climatal and other changes; and when we see a species
first appearing in any formation, the probability is that it only then
first immigrated into that area. It is well known, for instance, that
several species appeared somewhat earlier in the palaeozoic beds of
North America than in those of Europe; time having apparently been
required for their migration from the American to the European seas. In
examining the latest deposits of various quarters of the world, it has
everywhere been noted, that some few still existing species are common
in the deposit, but have become extinct in the immediately surrounding
sea; or, conversely, that some are now abundant in the neighbouring sea,
but are rare or absent in this particular deposit. It is an excellent
lesson to reflect on the ascertained amount of migration of the
inhabitants of Europe during the Glacial period, which forms only a part
of one whole geological period; and likewise to reflect on the great
changes of level, on the inordinately great change of climate, on the
prodigious lapse of time, all included within this same glacial period.
Yet it may be doubted whether in any quarter of the world, sedimentary
deposits, INCLUDING FOSSIL REMAINS, have gone on accumulating within
the same area during the whole of this period. It is not, for instance,
probable that sediment was deposited during the whole of the glacial
