and slightly favourable deviations of structure.

I am well aware that this doctrine of natural selection, exemplified in
the above imaginary instances, is open to the same objections which were
at first urged against Sir Charles Lyell's noble views on "the modern
changes of the earth, as illustrative of geology;" but we now very
seldom hear the action, for instance, of the coast-waves, called a
trifling and insignificant cause, when applied to the excavation of
gigantic valleys or to the formation of the longest lines of inland
cliffs. Natural selection can act only by the preservation and
accumulation of infinitesimally small inherited modifications, each
profitable to the preserved being; and as modern geology has almost
banished such views as the excavation of a great valley by a single
diluvial wave, so will natural selection, if it be a true principle,
banish the belief of the continued creation of new organic beings, or of
any great and sudden modification in their structure.

ON THE INTERCROSSING OF INDIVIDUALS.

I must here introduce a short digression. In the case of animals
and plants with separated sexes, it is of course obvious that two
individuals must always unite for each birth; but in the case of
hermaphrodites this is far from obvious. Nevertheless I am strongly
inclined to believe that with all hermaphrodites two individuals, either
occasionally or habitually, concur for the reproduction of their kind.
This view, I may add, was first suggested by Andrew Knight. We shall
presently see its importance; but I must here treat the subject with
extreme brevity, though I have the materials prepared for an ample
discussion. All vertebrate animals, all insects, and some other large
groups of animals, pair for each birth. Modern research has much
diminished the number of supposed hermaphrodites, and of real
hermaphrodites a large number pair; that is, two individuals regularly
unite for reproduction, which is all that concerns us. But still there
are many hermaphrodite animals which certainly do not habitually pair,
and a vast majority of plants are hermaphrodites. What reason, it may be
asked, is there for supposing in these cases that two individuals ever
concur in reproduction? As it is impossible here to enter on details, I
must trust to some general considerations alone.

In the first place, I have collected so large a body of facts, showing,
in accordance with the almost universal belief of breeders, that with
animals and plants a cross between different varieties, or between
individuals of the same variety but of another strain, gives vigour
and fertility to the offspring; and on the other hand, that CLOSE
interbreeding diminishes vigour and fertility; that these facts alone
incline me to believe that it is a general law of nature (utterly
ignorant though we be of the meaning of the law) that no organic being
self-fertilises itself for an eternity of generations; but that a
cross with another individual is occasionally--perhaps at very long
intervals--indispensable.

On the belief that this is a law of nature, we can, I think, understand
several large classes of facts, such as the following, which on any
other view are inexplicable. Every hybridizer knows how unfavourable
exposure to wet is to the fertilisation of a flower, yet what a
multitude of flowers have their anthers and stigmas fully exposed to
the weather! but if an occasional cross be indispensable, the fullest
freedom for the entrance of pollen from another individual will explain
this state of exposure, more especially as the plant's own anthers and
pistil generally stand so close together that self-fertilisation seems
almost inevitable. Many flowers, on the other hand, have their organs
of fructification closely enclosed, as in the great papilionaceous or
pea-family; but in several, perhaps in all, such flowers, there is a
very curious adaptation between the structure of the flower and the
manner in which bees suck the nectar; for, in doing this, they either
push the flower's own pollen on the stigma, or bring pollen from another
flower. So necessary are the visits of bees to papilionaceous flowers,
that I have found, by experiments published elsewhere, that their
fertility is greatly diminished if these visits be prevented. Now, it
is scarcely possible that bees should fly from flower to flower, and not
carry pollen from one to the other, to the great good, as I believe,
of the plant. Bees will act like a camel-hair pencil, and it is quite
sufficient just to touch the anthers of one flower and then the stigma
of another with the same brush to ensure fertilisation; but it must not
be supposed that bees would thus produce a multitude of hybrids between
distinct species; for if you bring on the same brush a plant's own
pollen and pollen from another species, the former will have such a
prepotent effect, that it will invariably and completely destroy, as has
been shown by Gartner, any influence from the foreign pollen.

When the stamens of a flower suddenly spring towards the pistil, or
slowly move one after the other towards it, the contrivance seems
adapted solely to ensure self-fertilisation; and no doubt it is useful
for this end: but, the agency of insects is often required to cause the
stamens to spring forward, as Kolreuter has shown to be the case with
the barberry; and curiously in this very genus, which seems to have a
special contrivance for self-fertilisation, it is well known that if
very closely-allied forms or varieties are planted near each other, it
is hardly possible to raise pure seedlings, so largely do they
naturally cross. In many other cases, far from there being any aids for
self-fertilisation, there are special contrivances, as I could show
from the writings of C. C. Sprengel and from my own observations, which
effectually prevent the stigma receiving pollen from its own flower: for
instance, in Lobelia fulgens, there is a really beautiful and
elaborate contrivance by which every one of the infinitely numerous
pollen-granules are swept out of the conjoined anthers of each flower,
before the stigma of that individual flower is ready to receive them;
and as this flower is never visited, at least in my garden, by insects,
it never sets a seed, though by placing pollen from one flower on the
stigma of another, I raised plenty of seedlings; and whilst another
species of Lobelia growing close by, which is visited by bees, seeds
freely. In very many other cases, though there be no special mechanical
contrivance to prevent the stigma of a flower receiving its own pollen,
yet, as C. C. Sprengel has shown, and as I can confirm, either the
anthers burst before the stigma is ready for fertilisation, or the
stigma is ready before the pollen of that flower is ready, so that these
plants have in fact separated sexes, and must habitually be crossed.
How strange are these facts! How strange that the pollen and stigmatic
surface of the same flower, though placed so close together, as if
for the very purpose of self-fertilisation, should in so many cases be
mutually useless to each other! How simply are these facts explained
on the view of an occasional cross with a distinct individual being
advantageous or indispensable!

If several varieties of the cabbage, radish, onion, and of some other
plants, be allowed to seed near each other, a large majority, as I
have found, of the seedlings thus raised will turn out mongrels: for
instance, I raised  seedling cabbages from some plants of different
varieties growing near each other, and of these only  were true to
their kind, and some even of these were not perfectly true. Yet the
pistil of each cabbage-flower is surrounded not only by its own six
stamens, but by those of the many other flowers on the same plant. How,
then, comes it that such a vast number of the seedlings are mongrelized?
I suspect that it must arise from the pollen of a distinct VARIETY
having a prepotent effect over a flower's own pollen; and that this is
part of the general law of good being derived from the intercrossing
of distinct individuals of the same species. When distinct SPECIES are
crossed the case is directly the reverse, for a plant's own pollen
is always prepotent over foreign pollen; but to this subject we shall
return in a future chapter.

In the case of a gigantic tree covered with innumerable flowers, it may
be objected that pollen could seldom be carried from tree to tree, and
at most only from flower to flower on the same tree, and that flowers
on the same tree can be considered as distinct individuals only in a
limited sense. I believe this objection to be valid, but that nature has
largely provided against it by giving to trees a strong tendency to bear
flowers with separated sexes. When the sexes are separated, although
the male and female flowers may be produced on the same tree, we can see
that pollen must be regularly carried from flower to flower; and this
will give a better chance of pollen being occasionally carried from tree
to tree. That trees belonging to all Orders have their sexes more often
separated than other plants, I find to be the case in this country; and
at my request Dr. Hooker tabulated the trees of New Zealand, and Dr. Asa
Gray those of the United States, and the result was as I anticipated. On
the other hand, Dr. Hooker has recently informed me that he finds that
the rule does not hold in Australia; and I have made these few remarks
on the sexes of trees simply to call attention to the subject.

Turning for a very brief space to animals: on the land there are some
