say that because planets revolve in elliptic courses round the sun,
satellites follow the same course round the planets, for the sake of
symmetry, and to complete the scheme of nature? An eminent physiologist
accounts for the presence of rudimentary organs, by supposing that they
serve to excrete matter in excess, or injurious to the system; but can
we suppose that the minute papilla, which often represents the pistil
in male flowers, and which is formed merely of cellular tissue, can thus
act? Can we suppose that the formation of rudimentary teeth which are
subsequently absorbed, can be of any service to the rapidly growing
embryonic calf by the excretion of precious phosphate of lime? When a
man's fingers have been amputated, imperfect nails sometimes appear on
the stumps: I could as soon believe that these vestiges of nails have
appeared, not from unknown laws of growth, but in order to excrete horny
matter, as that the rudimentary nails on the fin of the manatee were
formed for this purpose.

On my view of descent with modification, the origin of rudimentary
organs is simple. We have plenty of cases of rudimentary organs in our
domestic productions,--as the stump of a tail in tailless breeds,--the
vestige of an ear in earless breeds,--the reappearance of minute
dangling horns in hornless breeds of cattle, more especially, according
to Youatt, in young animals,--and the state of the whole flower in the
cauliflower. We often see rudiments of various parts in monsters. But
I doubt whether any of these cases throw light on the origin of
rudimentary organs in a state of nature, further than by showing that
rudiments can be produced; for I doubt whether species under nature ever
undergo abrupt changes. I believe that disuse has been the main agency;
that it has led in successive generations to the gradual reduction of
various organs, until they have become rudimentary,--as in the case of
the eyes of animals inhabiting dark caverns, and of the wings of birds
inhabiting oceanic islands, which have seldom been forced to take
flight, and have ultimately lost the power of flying. Again, an organ
useful under certain conditions, might become injurious under others,
as with the wings of beetles living on small and exposed islands; and in
this case natural selection would continue slowly to reduce the organ,
until it was rendered harmless and rudimentary.

Any change in function, which can be effected by insensibly small steps,
is within the power of natural selection; so that an organ rendered,
during changed habits of life, useless or injurious for one purpose,
might easily be modified and used for another purpose. Or an organ
might be retained for one alone of its former functions. An organ, when
rendered useless, may well be variable, for its variations cannot be
checked by natural selection. At whatever period of life disuse or
selection reduces an organ, and this will generally be when the being
has come to maturity and to its full powers of action, the principle
of inheritance at corresponding ages will reproduce the organ in its
reduced state at the same age, and consequently will seldom affect or
reduce it in the embryo. Thus we can understand the greater relative
size of rudimentary organs in the embryo, and their lesser relative size
in the adult. But if each step of the process of reduction were to
be inherited, not at the corresponding age, but at an extremely early
period of life (as we have good reason to believe to be possible) the
rudimentary part would tend to be wholly lost, and we should have a case
of complete abortion. The principle, also, of economy, explained in a
former chapter, by which the materials forming any part or structure, if
not useful to the possessor, will be saved as far as is possible, will
probably often come into play; and this will tend to cause the entire
obliteration of a rudimentary organ.

As the presence of rudimentary organs is thus due to the tendency
in every part of the organisation, which has long existed, to
be inherited--we can understand, on the genealogical view of
classification, how it is that systematists have found rudimentary
parts as useful as, or even sometimes more useful than, parts of high
physiological importance. Rudimentary organs may be compared with the
letters in a word, still retained in the spelling, but become useless
in the pronunciation, but which serve as a clue in seeking for its
derivation. On the view of descent with modification, we may conclude
that the existence of organs in a rudimentary, imperfect, and useless
condition, or quite aborted, far from presenting a strange difficulty,
as they assuredly do on the ordinary doctrine of creation, might
even have been anticipated, and can be accounted for by the laws of
inheritance.

SUMMARY.

In this chapter I have attempted to show, that the subordination of
group to group in all organisms throughout all time; that the nature of
the relationship, by which all living and extinct beings are united by
complex, radiating, and circuitous lines of affinities into one
grand system; the rules followed and the difficulties encountered by
naturalists in their classifications; the value set upon characters, if
constant and prevalent, whether of high vital importance, or of the most
trifling importance, or, as in rudimentary organs, of no importance; the
wide opposition in value between analogical or adaptive characters, and
characters of true affinity; and other such rules;--all naturally follow
on the view of the common parentage of those forms which are considered
by naturalists as allied, together with their modification through
natural selection, with its contingencies of extinction and divergence
of character. In considering this view of classification, it should be
borne in mind that the element of descent has been universally used in
ranking together the sexes, ages, and acknowledged varieties of the same
species, however different they may be in structure. If we extend the
use of this element of descent,--the only certainly known cause of
similarity in organic beings,--we shall understand what is meant by the
natural system: it is genealogical in its attempted arrangement,
with the grades of acquired difference marked by the terms varieties,
species, genera, families, orders, and classes.

On this same view of descent with modification, all the great facts in
Morphology become intelligible,--whether we look to the same pattern
displayed in the homologous organs, to whatever purpose applied, of the
different species of a class; or to the homologous parts constructed on
the same pattern in each individual animal and plant.

On the principle of successive slight variations, not necessarily
or generally supervening at a very early period of life, and being
inherited at a corresponding period, we can understand the great leading
facts in Embryology; namely, the resemblance in an individual embryo of
the homologous parts, which when matured will become widely different
from each other in structure and function; and the resemblance in
different species of a class of the homologous parts or organs, though
fitted in the adult members for purposes as different as possible.
Larvae are active embryos, which have become specially modified in
relation to their habits of life, through the principle of modifications
being inherited at corresponding ages. On this same principle--and
bearing in mind, that when organs are reduced in size, either from
disuse or selection, it will generally be at that period of life when
the being has to provide for its own wants, and bearing in mind how
strong is the principle of inheritance--the occurrence of rudimentary
organs and their final abortion, present to us no inexplicable
difficulties; on the contrary, their presence might have been even
anticipated. The importance of embryological characters and of
rudimentary organs in classification is intelligible, on the view that
an arrangement is only so far natural as it is genealogical.

Finally, the several classes of facts which have been considered in
this chapter, seem to me to proclaim so plainly, that the innumerable
species, genera, and families of organic beings, with which this world
is peopled, have all descended, each within its own class or group, from
common parents, and have all been modified in the course of descent,
that I should without hesitation adopt this view, even if it were
unsupported by other facts or arguments.




. RECAPITULATION AND CONCLUSION.

Recapitulation of the difficulties on the theory of Natural Selection.
Recapitulation of the general and special circumstances in its favour.
Causes of the general belief in the immutability of species. How far the
theory of natural selection may be extended. Effects of its adoption on
the study of Natural history. Concluding remarks.

As this whole volume is one long argument, it may be convenient to the
reader to have the leading facts and inferences briefly recapitulated.

That many and grave objections may be advanced against the theory of
