
Guided by theoretical considerations, I thought that some interesting
results might be obtained in regard to the nature and relations of the
species which vary most, by tabulating all the varieties in several
well-worked floras. At first this seemed a simple task; but Mr. H. C.
Watson, to whom I am much indebted for valuable advice and assistance
on this subject, soon convinced me that there were many difficulties, as
did subsequently Dr. Hooker, even in stronger terms. I shall reserve
for my future work the discussion of these difficulties, and the tables
themselves of the proportional numbers of the varying species.
Dr. Hooker permits me to add, that after having carefully read my
manuscript, and examined the tables, he thinks that the following
statements are fairly well established. The whole subject, however,
treated as it necessarily here is with much brevity, is rather
perplexing, and allusions cannot be avoided to the "struggle for
existence," "divergence of character," and other questions, hereafter to
be discussed.

Alph. De Candolle and others have shown that plants which have very wide
ranges generally present varieties; and this might have been expected,
as they become exposed to diverse physical conditions, and as they
come into competition (which, as we shall hereafter see, is a far more
important circumstance) with different sets of organic beings. But my
tables further show that, in any limited country, the species which are
most common, that is abound most in individuals, and the species
which are most widely diffused within their own country (and this is a
different consideration from wide range, and to a certain extent from
commonness), often give rise to varieties sufficiently well-marked to
have been recorded in botanical works. Hence it is the most flourishing,
or, as they may be called, the dominant species,--those which range
widely over the world, are the most diffused in their own country,
and are the most numerous in individuals,--which oftenest produce
well-marked varieties, or, as I consider them, incipient species. And
this, perhaps, might have been anticipated; for, as varieties, in order
to become in any degree permanent, necessarily have to struggle with the
other inhabitants of the country, the species which are already dominant
will be the most likely to yield offspring which, though in some slight
degree modified, will still inherit those advantages that enabled their
parents to become dominant over their compatriots.

If the plants inhabiting a country and described in any Flora be divided
into two equal masses, all those in the larger genera being placed
on one side, and all those in the smaller genera on the other side, a
somewhat larger number of the very common and much diffused or dominant
species will be found on the side of the larger genera. This, again,
might have been anticipated; for the mere fact of many species of the
same genus inhabiting any country, shows that there is something in the
organic or inorganic conditions of that country favourable to the genus;
and, consequently, we might have expected to have found in the larger
genera, or those including many species, a large proportional number of
dominant species. But so many causes tend to obscure this result, that
I am surprised that my tables show even a small majority on the side of
the larger genera. I will here allude to only two causes of obscurity.
Fresh-water and salt-loving plants have generally very wide ranges and
are much diffused, but this seems to be connected with the nature of the
stations inhabited by them, and has little or no relation to the size of
the genera to which the species belong. Again, plants low in the scale
of organisation are generally much more widely diffused than plants
higher in the scale; and here again there is no close relation to the
size of the genera. The cause of lowly-organised plants ranging widely
will be discussed in our chapter on geographical distribution.

From looking at species as only strongly-marked and well-defined
varieties, I was led to anticipate that the species of the larger genera
in each country would oftener present varieties, than the species of the
smaller genera; for wherever many closely related species (i.e. species
of the same genus) have been formed, many varieties or incipient species
ought, as a general rule, to be now forming. Where many large trees
grow, we expect to find saplings. Where many species of a genus have
been formed through variation, circumstances have been favourable
for variation; and hence we might expect that the circumstances would
generally be still favourable to variation. On the other hand, if we
look at each species as a special act of creation, there is no apparent
reason why more varieties should occur in a group having many species,
than in one having few.

To test the truth of this anticipation I have arranged the plants of
twelve countries, and the coleopterous insects of two districts, into
two nearly equal masses, the species of the larger genera on one side,
and those of the smaller genera on the other side, and it has invariably
proved to be the case that a larger proportion of the species on the
side of the larger genera present varieties, than on the side of the
smaller genera. Moreover, the species of the large genera which present
any varieties, invariably present a larger average number of varieties
than do the species of the small genera. Both these results follow when
another division is made, and when all the smallest genera, with from
only one to four species, are absolutely excluded from the tables.
These facts are of plain signification on the view that species are only
strongly marked and permanent varieties; for wherever many species of
the same genus have been formed, or where, if we may use the expression,
the manufactory of species has been active, we ought generally to find
the manufactory still in action, more especially as we have every reason
to believe the process of manufacturing new species to be a slow one.
And this certainly is the case, if varieties be looked at as incipient
species; for my tables clearly show as a general rule that, wherever
many species of a genus have been formed, the species of that genus
present a number of varieties, that is of incipient species, beyond the
average. It is not that all large genera are now varying much, and are
thus increasing in the number of their species, or that no small genera
are now varying and increasing; for if this had been so, it would have
been fatal to my theory; inasmuch as geology plainly tells us that small
genera have in the lapse of time often increased greatly in size;
and that large genera have often come to their maxima, declined, and
disappeared. All that we want to show is, that where many species of a
genus have been formed, on an average many are still forming; and this
holds good.

There are other relations between the species of large genera and their
recorded varieties which deserve notice. We have seen that there is no
infallible criterion by which to distinguish species and well-marked
varieties; and in those cases in which intermediate links have not been
found between doubtful forms, naturalists are compelled to come to
a determination by the amount of difference between them, judging by
analogy whether or not the amount suffices to raise one or both to the
rank of species. Hence the amount of difference is one very important
criterion in settling whether two forms should be ranked as species or
varieties. Now Fries has remarked in regard to plants, and Westwood in
regard to insects, that in large genera the amount of difference between
the species is often exceedingly small. I have endeavoured to test this
numerically by averages, and, as far as my imperfect results go, they
always confirm the view. I have also consulted some sagacious and most
experienced observers, and, after deliberation, they concur in this
view. In this respect, therefore, the species of the larger genera
resemble varieties, more than do the species of the smaller genera.
Or the case may be put in another way, and it may be said, that in
the larger genera, in which a number of varieties or incipient species
greater than the average are now manufacturing, many of the species
already manufactured still to a certain extent resemble varieties, for
they differ from each other by a less than usual amount of difference.

Moreover, the species of the large genera are related to each other, in
the same manner as the varieties of any one species are related to
each other. No naturalist pretends that all the species of a genus are
equally distinct from each other; they may generally be divided into
sub-genera, or sections, or lesser groups. As Fries has well remarked,
little groups of species are generally clustered like satellites around
certain other species. And what are varieties but groups of forms,
unequally related to each other, and clustered round certain forms--that
is, round their parent-species? Undoubtedly there is one most important
point of difference between varieties and species; namely, that the
amount of difference between varieties, when compared with each other or
with their parent-species, is much less than that between the species of
the same genus. But when we come to discuss the principle, as I call it,
of Divergence of Character, we shall see how this may be explained, and
how the lesser differences between varieties will tend to increase into
the greater differences between species.

There is one other point which seems to me worth notice. Varieties
generally have much restricted ranges: this statement is indeed scarcely
more than a truism, for if a variety were found to have a wider range
