and cowslip, which are considered by many of our best botanists as
varieties, are said by Gartner not to be quite fertile when crossed, and
he consequently ranks them as undoubted species. If we thus argue in
a circle, the fertility of all varieties produced under nature will
assuredly have to be granted.

If we turn to varieties, produced, or supposed to have been produced,
under domestication, we are still involved in doubt. For when it is
stated, for instance, that the German Spitz dog unites more easily
than other dogs with foxes, or that certain South American indigenous
domestic dogs do not readily cross with European dogs, the explanation
which will occur to everyone, and probably the true one, is that
these dogs have descended from several aboriginally distinct species.
Nevertheless the perfect fertility of so many domestic varieties,
differing widely from each other in appearance, for instance of the
pigeon or of the cabbage, is a remarkable fact; more especially when we
reflect how many species there are, which, though resembling each
other most closely, are utterly sterile when intercrossed. Several
considerations, however, render the fertility of domestic varieties less
remarkable than at first appears. It can, in the first place, be clearly
shown that mere external dissimilarity between two species does not
determine their greater or lesser degree of sterility when crossed; and
we may apply the same rule to domestic varieties. In the second place,
some eminent naturalists believe that a long course of domestication
tends to eliminate sterility in the successive generations of hybrids,
which were at first only slightly sterile; and if this be so, we surely
ought not to expect to find sterility both appearing and disappearing
under nearly the same conditions of life. Lastly, and this seems to me
by far the most important consideration, new races of animals and plants
are produced under domestication by man's methodical and unconscious
power of selection, for his own use and pleasure: he neither wishes to
select, nor could select, slight differences in the reproductive system,
or other constitutional differences correlated with the reproductive
system. He supplies his several varieties with the same food; treats
them in nearly the same manner, and does not wish to alter their general
habits of life. Nature acts uniformly and slowly during vast periods
of time on the whole organisation, in any way which may be for each
creature's own good; and thus she may, either directly, or more probably
indirectly, through correlation, modify the reproductive system in the
several descendants from any one species. Seeing this difference in the
process of selection, as carried on by man and nature, we need not be
surprised at some difference in the result.

I have as yet spoken as if the varieties of the same species were
invariably fertile when intercrossed. But it seems to me impossible to
resist the evidence of the existence of a certain amount of sterility in
the few following cases, which I will briefly abstract. The evidence
is at least as good as that from which we believe in the sterility of
a multitude of species. The evidence is, also, derived from hostile
witnesses, who in all other cases consider fertility and sterility as
safe criterions of specific distinction. Gartner kept during several
years a dwarf kind of maize with yellow seeds, and a tall variety with
red seeds, growing near each other in his garden; and although these
plants have separated sexes, they never naturally crossed. He then
fertilised thirteen flowers of the one with the pollen of the other; but
only a single head produced any seed, and this one head produced only
five grains. Manipulation in this case could not have been injurious, as
the plants have separated sexes. No one, I believe, has suspected that
these varieties of maize are distinct species; and it is important to
notice that the hybrid plants thus raised were themselves PERFECTLY
fertile; so that even Gartner did not venture to consider the two
varieties as specifically distinct.

Girou de Buzareingues crossed three varieties of gourd, which like
the maize has separated sexes, and he asserts that their mutual
fertilisation is by so much the less easy as their differences are
greater. How far these experiments may be trusted, I know not; but the
forms experimentised on, are ranked by Sagaret, who mainly founds his
classification by the test of infertility, as varieties.

The following case is far more remarkable, and seems at first quite
incredible; but it is the result of an astonishing number of experiments
made during many years on nine species of Verbascum, by so good an
observer and so hostile a witness, as Gartner: namely, that yellow
and white varieties of the same species of Verbascum when intercrossed
produce less seed, than do either coloured varieties when fertilised
with pollen from their own coloured flowers. Moreover, he asserts that
when yellow and white varieties of one species are crossed with yellow
and white varieties of a DISTINCT species, more seed is produced by the
crosses between the same coloured flowers, than between those which are
differently coloured. Yet these varieties of Verbascum present no other
difference besides the mere colour of the flower; and one variety can
sometimes be raised from the seed of the other.

From observations which I have made on certain varieties of hollyhock, I
am inclined to suspect that they present analogous facts.

Kolreuter, whose accuracy has been confirmed by every subsequent
observer, has proved the remarkable fact, that one variety of the common
tobacco is more fertile, when crossed with a widely distinct species,
than are the other varieties. He experimentised on five forms, which are
commonly reputed to be varieties, and which he tested by the severest
trial, namely, by reciprocal crosses, and he found their mongrel
offspring perfectly fertile. But one of these five varieties, when used
either as father or mother, and crossed with the Nicotiana glutinosa,
always yielded hybrids not so sterile as those which were produced
from the four other varieties when crossed with N. glutinosa. Hence the
reproductive system of this one variety must have been in some manner
and in some degree modified.

From these facts; from the great difficulty of ascertaining the
infertility of varieties in a state of nature, for a supposed variety if
infertile in any degree would generally be ranked as species; from
man selecting only external characters in the production of the most
distinct domestic varieties, and from not wishing or being able to
produce recondite and functional differences in the reproductive system;
from these several considerations and facts, I do not think that the
very general fertility of varieties can be proved to be of universal
occurrence, or to form a fundamental distinction between varieties
and species. The general fertility of varieties does not seem to me
sufficient to overthrow the view which I have taken with respect to
the very general, but not invariable, sterility of first crosses and of
hybrids, namely, that it is not a special endowment, but is incidental
on slowly acquired modifications, more especially in the reproductive
systems of the forms which are crossed.

HYBRIDS AND MONGRELS COMPARED, INDEPENDENTLY OF THEIR FERTILITY.

Independently of the question of fertility, the offspring of species
when crossed and of varieties when crossed may be compared in several
other respects. Gartner, whose strong wish was to draw a marked line of
distinction between species and varieties, could find very few and,
as it seems to me, quite unimportant differences between the so-called
hybrid offspring of species, and the so-called mongrel offspring of
varieties. And, on the other hand, they agree most closely in very many
important respects.

I shall here discuss this subject with extreme brevity. The most
important distinction is, that in the first generation mongrels are
more variable than hybrids; but Gartner admits that hybrids from
species which have long been cultivated are often variable in the first
generation; and I have myself seen striking instances of this fact.
Gartner further admits that hybrids between very closely allied species
are more variable than those from very distinct species; and this shows
that the difference in the degree of variability graduates away.
When mongrels and the more fertile hybrids are propagated for several
generations an extreme amount of variability in their offspring
is notorious; but some few cases both of hybrids and mongrels long
retaining uniformity of character could be given. The variability,
however, in the successive generations of mongrels is, perhaps, greater
than in hybrids.

This greater variability of mongrels than of hybrids does not seem to me
at all surprising. For the parents of mongrels are varieties, and mostly
domestic varieties (very few experiments having been tried on natural
varieties), and this implies in most cases that there has been recent
variability; and therefore we might expect that such variability would
often continue and be super-added to that arising from the mere act of
crossing. The slight degree of variability in hybrids from the first
cross or in the first generation, in contrast with their extreme
