shallow seas, probably represents the former state of Europe, when most
of our formations were accumulating. The Malay Archipelago is one of
the richest regions of the whole world in organic beings; yet if all
the species were to be collected which have ever lived there, how
imperfectly would they represent the natural history of the world!

But we have every reason to believe that the terrestrial productions of
the archipelago would be preserved in an excessively imperfect manner in
the formations which we suppose to be there accumulating. I suspect that
not many of the strictly littoral animals, or of those which lived on
naked submarine rocks, would be embedded; and those embedded in gravel
or sand, would not endure to a distant epoch. Wherever sediment did not
accumulate on the bed of the sea, or where it did not accumulate at a
sufficient rate to protect organic bodies from decay, no remains could
be preserved.

In our archipelago, I believe that fossiliferous formations could be
formed of sufficient thickness to last to an age, as distant in futurity
as the secondary formations lie in the past, only during periods of
subsidence. These periods of subsidence would be separated from each
other by enormous intervals, during which the area would be either
stationary or rising; whilst rising, each fossiliferous formation
would be destroyed, almost as soon as accumulated, by the incessant
coast-action, as we now see on the shores of South America. During the
periods of subsidence there would probably be much extinction of life;
during the periods of elevation, there would be much variation, but the
geological record would then be least perfect.

It may be doubted whether the duration of any one great period of
subsidence over the whole or part of the archipelago, together with
a contemporaneous accumulation of sediment, would EXCEED the average
duration of the same specific forms; and these contingencies are
indispensable for the preservation of all the transitional gradations
between any two or more species. If such gradations were not fully
preserved, transitional varieties would merely appear as so many
distinct species. It is, also, probable that each great period of
subsidence would be interrupted by oscillations of level, and that
slight climatal changes would intervene during such lengthy periods; and
in these cases the inhabitants of the archipelago would have to migrate,
and no closely consecutive record of their modifications could be
preserved in any one formation.

Very many of the marine inhabitants of the archipelago now range
thousands of miles beyond its confines; and analogy leads me to believe
that it would be chiefly these far-ranging species which would oftenest
produce new varieties; and the varieties would at first generally
be local or confined to one place, but if possessed of any decided
advantage, or when further modified and improved, they would slowly
spread and supplant their parent-forms. When such varieties returned to
their ancient homes, as they would differ from their former state, in
a nearly uniform, though perhaps extremely slight degree, they would,
according to the principles followed by many palaeontologists, be ranked
as new and distinct species.

If then, there be some degree of truth in these remarks, we have no
right to expect to find in our geological formations, an infinite number
of those fine transitional forms, which on my theory assuredly have
connected all the past and present species of the same group into one
long and branching chain of life. We ought only to look for a few links,
some more closely, some more distantly related to each other; and these
links, let them be ever so close, if found in different stages of the
same formation, would, by most palaeontologists, be ranked as distinct
species. But I do not pretend that I should ever have suspected how poor
a record of the mutations of life, the best preserved geological section
presented, had not the difficulty of our not discovering innumerable
transitional links between the species which appeared at the
commencement and close of each formation, pressed so hardly on my
theory.

ON THE SUDDEN APPEARANCE OF WHOLE GROUPS OF ALLIED SPECIES.

The abrupt manner in which whole groups of species suddenly appear in
certain formations, has been urged by several palaeontologists,
for instance, by Agassiz, Pictet, and by none more forcibly than
by Professor Sedgwick, as a fatal objection to the belief in the
transmutation of species. If numerous species, belonging to the same
genera or families, have really started into life all at once, the fact
would be fatal to the theory of descent with slow modification through
natural selection. For the development of a group of forms, all of which
have descended from some one progenitor, must have been an extremely
slow process; and the progenitors must have lived long ages before their
modified descendants. But we continually over-rate the perfection of the
geological record, and falsely infer, because certain genera or families
have not been found beneath a certain stage, that they did not exist
before that stage. We continually forget how large the world is,
compared with the area over which our geological formations have been
carefully examined; we forget that groups of species may elsewhere have
long existed and have slowly multiplied before they invaded the ancient
archipelagoes of Europe and of the United States. We do not make due
allowance for the enormous intervals of time, which have probably
elapsed between our consecutive formations,--longer perhaps in some
cases than the time required for the accumulation of each formation.
These intervals will have given time for the multiplication of species
from some one or some few parent-forms; and in the succeeding formation
such species will appear as if suddenly created.

I may here recall a remark formerly made, namely that it might require
a long succession of ages to adapt an organism to some new and peculiar
line of life, for instance to fly through the air; but that when this
had been effected, and a few species had thus acquired a great advantage
over other organisms, a comparatively short time would be necessary to
produce many divergent forms, which would be able to spread rapidly and
widely throughout the world.

I will now give a few examples to illustrate these remarks; and to show
how liable we are to error in supposing that whole groups of species
have suddenly been produced. I may recall the well-known fact that in
geological treatises, published not many years ago, the great class
of mammals was always spoken of as having abruptly come in at the
commencement of the tertiary series. And now one of the richest known
accumulations of fossil mammals belongs to the middle of the secondary
series; and one true mammal has been discovered in the new red sandstone
at nearly the commencement of this great series. Cuvier used to urge
that no monkey occurred in any tertiary stratum; but now extinct species
have been discovered in India, South America, and in Europe even as far
back as the eocene stage. The most striking case, however, is that of
the Whale family; as these animals have huge bones, are marine, and
range over the world, the fact of not a single bone of a whale having
been discovered in any secondary formation, seemed fully to justify the
belief that this great and distinct order had been suddenly produced
in the interval between the latest secondary and earliest tertiary
formation. But now we may read in the Supplement to Lyell's 'Manual,'
published in , clear evidence of the existence of whales in the
upper greensand, some time before the close of the secondary period.

I may give another instance, which from having passed under my own eyes
has much struck me. In a memoir on Fossil Sessile Cirripedes, I have
stated that, from the number of existing and extinct tertiary species;
from the extraordinary abundance of the individuals of many species
all over the world, from the Arctic regions to the equator, inhabiting
various zones of depths from the upper tidal limits to  fathoms;
from the perfect manner in which specimens are preserved in the oldest
tertiary beds; from the ease with which even a fragment of a valve can
be recognised; from all these circumstances, I inferred that had sessile
cirripedes existed during the secondary periods, they would certainly
have been preserved and discovered; and as not one species had been
discovered in beds of this age, I concluded that this great group had
been suddenly developed at the commencement of the tertiary series. This
was a sore trouble to me, adding as I thought one more instance of the
abrupt appearance of a great group of species. But my work had hardly
been published, when a skilful palaeontologist, M. Bosquet, sent me a
drawing of a perfect specimen of an unmistakeable sessile cirripede,
which he had himself extracted from the chalk of Belgium. And, as if
to make the case as striking as possible, this sessile cirripede was a
Chthamalus, a very common, large, and ubiquitous genus, of which not one
specimen has as yet been found even in any tertiary stratum. Hence we
now positively know that sessile cirripedes existed during the secondary
period; and these cirripedes might have been the progenitors of our many
tertiary and existing species.

