differences, would have been profitable to them.

The advantage of diversification in the inhabitants of the same region
is, in fact, the same as that of the physiological division of labour in
the organs of the same individual body--a subject so well elucidated by
Milne Edwards. No physiologist doubts that a stomach by being adapted to
digest vegetable matter alone, or flesh alone, draws most nutriment from
these substances. So in the general economy of any land, the more widely
and perfectly the animals and plants are diversified for different
habits of life, so will a greater number of individuals be capable of
there supporting themselves. A set of animals, with their organisation
but little diversified, could hardly compete with a set more perfectly
diversified in structure. It may be doubted, for instance, whether
the Australian marsupials, which are divided into groups differing but
little from each other, and feebly representing, as Mr. Waterhouse and
others have remarked, our carnivorous, ruminant, and rodent mammals,
could successfully compete with these well-pronounced orders. In the
Australian mammals, we see the process of diversification in an early
and incomplete stage of development. After the foregoing discussion,
which ought to have been much amplified, we may, I think, assume that
the modified descendants of any one species will succeed by so much
the better as they become more diversified in structure, and are thus
enabled to encroach on places occupied by other beings. Now let us see
how this principle of great benefit being derived from divergence of
character, combined with the principles of natural selection and of
extinction, will tend to act.

The accompanying diagram will aid us in understanding this rather
perplexing subject. Let A to L represent the species of a genus large
in its own country; these species are supposed to resemble each other
in unequal degrees, as is so generally the case in nature, and as is
represented in the diagram by the letters standing at unequal distances.
I have said a large genus, because we have seen in the second chapter,
that on an average more of the species of large genera vary than of
small genera; and the varying species of the large genera present a
greater number of varieties. We have, also, seen that the species, which
are the commonest and the most widely-diffused, vary more than rare
species with restricted ranges. Let (A) be a common, widely-diffused,
and varying species, belonging to a genus large in its own country. The
little fan of diverging dotted lines of unequal lengths proceeding from
(A), may represent its varying offspring. The variations are supposed
to be extremely slight, but of the most diversified nature; they are not
supposed all to appear simultaneously, but often after long intervals of
time; nor are they all supposed to endure for equal periods. Only
those variations which are in some way profitable will be preserved or
naturally selected. And here the importance of the principle of benefit
being derived from divergence of character comes in; for this
will generally lead to the most different or divergent variations
(represented by the outer dotted lines) being preserved and accumulated
by natural selection. When a dotted line reaches one of the horizontal
lines, and is there marked by a small numbered letter, a sufficient
amount of variation is supposed to have been accumulated to have formed
a fairly well-marked variety, such as would be thought worthy of record
in a systematic work.

The intervals between the horizontal lines in the diagram, may represent
each a thousand generations; but it would have been better if each had
represented ten thousand generations. After a thousand generations,
species (A) is supposed to have produced two fairly well-marked
varieties, namely a and m. These two varieties will generally continue
to be exposed to the same conditions which made their parents variable,
and the tendency to variability is in itself hereditary, consequently
they will tend to vary, and generally to vary in nearly the same manner
as their parents varied. Moreover, these two varieties, being only
slightly modified forms, will tend to inherit those advantages which
made their common parent (A) more numerous than most of the other
inhabitants of the same country; they will likewise partake of those
more general advantages which made the genus to which the parent-species
belonged, a large genus in its own country. And these circumstances we
know to be favourable to the production of new varieties.

If, then, these two varieties be variable, the most divergent of
their variations will generally be preserved during the next thousand
generations. And after this interval, variety a is supposed in the
diagram to have produced variety a, which will, owing to the principle
of divergence, differ more from (A) than did variety a. Variety m is
supposed to have produced two varieties, namely m and s, differing
from each other, and more considerably from their common parent (A). We
may continue the process by similar steps for any length of time; some
of the varieties, after each thousand generations, producing only
a single variety, but in a more and more modified condition, some
producing two or three varieties, and some failing to produce any. Thus
the varieties or modified descendants, proceeding from the common
parent (A), will generally go on increasing in number and diverging
in character. In the diagram the process is represented up to the
ten-thousandth generation, and under a condensed and simplified form up
to the fourteen-thousandth generation.

But I must here remark that I do not suppose that the process ever goes
on so regularly as is represented in the diagram, though in itself
made somewhat irregular. I am far from thinking that the most divergent
varieties will invariably prevail and multiply: a medium form may
often long endure, and may or may not produce more than one modified
descendant; for natural selection will always act according to the
nature of the places which are either unoccupied or not perfectly
occupied by other beings; and this will depend on infinitely complex
relations. But as a general rule, the more diversified in structure the
descendants from any one species can be rendered, the more places they
will be enabled to seize on, and the more their modified progeny will
be increased. In our diagram the line of succession is broken at regular
intervals by small numbered letters marking the successive forms which
have become sufficiently distinct to be recorded as varieties. But
these breaks are imaginary, and might have been inserted anywhere, after
intervals long enough to have allowed the accumulation of a considerable
amount of divergent variation.

As all the modified descendants from a common and widely-diffused
species, belonging to a large genus, will tend to partake of the
same advantages which made their parent successful in life, they will
generally go on multiplying in number as well as diverging in character:
this is represented in the diagram by the several divergent branches
proceeding from (A). The modified offspring from the later and more
highly improved branches in the lines of descent, will, it is probable,
often take the place of, and so destroy, the earlier and less improved
branches: this is represented in the diagram by some of the lower
branches not reaching to the upper horizontal lines. In some cases I do
not doubt that the process of modification will be confined to a
single line of descent, and the number of the descendants will not be
increased; although the amount of divergent modification may have been
increased in the successive generations. This case would be represented
in the diagram, if all the lines proceeding from (A) were removed,
excepting that from a to a. In the same way, for instance, the
English race-horse and English pointer have apparently both gone on
slowly diverging in character from their original stocks, without either
having given off any fresh branches or races.

After ten thousand generations, species (A) is supposed to have produced
three forms, a, f, and m, which, from having diverged in character
during the successive generations, will have come to differ largely, but
perhaps unequally, from each other and from their common parent. If we
suppose the amount of change between each horizontal line in our diagram
to be excessively small, these three forms may still be only well-marked
varieties; or they may have arrived at the doubtful category of
sub-species; but we have only to suppose the steps in the process of
modification to be more numerous or greater in amount, to convert these
three forms into well-defined species: thus the diagram illustrates
the steps by which the small differences distinguishing varieties
are increased into the larger differences distinguishing species. By
continuing the same process for a greater number of generations (as
shown in the diagram in a condensed and simplified manner), we get eight
species, marked by the letters between a and m, all descended from
(A). Thus, as I believe, species are multiplied and genera are formed.

In a large genus it is probable that more than one species would vary.
In the diagram I have assumed that a second species (I) has produced, by
analogous steps, after ten thousand generations, either two well-marked
varieties (w and z) or two species, according to the amount of
change supposed to be represented between the horizontal lines. After
fourteen thousand generations, six new species, marked by the letters
n to z, are supposed to have been produced. In each genus, the
