natural selection we need not marvel at some instincts being apparently
not perfect and liable to mistakes, and at many instincts causing other
animals to suffer.

If species be only well-marked and permanent varieties, we can at once
see why their crossed offspring should follow the same complex laws
in their degrees and kinds of resemblance to their parents,--in being
absorbed into each other by successive crosses, and in other such
points,--as do the crossed offspring of acknowledged varieties. On
the other hand, these would be strange facts if species have been
independently created, and varieties have been produced by secondary
laws.

If we admit that the geological record is imperfect in an extreme
degree, then such facts as the record gives, support the theory of
descent with modification. New species have come on the stage slowly and
at successive intervals; and the amount of change, after equal intervals
of time, is widely different in different groups. The extinction of
species and of whole groups of species, which has played so conspicuous
a part in the history of the organic world, almost inevitably follows on
the principle of natural selection; for old forms will be supplanted
by new and improved forms. Neither single species nor groups of species
reappear when the chain of ordinary generation has once been broken. The
gradual diffusion of dominant forms, with the slow modification of their
descendants, causes the forms of life, after long intervals of time, to
appear as if they had changed simultaneously throughout the world.
The fact of the fossil remains of each formation being in some degree
intermediate in character between the fossils in the formations above
and below, is simply explained by their intermediate position in the
chain of descent. The grand fact that all extinct organic beings belong
to the same system with recent beings, falling either into the same or
into intermediate groups, follows from the living and the extinct being
the offspring of common parents. As the groups which have descended
from an ancient progenitor have generally diverged in character, the
progenitor with its early descendants will often be intermediate in
character in comparison with its later descendants; and thus we can see
why the more ancient a fossil is, the oftener it stands in some degree
intermediate between existing and allied groups. Recent forms are
generally looked at as being, in some vague sense, higher than ancient
and extinct forms; and they are in so far higher as the later and more
improved forms have conquered the older and less improved organic beings
in the struggle for life. Lastly, the law of the long endurance of
allied forms on the same continent,--of marsupials in Australia, of
edentata in America, and other such cases,--is intelligible, for within
a confined country, the recent and the extinct will naturally be allied
by descent.

Looking to geographical distribution, if we admit that there has been
during the long course of ages much migration from one part of the world
to another, owing to former climatal and geographical changes and to the
many occasional and unknown means of dispersal, then we can understand,
on the theory of descent with modification, most of the great leading
facts in Distribution. We can see why there should be so striking a
parallelism in the distribution of organic beings throughout space, and
in their geological succession throughout time; for in both cases the
beings have been connected by the bond of ordinary generation, and the
means of modification have been the same. We see the full meaning of the
wonderful fact, which must have struck every traveller, namely, that on
the same continent, under the most diverse conditions, under heat and
cold, on mountain and lowland, on deserts and marshes, most of the
inhabitants within each great class are plainly related; for they will
generally be descendants of the same progenitors and early colonists.
On this same principle of former migration, combined in most cases with
modification, we can understand, by the aid of the Glacial period, the
identity of some few plants, and the close alliance of many others,
on the most distant mountains, under the most different climates; and
likewise the close alliance of some of the inhabitants of the sea in
the northern and southern temperate zones, though separated by the whole
intertropical ocean. Although two areas may present the same physical
conditions of life, we need feel no surprise at their inhabitants
being widely different, if they have been for a long period completely
separated from each other; for as the relation of organism to organism
is the most important of all relations, and as the two areas will have
received colonists from some third source or from each other, at various
periods and in different proportions, the course of modification in the
two areas will inevitably be different.

On this view of migration, with subsequent modification, we can see why
oceanic islands should be inhabited by few species, but of these, that
many should be peculiar. We can clearly see why those animals which
cannot cross wide spaces of ocean, as frogs and terrestrial mammals,
should not inhabit oceanic islands; and why, on the other hand, new and
peculiar species of bats, which can traverse the ocean, should so often
be found on islands far distant from any continent. Such facts as the
presence of peculiar species of bats, and the absence of all other
mammals, on oceanic islands, are utterly inexplicable on the theory of
independent acts of creation.

The existence of closely allied or representative species in any two
areas, implies, on the theory of descent with modification, that the
same parents formerly inhabited both areas; and we almost invariably
find that wherever many closely allied species inhabit two areas, some
identical species common to both still exist. Wherever many closely
allied yet distinct species occur, many doubtful forms and varieties of
the same species likewise occur. It is a rule of high generality that
the inhabitants of each area are related to the inhabitants of the
nearest source whence immigrants might have been derived. We see this in
nearly all the plants and animals of the Galapagos archipelago, of Juan
Fernandez, and of the other American islands being related in the most
striking manner to the plants and animals of the neighbouring American
mainland; and those of the Cape de Verde archipelago and other African
islands to the African mainland. It must be admitted that these facts
receive no explanation on the theory of creation.

The fact, as we have seen, that all past and present organic beings
constitute one grand natural system, with group subordinate to group,
and with extinct groups often falling in between recent groups, is
intelligible on the theory of natural selection with its contingencies
of extinction and divergence of character. On these same principles
we see how it is, that the mutual affinities of the species and genera
within each class are so complex and circuitous. We see why certain
characters are far more serviceable than others for classification;--why
adaptive characters, though of paramount importance to the being, are
of hardly any importance in classification; why characters derived from
rudimentary parts, though of no service to the being, are often of high
classificatory value; and why embryological characters are the most
valuable of all. The real affinities of all organic beings are due
to inheritance or community of descent. The natural system is a
genealogical arrangement, in which we have to discover the lines of
descent by the most permanent characters, however slight their vital
importance may be.

The framework of bones being the same in the hand of a man, wing of
a bat, fin of the porpoise, and leg of the horse,--the same number of
vertebrae forming the neck of the giraffe and of the elephant,--and
innumerable other such facts, at once explain themselves on the theory
of descent with slow and slight successive modifications. The similarity
of pattern in the wing and leg of a bat, though used for such different
purpose,--in the jaws and legs of a crab,--in the petals, stamens, and
pistils of a flower, is likewise intelligible on the view of the
gradual modification of parts or organs, which were alike in the early
progenitor of each class. On the principle of successive variations
not always supervening at an early age, and being inherited at a
corresponding not early period of life, we can clearly see why the
embryos of mammals, birds, reptiles, and fishes should be so closely
alike, and should be so unlike the adult forms. We may cease marvelling
at the embryo of an air-breathing mammal or bird having branchial slits
and arteries running in loops, like those in a fish which has to breathe
the air dissolved in water, by the aid of well-developed branchiae.

Disuse, aided sometimes by natural selection, will often tend to reduce
an organ, when it has become useless by changed habits or under changed
conditions of life; and we can clearly understand on this view the
meaning of rudimentary organs. But disuse and selection will generally
act on each creature, when it has come to maturity and has to play its
full part in the struggle for existence, and will thus have little power
of acting on an organ during early life; hence the organ will not be
much reduced or rendered rudimentary at this early age. The calf, for
instance, has inherited teeth, which never cut through the gums of the
upper jaw, from an early progenitor having well-developed teeth; and we
