favourably circumstanced in an equal degree, whenever their inhabitants
met, the battle would be prolonged and severe; and some from one
birthplace and some from the other might be victorious. But in the
course of time, the forms dominant in the highest degree, wherever
produced, would tend everywhere to prevail. As they prevailed, they
would cause the extinction of other and inferior forms; and as these
inferior forms would be allied in groups by inheritance, whole groups
would tend slowly to disappear; though here and there a single member
might long be enabled to survive.

Thus, as it seems to me, the parallel, and, taken in a large sense,
simultaneous, succession of the same forms of life throughout the world,
accords well with the principle of new species having been formed by
dominant species spreading widely and varying; the new species thus
produced being themselves dominant owing to inheritance, and to having
already had some advantage over their parents or over other species;
these again spreading, varying, and producing new species. The forms
which are beaten and which yield their places to the new and victorious
forms, will generally be allied in groups, from inheriting some
inferiority in common; and therefore as new and improved groups spread
throughout the world, old groups will disappear from the world; and the
succession of forms in both ways will everywhere tend to correspond.

There is one other remark connected with this subject worth making. I
have given my reasons for believing that all our greater fossiliferous
formations were deposited during periods of subsidence; and that blank
intervals of vast duration occurred during the periods when the bed of
the sea was either stationary or rising, and likewise when sediment was
not thrown down quickly enough to embed and preserve organic remains.
During these long and blank intervals I suppose that the inhabitants
of each region underwent a considerable amount of modification and
extinction, and that there was much migration from other parts of the
world. As we have reason to believe that large areas are affected by the
same movement, it is probable that strictly contemporaneous formations
have often been accumulated over very wide spaces in the same quarter
of the world; but we are far from having any right to conclude that this
has invariably been the case, and that large areas have invariably been
affected by the same movements. When two formations have been deposited
in two regions during nearly, but not exactly the same period, we should
find in both, from the causes explained in the foregoing paragraphs, the
same general succession in the forms of life; but the species would not
exactly correspond; for there will have been a little more time in
the one region than in the other for modification, extinction, and
immigration.

I suspect that cases of this nature have occurred in Europe. Mr.
Prestwich, in his admirable Memoirs on the eocene deposits of England
and France, is able to draw a close general parallelism between the
successive stages in the two countries; but when he compares certain
stages in England with those in France, although he finds in both a
curious accordance in the numbers of the species belonging to the same
genera, yet the species themselves differ in a manner very difficult
to account for, considering the proximity of the two areas,--unless,
indeed, it be assumed that an isthmus separated two seas inhabited
by distinct, but contemporaneous, faunas. Lyell has made similar
observations on some of the later tertiary formations. Barrande, also,
shows that there is a striking general parallelism in the successive
Silurian deposits of Bohemia and Scandinavia; nevertheless he finds
a surprising amount of difference in the species. If the several
formations in these regions have not been deposited during the same
exact periods,--a formation in one region often corresponding with a
blank interval in the other,--and if in both regions the species
have gone on slowly changing during the accumulation of the several
formations and during the long intervals of time between them; in this
case, the several formations in the two regions could be arranged in
the same order, in accordance with the general succession of the form
of life, and the order would falsely appear to be strictly parallel;
nevertheless the species would not all be the same in the apparently
corresponding stages in the two regions.

ON THE AFFINITIES OF EXTINCT SPECIES TO EACH OTHER, AND TO LIVING FORMS.

Let us now look to the mutual affinities of extinct and living species.
They all fall into one grand natural system; and this fact is at once
explained on the principle of descent. The more ancient any form is, the
more, as a general rule, it differs from living forms. But, as Buckland
long ago remarked, all fossils can be classed either in still existing
groups, or between them. That the extinct forms of life help to fill up
the wide intervals between existing genera, families, and orders, cannot
be disputed. For if we confine our attention either to the living or
to the extinct alone, the series is far less perfect than if we combine
both into one general system. With respect to the Vertebrata, whole
pages could be filled with striking illustrations from our great
palaeontologist, Owen, showing how extinct animals fall in between
existing groups. Cuvier ranked the Ruminants and Pachyderms, as the two
most distinct orders of mammals; but Owen has discovered so many fossil
links, that he has had to alter the whole classification of these two
orders; and has placed certain pachyderms in the same sub-order with
ruminants: for example, he dissolves by fine gradations the apparently
wide difference between the pig and the camel. In regard to the
Invertebrata, Barrande, and a higher authority could not be named,
asserts that he is every day taught that palaeozoic animals, though
belonging to the same orders, families, or genera with those living at
the present day, were not at this early epoch limited in such distinct
groups as they now are.

Some writers have objected to any extinct species or group of species
being considered as intermediate between living species or groups. If by
this term it is meant that an extinct form is directly intermediate in
all its characters between two living forms, the objection is probably
valid. But I apprehend that in a perfectly natural classification many
fossil species would have to stand between living species, and some
extinct genera between living genera, even between genera belonging to
distinct families. The most common case, especially with respect to very
distinct groups, such as fish and reptiles, seems to be, that supposing
them to be distinguished at the present day from each other by a
dozen characters, the ancient members of the same two groups would be
distinguished by a somewhat lesser number of characters, so that the two
groups, though formerly quite distinct, at that period made some small
approach to each other.

It is a common belief that the more ancient a form is, by so much the
more it tends to connect by some of its characters groups now widely
separated from each other. This remark no doubt must be restricted
to those groups which have undergone much change in the course of
geological ages; and it would be difficult to prove the truth of
the proposition, for every now and then even a living animal, as the
Lepidosiren, is discovered having affinities directed towards very
distinct groups. Yet if we compare the older Reptiles and Batrachians,
the older Fish, the older Cephalopods, and the eocene Mammals, with the
more recent members of the same classes, we must admit that there is
some truth in the remark.

Let us see how far these several facts and inferences accord with the
theory of descent with modification. As the subject is somewhat complex,
I must request the reader to turn to the diagram in the fourth chapter.
We may suppose that the numbered letters represent genera, and the
dotted lines diverging from them the species in each genus. The diagram
is much too simple, too few genera and too few species being given,
but this is unimportant for us. The horizontal lines may represent
successive geological formations, and all the forms beneath the
uppermost line may be considered as extinct. The three existing genera,
a, q, p, will form a small family; b and f a closely allied
family or sub-family; and o, e, m, a third family. These three
families, together with the many extinct genera on the several lines of
descent diverging from the parent-form A, will form an order; for all
will have inherited something in common from their ancient and common
progenitor. On the principle of the continued tendency to divergence
of character, which was formerly illustrated by this diagram, the more
recent any form is, the more it will generally differ from its ancient
progenitor. Hence we can understand the rule that the most ancient
fossils differ most from existing forms. We must not, however, assume
that divergence of character is a necessary contingency; it depends
solely on the descendants from a species being thus enabled to seize
on many and different places in the economy of nature. Therefore it is
quite possible, as we have seen in the case of some Silurian forms,
that a species might go on being slightly modified in relation to its
slightly altered conditions of life, and yet retain throughout a vast
period the same general characteristics. This is represented in the
diagram by the letter F.
