It is a remarkable fact, strongly insisted on by Hooker in regard to
America, and by Alph. de Candolle in regard to Australia, that many
more identical plants and allied forms have apparently migrated from the
north to the south, than in a reversed direction. We see, however, a
few southern vegetable forms on the mountains of Borneo and Abyssinia.
I suspect that this preponderant migration from north to south is due
to the greater extent of land in the north, and to the northern forms
having existed in their own homes in greater numbers, and having
consequently been advanced through natural selection and competition
to a higher stage of perfection or dominating power, than the southern
forms. And thus, when they became commingled during the Glacial period,
the northern forms were enabled to beat the less powerful southern
forms. Just in the same manner as we see at the present day, that very
many European productions cover the ground in La Plata, and in a lesser
degree in Australia, and have to a certain extent beaten the natives;
whereas extremely few southern forms have become naturalised in any part
of Europe, though hides, wool, and other objects likely to carry seeds
have been largely imported into Europe during the last two or three
centuries from La Plata, and during the last thirty or forty years
from Australia. Something of the same kind must have occurred on the
intertropical mountains: no doubt before the Glacial period they were
stocked with endemic Alpine forms; but these have almost everywhere
largely yielded to the more dominant forms, generated in the larger
areas and more efficient workshops of the north. In many islands the
native productions are nearly equalled or even outnumbered by the
naturalised; and if the natives have not been actually exterminated,
their numbers have been greatly reduced, and this is the first stage
towards extinction. A mountain is an island on the land; and the
intertropical mountains before the Glacial period must have been
completely isolated; and I believe that the productions of these islands
on the land yielded to those produced within the larger areas of the
north, just in the same way as the productions of real islands have
everywhere lately yielded to continental forms, naturalised by man's
agency.

I am far from supposing that all difficulties are removed on the view
here given in regard to the range and affinities of the allied species
which live in the northern and southern temperate zones and on the
mountains of the intertropical regions. Very many difficulties remain
to be solved. I do not pretend to indicate the exact lines and means
of migration, or the reason why certain species and not others have
migrated; why certain species have been modified and have given rise to
new groups of forms, and others have remained unaltered. We cannot hope
to explain such facts, until we can say why one species and not another
becomes naturalised by man's agency in a foreign land; why one ranges
twice or thrice as far, and is twice or thrice as common, as another
species within their own homes.

I have said that many difficulties remain to be solved: some of the
most remarkable are stated with admirable clearness by Dr. Hooker in
his botanical works on the antarctic regions. These cannot be here
discussed. I will only say that as far as regards the occurrence of
identical species at points so enormously remote as Kerguelen Land, New
Zealand, and Fuegia, I believe that towards the close of the Glacial
period, icebergs, as suggested by Lyell, have been largely concerned in
their dispersal. But the existence of several quite distinct species,
belonging to genera exclusively confined to the south, at these and
other distant points of the southern hemisphere, is, on my theory of
descent with modification, a far more remarkable case of difficulty. For
some of these species are so distinct, that we cannot suppose that there
has been time since the commencement of the Glacial period for their
migration, and for their subsequent modification to the necessary
degree. The facts seem to me to indicate that peculiar and very distinct
species have migrated in radiating lines from some common centre; and I
am inclined to look in the southern, as in the northern hemisphere, to a
former and warmer period, before the commencement of the Glacial period,
when the antarctic lands, now covered with ice, supported a highly
peculiar and isolated flora. I suspect that before this flora was
exterminated by the Glacial epoch, a few forms were widely dispersed
to various points of the southern hemisphere by occasional means of
transport, and by the aid, as halting-places, of existing and now sunken
islands, and perhaps at the commencement of the Glacial period, by
icebergs. By these means, as I believe, the southern shores of America,
Australia, New Zealand have become slightly tinted by the same peculiar
forms of vegetable life.

Sir C. Lyell in a striking passage has speculated, in language almost
identical with mine, on the effects of great alternations of climate on
geographical distribution. I believe that the world has recently felt
one of his great cycles of change; and that on this view, combined with
modification through natural selection, a multitude of facts in the
present distribution both of the same and of allied forms of life can be
explained. The living waters may be said to have flowed during one short
period from the north and from the south, and to have crossed at the
equator; but to have flowed with greater force from the north so as
to have freely inundated the south. As the tide leaves its drift in
horizontal lines, though rising higher on the shores where the tide
rises highest, so have the living waters left their living drift on our
mountain-summits, in a line gently rising from the arctic lowlands to
a great height under the equator. The various beings thus left stranded
may be compared with savage races of man, driven up and surviving in the
mountain-fastnesses of almost every land, which serve as a record,
full of interest to us, of the former inhabitants of the surrounding
lowlands.




. GEOGRAPHICAL DISTRIBUTION--continued.

Distribution of fresh-water productions. On the inhabitants of oceanic
islands. Absence of Batrachians and of terrestrial Mammals. On the
relation of the inhabitants of islands to those of the nearest mainland.
On colonisation from the nearest source with subsequent modification.
Summary of the last and present chapters.

As lakes and river-systems are separated from each other by barriers of
land, it might have been thought that fresh-water productions would not
have ranged widely within the same country, and as the sea is apparently
a still more impassable barrier, that they never would have extended to
distant countries. But the case is exactly the reverse. Not only have
many fresh-water species, belonging to quite different classes, an
enormous range, but allied species prevail in a remarkable manner
throughout the world. I well remember, when first collecting in the
fresh waters of Brazil, feeling much surprise at the similarity of
the fresh-water insects, shells, etc., and at the dissimilarity of the
surrounding terrestrial beings, compared with those of Britain.

But this power in fresh-water productions of ranging widely, though so
unexpected, can, I think, in most cases be explained by their having
become fitted, in a manner highly useful to them, for short and frequent
migrations from pond to pond, or from stream to stream; and liability
to wide dispersal would follow from this capacity as an almost necessary
consequence. We can here consider only a few cases. In regard to fish, I
believe that the same species never occur in the fresh waters of distant
continents. But on the same continent the species often range widely and
almost capriciously; for two river-systems will have some fish in common
and some different. A few facts seem to favour the possibility of their
occasional transport by accidental means; like that of the live fish
not rarely dropped by whirlwinds in India, and the vitality of their
ova when removed from the water. But I am inclined to attribute the
dispersal of fresh-water fish mainly to slight changes within the recent
period in the level of the land, having caused rivers to flow into each
other. Instances, also, could be given of this having occurred during
floods, without any change of level. We have evidence in the loess of
the Rhine of considerable changes of level in the land within a very
recent geological period, and when the surface was peopled by existing
land and fresh-water shells. The wide difference of the fish on opposite
sides of continuous mountain-ranges, which from an early period must
have parted river-systems and completely prevented their inosculation,
seems to lead to this same conclusion. With respect to allied
fresh-water fish occurring at very distant points of the world, no doubt
there are many cases which cannot at present be explained: but some
fresh-water fish belong to very ancient forms, and in such cases
there will have been ample time for great geographical changes, and
consequently time and means for much migration. In the second place,
salt-water fish can with care be slowly accustomed to live in fresh
water; and, according to Valenciennes, there is hardly a single group of
fishes confined exclusively to fresh water, so that we may imagine that
a marine member of a fresh-water group might travel far along the shores
