their kind.

The subject well deserves to be discussed at great length, but I will
here take only a single case, that of working or sterile ants. How the
workers have been rendered sterile is a difficulty; but not much greater
than that of any other striking modification of structure; for it can
be shown that some insects and other articulate animals in a state of
nature occasionally become sterile; and if such insects had been social,
and it had been profitable to the community that a number should have
been annually born capable of work, but incapable of procreation, I
can see no very great difficulty in this being effected by natural
selection. But I must pass over this preliminary difficulty. The great
difficulty lies in the working ants differing widely from both the males
and the fertile females in structure, as in the shape of the thorax and
in being destitute of wings and sometimes of eyes, and in instinct. As
far as instinct alone is concerned, the prodigious difference in this
respect between the workers and the perfect females, would have been
far better exemplified by the hive-bee. If a working ant or other
neuter insect had been an animal in the ordinary state, I should have
unhesitatingly assumed that all its characters had been slowly acquired
through natural selection; namely, by an individual having been born
with some slight profitable modification of structure, this being
inherited by its offspring, which again varied and were again selected,
and so onwards. But with the working ant we have an insect differing
greatly from its parents, yet absolutely sterile; so that it could never
have transmitted successively acquired modifications of structure or
instinct to its progeny. It may well be asked how is it possible to
reconcile this case with the theory of natural selection?

First, let it be remembered that we have innumerable instances, both in
our domestic productions and in those in a state of nature, of all sorts
of differences of structure which have become correlated to certain
ages, and to either sex. We have differences correlated not only to
one sex, but to that short period alone when the reproductive system is
active, as in the nuptial plumage of many birds, and in the hooked jaws
of the male salmon. We have even slight differences in the horns of
different breeds of cattle in relation to an artificially imperfect
state of the male sex; for oxen of certain breeds have longer horns than
in other breeds, in comparison with the horns of the bulls or cows of
these same breeds. Hence I can see no real difficulty in any character
having become correlated with the sterile condition of certain members
of insect-communities: the difficulty lies in understanding how such
correlated modifications of structure could have been slowly accumulated
by natural selection.

This difficulty, though appearing insuperable, is lessened, or, as I
believe, disappears, when it is remembered that selection may be applied
to the family, as well as to the individual, and may thus gain the
desired end. Thus, a well-flavoured vegetable is cooked, and the
individual is destroyed; but the horticulturist sows seeds of the same
stock, and confidently expects to get nearly the same variety; breeders
of cattle wish the flesh and fat to be well marbled together; the animal
has been slaughtered, but the breeder goes with confidence to the same
family. I have such faith in the powers of selection, that I do not
doubt that a breed of cattle, always yielding oxen with extraordinarily
long horns, could be slowly formed by carefully watching which
individual bulls and cows, when matched, produced oxen with the longest
horns; and yet no one ox could ever have propagated its kind. Thus
I believe it has been with social insects: a slight modification of
structure, or instinct, correlated with the sterile condition of certain
members of the community, has been advantageous to the community:
consequently the fertile males and females of the same community
flourished, and transmitted to their fertile offspring a tendency to
produce sterile members having the same modification. And I believe
that this process has been repeated, until that prodigious amount of
difference between the fertile and sterile females of the same species
has been produced, which we see in many social insects.

But we have not as yet touched on the climax of the difficulty; namely,
the fact that the neuters of several ants differ, not only from the
fertile females and males, but from each other, sometimes to an almost
incredible degree, and are thus divided into two or even three castes.
The castes, moreover, do not generally graduate into each other, but are
perfectly well defined; being as distinct from each other, as are any
two species of the same genus, or rather as any two genera of the same
family. Thus in Eciton, there are working and soldier neuters, with jaws
and instincts extraordinarily different: in Cryptocerus, the workers of
one caste alone carry a wonderful sort of shield on their heads, the use
of which is quite unknown: in the Mexican Myrmecocystus, the workers of
one caste never leave the nest; they are fed by the workers of another
caste, and they have an enormously developed abdomen which secretes a
sort of honey, supplying the place of that excreted by the aphides, or
the domestic cattle as they may be called, which our European ants guard
or imprison.

It will indeed be thought that I have an overweening confidence in the
principle of natural selection, when I do not admit that such wonderful
and well-established facts at once annihilate my theory. In the simpler
case of neuter insects all of one caste or of the same kind, which have
been rendered by natural selection, as I believe to be quite possible,
different from the fertile males and females,--in this case, we may
safely conclude from the analogy of ordinary variations, that each
successive, slight, profitable modification did not probably at first
appear in all the individual neuters in the same nest, but in a few
alone; and that by the long-continued selection of the fertile parents
which produced most neuters with the profitable modification, all the
neuters ultimately came to have the desired character. On this view we
ought occasionally to find neuter-insects of the same species, in the
same nest, presenting gradations of structure; and this we do find,
even often, considering how few neuter-insects out of Europe have been
carefully examined. Mr. F. Smith has shown how surprisingly the neuters
of several British ants differ from each other in size and sometimes
in colour; and that the extreme forms can sometimes be perfectly linked
together by individuals taken out of the same nest: I have myself
compared perfect gradations of this kind. It often happens that the
larger or the smaller sized workers are the most numerous; or that both
large and small are numerous, with those of an intermediate size scanty
in numbers. Formica flava has larger and smaller workers, with some of
intermediate size; and, in this species, as Mr. F. Smith has observed,
the larger workers have simple eyes (ocelli), which though small can
be plainly distinguished, whereas the smaller workers have their ocelli
rudimentary. Having carefully dissected several specimens of these
workers, I can affirm that the eyes are far more rudimentary in the
smaller workers than can be accounted for merely by their proportionally
lesser size; and I fully believe, though I dare not assert so
positively, that the workers of intermediate size have their ocelli in
an exactly intermediate condition. So that we here have two bodies of
sterile workers in the same nest, differing not only in size, but
in their organs of vision, yet connected by some few members in an
intermediate condition. I may digress by adding, that if the smaller
workers had been the most useful to the community, and those males and
females had been continually selected, which produced more and more
of the smaller workers, until all the workers had come to be in this
condition; we should then have had a species of ant with neuters very
nearly in the same condition with those of Myrmica. For the workers of
Myrmica have not even rudiments of ocelli, though the male and female
ants of this genus have well-developed ocelli.

I may give one other case: so confidently did I expect to find
gradations in important points of structure between the different castes
of neuters in the same species, that I gladly availed myself of Mr. F.
Smith's offer of numerous specimens from the same nest of the driver
ant (Anomma) of West Africa. The reader will perhaps best appreciate
the amount of difference in these workers, by my giving not the actual
measurements, but a strictly accurate illustration: the difference was
the same as if we were to see a set of workmen building a house of whom
many were five feet four inches high, and many sixteen feet high; but
we must suppose that the larger workmen had heads four instead of three
times as big as those of the smaller men, and jaws nearly five times
as big. The jaws, moreover, of the working ants of the several sizes
differed wonderfully in shape, and in the form and number of the teeth.
But the important fact for us is, that though the workers can be grouped
into castes of different sizes, yet they graduate insensibly into each
other, as does the widely-different structure of their jaws. I speak
confidently on this latter point, as Mr. Lubbock made drawings for
me with the camera lucida of the jaws which I had dissected from the
workers of the several sizes.

With these facts before me, I believe that natural selection, by acting
on the fertile parents, could form a species which should regularly
