than that of its supposed parent-species, their denominations ought to
be reversed. But there is also reason to believe, that those species
which are very closely allied to other species, and in so far resemble
varieties, often have much restricted ranges. For instance, Mr. H. C.
Watson has marked for me in the well-sifted London Catalogue of plants
(th edition)  plants which are therein ranked as species, but which
he considers as so closely allied to other species as to be of doubtful
value: these  reputed species range on an average over . of the
provinces into which Mr. Watson has divided Great Britain. Now, in this
same catalogue,  acknowledged varieties are recorded, and these range
over . provinces; whereas, the species to which these varieties belong
range over . provinces. So that the acknowledged varieties have very
nearly the same restricted average range, as have those very closely
allied forms, marked for me by Mr. Watson as doubtful species, but which
are almost universally ranked by British botanists as good and true
species.

Finally, then, varieties have the same general characters as species,
for they cannot be distinguished from species,--except, firstly, by
the discovery of intermediate linking forms, and the occurrence of
such links cannot affect the actual characters of the forms which they
connect; and except, secondly, by a certain amount of difference, for
two forms, if differing very little, are generally ranked as varieties,
notwithstanding that intermediate linking forms have not been
discovered; but the amount of difference considered necessary to give to
two forms the rank of species is quite indefinite. In genera having more
than the average number of species in any country, the species of these
genera have more than the average number of varieties. In large genera
the species are apt to be closely, but unequally, allied together,
forming little clusters round certain species. Species very closely
allied to other species apparently have restricted ranges. In all these
several respects the species of large genera present a strong analogy
with varieties. And we can clearly understand these analogies, if
species have once existed as varieties, and have thus originated:
whereas, these analogies are utterly inexplicable if each species has
been independently created.

We have, also, seen that it is the most flourishing and dominant species
of the larger genera which on an average vary most; and varieties, as
we shall hereafter see, tend to become converted into new and distinct
species. The larger genera thus tend to become larger; and throughout
nature the forms of life which are now dominant tend to become still
more dominant by leaving many modified and dominant descendants. But by
steps hereafter to be explained, the larger genera also tend to break up
into smaller genera. And thus, the forms of life throughout the universe
become divided into groups subordinate to groups.




. STRUGGLE FOR EXISTENCE.

Bears on natural selection. The term used in a wide sense. Geometrical
powers of increase. Rapid increase of naturalised animals and plants.
Nature of the checks to increase. Competition universal. Effects of
climate. Protection from the number of individuals. Complex relations of
all animals and plants throughout nature. Struggle for life most severe
between individuals and varieties of the same species; often severe
between species of the same genus. The relation of organism to organism
the most important of all relations.

Before entering on the subject of this chapter, I must make a few
preliminary remarks, to show how the struggle for existence bears on
Natural Selection. It has been seen in the last chapter that
amongst organic beings in a state of nature there is some individual
variability; indeed I am not aware that this has ever been disputed.
It is immaterial for us whether a multitude of doubtful forms be called
species or sub-species or varieties; what rank, for instance, the two or
three hundred doubtful forms of British plants are entitled to hold,
if the existence of any well-marked varieties be admitted. But the
mere existence of individual variability and of some few well-marked
varieties, though necessary as the foundation for the work, helps us but
little in understanding how species arise in nature. How have all those
exquisite adaptations of one part of the organisation to another part,
and to the conditions of life, and of one distinct organic being to
another being, been perfected? We see these beautiful co-adaptations
most plainly in the woodpecker and missletoe; and only a little
less plainly in the humblest parasite which clings to the hairs of a
quadruped or feathers of a bird; in the structure of the beetle which
dives through the water; in the plumed seed which is wafted by the
gentlest breeze; in short, we see beautiful adaptations everywhere and
in every part of the organic world.

Again, it may be asked, how is it that varieties, which I have called
incipient species, become ultimately converted into good and distinct
species, which in most cases obviously differ from each other far
more than do the varieties of the same species? How do those groups of
species, which constitute what are called distinct genera, and which
differ from each other more than do the species of the same genus,
arise? All these results, as we shall more fully see in the next
chapter, follow inevitably from the struggle for life. Owing to this
struggle for life, any variation, however slight and from whatever cause
proceeding, if it be in any degree profitable to an individual of any
species, in its infinitely complex relations to other organic beings and
to external nature, will tend to the preservation of that individual,
and will generally be inherited by its offspring. The offspring,
also, will thus have a better chance of surviving, for, of the many
individuals of any species which are periodically born, but a small
number can survive. I have called this principle, by which each slight
variation, if useful, is preserved, by the term of Natural Selection,
in order to mark its relation to man's power of selection. We have seen
that man by selection can certainly produce great results, and can adapt
organic beings to his own uses, through the accumulation of slight
but useful variations, given to him by the hand of Nature. But Natural
Selection, as we shall hereafter see, is a power incessantly ready for
action, and is as immeasurably superior to man's feeble efforts, as the
works of Nature are to those of Art.

We will now discuss in a little more detail the struggle for existence.
In my future work this subject shall be treated, as it well deserves,
at much greater length. The elder De Candolle and Lyell have largely
and philosophically shown that all organic beings are exposed to severe
competition. In regard to plants, no one has treated this subject with
more spirit and ability than W. Herbert, Dean of Manchester, evidently
the result of his great horticultural knowledge. Nothing is easier than
to admit in words the truth of the universal struggle for life, or more
difficult--at least I have found it so--than constantly to bear this
conclusion in mind. Yet unless it be thoroughly engrained in the mind,
I am convinced that the whole economy of nature, with every fact on
distribution, rarity, abundance, extinction, and variation, will be
dimly seen or quite misunderstood. We behold the face of nature bright
with gladness, we often see superabundance of food; we do not see, or
we forget, that the birds which are idly singing round us mostly live on
insects or seeds, and are thus constantly destroying life; or we forget
how largely these songsters, or their eggs, or their nestlings, are
destroyed by birds and beasts of prey; we do not always bear in mind,
that though food may be now superabundant, it is not so at all seasons
of each recurring year.

I should premise that I use the term Struggle for Existence in a large
and metaphorical sense, including dependence of one being on another,
and including (which is more important) not only the life of the
individual, but success in leaving progeny. Two canine animals in a time
of dearth, may be truly said to struggle with each other which shall get
food and live. But a plant on the edge of a desert is said to struggle
for life against the drought, though more properly it should be said to
be dependent on the moisture. A plant which annually produces a thousand
seeds, of which on an average only one comes to maturity, may be more
truly said to struggle with the plants of the same and other kinds which
already clothe the ground. The missletoe is dependent on the apple and a
few other trees, but can only in a far-fetched sense be said to struggle
with these trees, for if too many of these parasites grow on the same
tree, it will languish and die. But several seedling missletoes, growing
close together on the same branch, may more truly be said to struggle
with each other. As the missletoe is disseminated by birds, its
existence depends on birds; and it may metaphorically be said to
struggle with other fruit-bearing plants, in order to tempt birds to
devour and thus disseminate its seeds rather than those of other
plants. In these several senses, which pass into each other, I use for
convenience sake the general term of struggle for existence.
