Although in oceanic islands the number of kinds of inhabitants is
scanty, the proportion of endemic species (i.e. those found nowhere else
in the world) is often extremely large. If we compare, for instance, the
number of the endemic land-shells in Madeira, or of the endemic birds in
the Galapagos Archipelago, with the number found on any continent, and
then compare the area of the islands with that of the continent, we
shall see that this is true. This fact might have been expected on my
theory, for, as already explained, species occasionally arriving after
long intervals in a new and isolated district, and having to compete
with new associates, will be eminently liable to modification, and
will often produce groups of modified descendants. But it by no means
follows, that, because in an island nearly all the species of one class
are peculiar, those of another class, or of another section of the same
class, are peculiar; and this difference seems to depend on the species
which do not become modified having immigrated with facility and in a
body, so that their mutual relations have not been much disturbed. Thus
in the Galapagos Islands nearly every land-bird, but only two out of the
eleven marine birds, are peculiar; and it is obvious that marine birds
could arrive at these islands more easily than land-birds. Bermuda, on
the other hand, which lies at about the same distance from North America
as the Galapagos Islands do from South America, and which has a very
peculiar soil, does not possess one endemic land bird; and we know from
Mr. J. M. Jones's admirable account of Bermuda, that very many North
American birds, during their great annual migrations, visit either
periodically or occasionally this island. Madeira does not possess one
peculiar bird, and many European and African birds are almost every year
blown there, as I am informed by Mr. E. V. Harcourt. So that these two
islands of Bermuda and Madeira have been stocked by birds, which for
long ages have struggled together in their former homes, and have become
mutually adapted to each other; and when settled in their new homes,
each kind will have been kept by the others to their proper places and
habits, and will consequently have been little liable to modification.
Madeira, again, is inhabited by a wonderful number of peculiar
land-shells, whereas not one species of sea-shell is confined to its
shores: now, though we do not know how seashells are dispersed, yet
we can see that their eggs or larvae, perhaps attached to seaweed or
floating timber, or to the feet of wading-birds, might be transported
far more easily than land-shells, across three or four hundred miles of
open sea. The different orders of insects in Madeira apparently present
analogous facts.

Oceanic islands are sometimes deficient in certain classes, and
their places are apparently occupied by the other inhabitants; in the
Galapagos Islands reptiles, and in New Zealand gigantic wingless birds,
take the place of mammals. In the plants of the Galapagos Islands, Dr.
Hooker has shown that the proportional numbers of the different
orders are very different from what they are elsewhere. Such cases are
generally accounted for by the physical conditions of the islands;
but this explanation seems to me not a little doubtful. Facility of
immigration, I believe, has been at least as important as the nature of
the conditions.

Many remarkable little facts could be given with respect to the
inhabitants of remote islands. For instance, in certain islands not
tenanted by mammals, some of the endemic plants have beautifully hooked
seeds; yet few relations are more striking than the adaptation of hooked
seeds for transportal by the wool and fur of quadrupeds. This
case presents no difficulty on my view, for a hooked seed might be
transported to an island by some other means; and the plant then
becoming slightly modified, but still retaining its hooked seeds,
would form an endemic species, having as useless an appendage as any
rudimentary organ,--for instance, as the shrivelled wings under the
soldered elytra of many insular beetles. Again, islands often possess
trees or bushes belonging to orders which elsewhere include only
herbaceous species; now trees, as Alph. de Candolle has shown, generally
have, whatever the cause may be, confined ranges. Hence trees would be
little likely to reach distant oceanic islands; and an herbaceous plant,
though it would have no chance of successfully competing in stature
with a fully developed tree, when established on an island and having to
compete with herbaceous plants alone, might readily gain an advantage
by growing taller and taller and overtopping the other plants. If so,
natural selection would often tend to add to the stature of herbaceous
plants when growing on an island, to whatever order they belonged, and
thus convert them first into bushes and ultimately into trees.

With respect to the absence of whole orders on oceanic islands, Bory St.
Vincent long ago remarked that Batrachians (frogs, toads, newts) have
never been found on any of the many islands with which the great oceans
are studded. I have taken pains to verify this assertion, and I have
found it strictly true. I have, however, been assured that a frog exists
on the mountains of the great island of New Zealand; but I suspect that
this exception (if the information be correct) may be explained through
glacial agency. This general absence of frogs, toads, and newts on
so many oceanic islands cannot be accounted for by their physical
conditions; indeed it seems that islands are peculiarly well fitted for
these animals; for frogs have been introduced into Madeira, the Azores,
and Mauritius, and have multiplied so as to become a nuisance. But as
these animals and their spawn are known to be immediately killed by
sea-water, on my view we can see that there would be great difficulty in
their transportal across the sea, and therefore why they do not exist on
any oceanic island. But why, on the theory of creation, they should not
have been created there, it would be very difficult to explain.

Mammals offer another and similar case. I have carefully searched the
oldest voyages, but have not finished my search; as yet I have not found
a single instance, free from doubt, of a terrestrial mammal (excluding
domesticated animals kept by the natives) inhabiting an island situated
above  miles from a continent or great continental island; and
many islands situated at a much less distance are equally barren. The
Falkland Islands, which are inhabited by a wolf-like fox, come nearest
to an exception; but this group cannot be considered as oceanic, as it
lies on a bank connected with the mainland; moreover, icebergs formerly
brought boulders to its western shores, and they may have formerly
transported foxes, as so frequently now happens in the arctic regions.
Yet it cannot be said that small islands will not support small mammals,
for they occur in many parts of the world on very small islands, if
close to a continent; and hardly an island can be named on which our
smaller quadrupeds have not become naturalised and greatly multiplied.
It cannot be said, on the ordinary view of creation, that there has
not been time for the creation of mammals; many volcanic islands are
sufficiently ancient, as shown by the stupendous degradation which they
have suffered and by their tertiary strata: there has also been time
for the production of endemic species belonging to other classes; and on
continents it is thought that mammals appear and disappear at a quicker
rate than other and lower animals. Though terrestrial mammals do not
occur on oceanic islands, aerial mammals do occur on almost every
island. New Zealand possesses two bats found nowhere else in the world:
Norfolk Island, the Viti Archipelago, the Bonin Islands, the Caroline
and Marianne Archipelagoes, and Mauritius, all possess their peculiar
bats. Why, it may be asked, has the supposed creative force produced
bats and no other mammals on remote islands? On my view this question
can easily be answered; for no terrestrial mammal can be transported
across a wide space of sea, but bats can fly across. Bats have been seen
wandering by day far over the Atlantic Ocean; and two North American
species either regularly or occasionally visit Bermuda, at the distance
of  miles from the mainland. I hear from Mr. Tomes, who has specially
studied this family, that many of the same species have enormous ranges,
and are found on continents and on far distant islands. Hence we have
only to suppose that such wandering species have been modified through
natural selection in their new homes in relation to their new position,
and we can understand the presence of endemic bats on islands, with the
absence of all terrestrial mammals.

Besides the absence of terrestrial mammals in relation to the remoteness
of islands from continents, there is also a relation, to a certain
extent independent of distance, between the depth of the sea separating
an island from the neighbouring mainland, and the presence in both of
the same mammiferous species or of allied species in a more or less
modified condition. Mr. Windsor Earl has made some striking observations
on this head in regard to the great Malay Archipelago, which is
traversed near Celebes by a space of deep ocean; and this space
separates two widely distinct mammalian faunas. On either side the
islands are situated on moderately deep submarine banks, and they are
inhabited by closely allied or identical quadrupeds. No doubt some few
anomalies occur in this great archipelago, and there is much difficulty
in forming a judgment in some cases owing to the probable naturalisation
of certain mammals through man's agency; but we shall soon have much
light thrown on the natural history of this archipelago by the admirable
zeal and researches of Mr. Wallace. I have not as yet had time to follow
up this subject in all other quarters of the world; but as far as I have
