as incidental on unknown differences in their vegetative systems, so I
believe that the still more complex laws governing the facility of
first crosses, are incidental on unknown differences, chiefly in their
reproductive systems. These differences, in both cases, follow to a
certain extent, as might have been expected, systematic affinity, by
which every kind of resemblance and dissimilarity between organic
beings is attempted to be expressed. The facts by no means seem to me
to indicate that the greater or lesser difficulty of either grafting or
crossing together various species has been a special endowment;
although in the case of crossing, the difficulty is as important for the
endurance and stability of specific forms, as in the case of grafting it
is unimportant for their welfare.

CAUSES OF THE STERILITY OF FIRST CROSSES AND OF HYBRIDS.

We may now look a little closer at the probable causes of the sterility
of first crosses and of hybrids. These two cases are fundamentally
different, for, as just remarked, in the union of two pure species the
male and female sexual elements are perfect, whereas in hybrids they are
imperfect. Even in first crosses, the greater or lesser difficulty in
effecting a union apparently depends on several distinct causes. There
must sometimes be a physical impossibility in the male element reaching
the ovule, as would be the case with a plant having a pistil too long
for the pollen-tubes to reach the ovarium. It has also been observed
that when pollen of one species is placed on the stigma of a distantly
allied species, though the pollen-tubes protrude, they do not penetrate
the stigmatic surface. Again, the male element may reach the female
element, but be incapable of causing an embryo to be developed, as seems
to have been the case with some of Thuret's experiments on Fuci. No
explanation can be given of these facts, any more than why certain trees
cannot be grafted on others. Lastly, an embryo may be developed, and
then perish at an early period. This latter alternative has not been
sufficiently attended to; but I believe, from observations communicated
to me by Mr. Hewitt, who has had great experience in hybridising
gallinaceous birds, that the early death of the embryo is a very
frequent cause of sterility in first crosses. I was at first very
unwilling to believe in this view; as hybrids, when once born, are
generally healthy and long-lived, as we see in the case of the common
mule. Hybrids, however, are differently circumstanced before and after
birth: when born and living in a country where their two parents can
live, they are generally placed under suitable conditions of life. But
a hybrid partakes of only half of the nature and constitution of its
mother, and therefore before birth, as long as it is nourished within
its mother's womb or within the egg or seed produced by the mother, it
may be exposed to conditions in some degree unsuitable, and consequently
be liable to perish at an early period; more especially as all very
young beings seem eminently sensitive to injurious or unnatural
conditions of life.

In regard to the sterility of hybrids, in which the sexual elements are
imperfectly developed, the case is very different. I have more than once
alluded to a large body of facts, which I have collected, showing that
when animals and plants are removed from their natural conditions,
they are extremely liable to have their reproductive systems seriously
affected. This, in fact, is the great bar to the domestication of
animals. Between the sterility thus superinduced and that of hybrids,
there are many points of similarity. In both cases the sterility is
independent of general health, and is often accompanied by excess of
size or great luxuriance. In both cases, the sterility occurs in various
degrees; in both, the male element is the most liable to be affected;
but sometimes the female more than the male. In both, the tendency
goes to a certain extent with systematic affinity, for whole groups
of animals and plants are rendered impotent by the same unnatural
conditions; and whole groups of species tend to produce sterile hybrids.
On the other hand, one species in a group will sometimes resist great
changes of conditions with unimpaired fertility; and certain species in
a group will produce unusually fertile hybrids. No one can tell, till he
tries, whether any particular animal will breed under confinement or any
plant seed freely under culture; nor can he tell, till he tries, whether
any two species of a genus will produce more or less sterile hybrids.
Lastly, when organic beings are placed during several generations under
conditions not natural to them, they are extremely liable to vary,
which is due, as I believe, to their reproductive systems having been
specially affected, though in a lesser degree than when sterility
ensues. So it is with hybrids, for hybrids in successive generations are
eminently liable to vary, as every experimentalist has observed.

Thus we see that when organic beings are placed under new and unnatural
conditions, and when hybrids are produced by the unnatural crossing of
two species, the reproductive system, independently of the general state
of health, is affected by sterility in a very similar manner. In the
one case, the conditions of life have been disturbed, though often in so
slight a degree as to be inappreciable by us; in the other case, or
that of hybrids, the external conditions have remained the same, but
the organisation has been disturbed by two different structures and
constitutions having been blended into one. For it is scarcely possible
that two organisations should be compounded into one, without some
disturbance occurring in the development, or periodical action, or
mutual relation of the different parts and organs one to another, or to
the conditions of life. When hybrids are able to breed inter se, they
transmit to their offspring from generation to generation the same
compounded organisation, and hence we need not be surprised that their
sterility, though in some degree variable, rarely diminishes.

It must, however, be confessed that we cannot understand, excepting
on vague hypotheses, several facts with respect to the sterility of
hybrids; for instance, the unequal fertility of hybrids produced from
reciprocal crosses; or the increased sterility in those hybrids which
occasionally and exceptionally resemble closely either pure parent. Nor
do I pretend that the foregoing remarks go to the root of the matter:
no explanation is offered why an organism, when placed under unnatural
conditions, is rendered sterile. All that I have attempted to show,
is that in two cases, in some respects allied, sterility is the common
result,--in the one case from the conditions of life having been
disturbed, in the other case from the organisation having been disturbed
by two organisations having been compounded into one.

It may seem fanciful, but I suspect that a similar parallelism extends
to an allied yet very different class of facts. It is an old and almost
universal belief, founded, I think, on a considerable body of evidence,
that slight changes in the conditions of life are beneficial to all
living things. We see this acted on by farmers and gardeners in their
frequent exchanges of seed, tubers, etc., from one soil or climate to
another, and back again. During the convalescence of animals, we plainly
see that great benefit is derived from almost any change in the
habits of life. Again, both with plants and animals, there is abundant
evidence, that a cross between very distinct individuals of the same
species, that is between members of different strains or sub-breeds,
gives vigour and fertility to the offspring. I believe, indeed, from
the facts alluded to in our fourth chapter, that a certain amount of
crossing is indispensable even with hermaphrodites; and that close
interbreeding continued during several generations between the nearest
relations, especially if these be kept under the same conditions of
life, always induces weakness and sterility in the progeny.

Hence it seems that, on the one hand, slight changes in the conditions
of life benefit all organic beings, and on the other hand, that slight
crosses, that is crosses between the males and females of the same
species which have varied and become slightly different, give vigour and
fertility to the offspring. But we have seen that greater changes, or
changes of a particular nature, often render organic beings in some
degree sterile; and that greater crosses, that is crosses between males
and females which have become widely or specifically different, produce
hybrids which are generally sterile in some degree. I cannot persuade
myself that this parallelism is an accident or an illusion. Both series
of facts seem to be connected together by some common but unknown bond,
which is essentially related to the principle of life.

FERTILITY OF VARIETIES WHEN CROSSED, AND OF THEIR MONGREL OFFSPRING.

It may be urged, as a most forcible argument, that there must be some
essential distinction between species and varieties, and that there
must be some error in all the foregoing remarks, inasmuch as varieties,
however much they may differ from each other in external appearance,
cross with perfect facility, and yield perfectly fertile offspring. I
fully admit that this is almost invariably the case. But if we look to
varieties produced under nature, we are immediately involved in hopeless
difficulties; for if two hitherto reputed varieties be found in any
degree sterile together, they are at once ranked by most naturalists
as species. For instance, the blue and red pimpernel, the primrose
