Let this process go on for millions on millions of years; and during
each year on millions of individuals of many kinds; and may we not
believe that a living optical instrument might thus be formed as
superior to one of glass, as the works of the Creator are to those of
man?

If it could be demonstrated that any complex organ existed, which
could not possibly have been formed by numerous, successive, slight
modifications, my theory would absolutely break down. But I can find
out no such case. No doubt many organs exist of which we do not know
the transitional grades, more especially if we look to much-isolated
species, round which, according to my theory, there has been much
extinction. Or again, if we look to an organ common to all the members
of a large class, for in this latter case the organ must have been first
formed at an extremely remote period, since which all the many members
of the class have been developed; and in order to discover the early
transitional grades through which the organ has passed, we should have
to look to very ancient ancestral forms, long since become extinct.

We should be extremely cautious in concluding that an organ could not
have been formed by transitional gradations of some kind. Numerous cases
could be given amongst the lower animals of the same organ performing
at the same time wholly distinct functions; thus the alimentary canal
respires, digests, and excretes in the larva of the dragon-fly and in
the fish Cobites. In the Hydra, the animal may be turned inside out, and
the exterior surface will then digest and the stomach respire. In such
cases natural selection might easily specialise, if any advantage were
thus gained, a part or organ, which had performed two functions, for one
function alone, and thus wholly change its nature by insensible steps.
Two distinct organs sometimes perform simultaneously the same function
in the same individual; to give one instance, there are fish with gills
or branchiae that breathe the air dissolved in the water, at the same
time that they breathe free air in their swimbladders, this latter organ
having a ductus pneumaticus for its supply, and being divided by highly
vascular partitions. In these cases, one of the two organs might with
ease be modified and perfected so as to perform all the work by itself,
being aided during the process of modification by the other organ;
and then this other organ might be modified for some other and quite
distinct purpose, or be quite obliterated.

The illustration of the swimbladder in fishes is a good one, because
it shows us clearly the highly important fact that an organ originally
constructed for one purpose, namely flotation, may be converted into one
for a wholly different purpose, namely respiration. The swimbladder has,
also, been worked in as an accessory to the auditory organs of certain
fish, or, for I do not know which view is now generally held, a part
of the auditory apparatus has been worked in as a complement to the
swimbladder. All physiologists admit that the swimbladder is homologous,
or "ideally similar," in position and structure with the lungs of
the higher vertebrate animals: hence there seems to me to be no great
difficulty in believing that natural selection has actually converted a
swimbladder into a lung, or organ used exclusively for respiration.

I can, indeed, hardly doubt that all vertebrate animals having true
lungs have descended by ordinary generation from an ancient prototype,
of which we know nothing, furnished with a floating apparatus or
swimbladder. We can thus, as I infer from Professor Owen's interesting
description of these parts, understand the strange fact that every
particle of food and drink which we swallow has to pass over the
orifice of the trachea, with some risk of falling into the lungs,
notwithstanding the beautiful contrivance by which the glottis
is closed. In the higher Vertebrata the branchiae have wholly
disappeared--the slits on the sides of the neck and the loop-like course
of the arteries still marking in the embryo their former position. But
it is conceivable that the now utterly lost branchiae might have
been gradually worked in by natural selection for some quite distinct
purpose: in the same manner as, on the view entertained by some
naturalists that the branchiae and dorsal scales of Annelids are
homologous with the wings and wing-covers of insects, it is probable
that organs which at a very ancient period served for respiration have
been actually converted into organs of flight.

In considering transitions of organs, it is so important to bear in mind
the probability of conversion from one function to another, that I will
give one more instance. Pedunculated cirripedes have two minute folds of
skin, called by me the ovigerous frena, which serve, through the means
of a sticky secretion, to retain the eggs until they are hatched within
the sack. These cirripedes have no branchiae, the whole surface of the
body and sack, including the small frena, serving for respiration. The
Balanidae or sessile cirripedes, on the other hand, have no ovigerous
frena, the eggs lying loose at the bottom of the sack, in the
well-enclosed shell; but they have large folded branchiae. Now I think
no one will dispute that the ovigerous frena in the one family are
strictly homologous with the branchiae of the other family; indeed, they
graduate into each other. Therefore I do not doubt that little folds of
skin, which originally served as ovigerous frena, but which, likewise,
very slightly aided the act of respiration, have been gradually
converted by natural selection into branchiae, simply through an
increase in their size and the obliteration of their adhesive glands.
If all pedunculated cirripedes had become extinct, and they have already
suffered far more extinction than have sessile cirripedes, who would
ever have imagined that the branchiae in this latter family had
originally existed as organs for preventing the ova from being washed
out of the sack?

Although we must be extremely cautious in concluding that any organ
could not possibly have been produced by successive transitional
gradations, yet, undoubtedly, grave cases of difficulty occur, some of
which will be discussed in my future work.

One of the gravest is that of neuter insects, which are often very
differently constructed from either the males or fertile females; but
this case will be treated of in the next chapter. The electric organs
of fishes offer another case of special difficulty; it is impossible to
conceive by what steps these wondrous organs have been produced; but,
as Owen and others have remarked, their intimate structure closely
resembles that of common muscle; and as it has lately been shown that
Rays have an organ closely analogous to the electric apparatus, and yet
do not, as Matteuchi asserts, discharge any electricity, we must own
that we are far too ignorant to argue that no transition of any kind is
possible.

The electric organs offer another and even more serious difficulty; for
they occur in only about a dozen fishes, of which several are widely
remote in their affinities. Generally when the same organ appears in
several members of the same class, especially if in members having very
different habits of life, we may attribute its presence to inheritance
from a common ancestor; and its absence in some of the members to its
loss through disuse or natural selection. But if the electric organs had
been inherited from one ancient progenitor thus provided, we might have
expected that all electric fishes would have been specially related to
each other. Nor does geology at all lead to the belief that formerly
most fishes had electric organs, which most of their modified
descendants have lost. The presence of luminous organs in a few insects,
belonging to different families and orders, offers a parallel case of
difficulty. Other cases could be given; for instance in plants, the very
curious contrivance of a mass of pollen-grains, borne on a
foot-stalk with a sticky gland at the end, is the same in Orchis and
Asclepias,--genera almost as remote as possible amongst flowering
plants. In all these cases of two very distinct species furnished
with apparently the same anomalous organ, it should be observed that,
although the general appearance and function of the organ may be the
same, yet some fundamental difference can generally be detected. I
am inclined to believe that in nearly the same way as two men have
sometimes independently hit on the very same invention, so natural
selection, working for the good of each being and taking advantage of
analogous variations, has sometimes modified in very nearly the same
manner two parts in two organic beings, which owe but little of their
structure in common to inheritance from the same ancestor.

Although in many cases it is most difficult to conjecture by what
transitions an organ could have arrived at its present state; yet,
considering that the proportion of living and known forms to the extinct
and unknown is very small, I have been astonished how rarely an organ
can be named, towards which no transitional grade is known to lead.
The truth of this remark is indeed shown by that old canon in natural
history of "Natura non facit saltum." We meet with this admission in the
writings of almost every experienced naturalist; or, as Milne Edwards
has well expressed it, nature is prodigal in variety, but niggard in
innovation. Why, on the theory of Creation, should this be so? Why
