
In favour of this view, I may add, firstly, that C. livia, or the
rock-pigeon, has been found capable of domestication in Europe and in
India; and that it agrees in habits and in a great number of points of
structure with all the domestic breeds. Secondly, although an English
carrier or short-faced tumbler differs immensely in certain characters
from the rock-pigeon, yet by comparing the several sub-breeds of these
breeds, more especially those brought from distant countries, we
can make an almost perfect series between the extremes of structure.
Thirdly, those characters which are mainly distinctive of each breed,
for instance the wattle and length of beak of the carrier, the shortness
of that of the tumbler, and the number of tail-feathers in the fantail,
are in each breed eminently variable; and the explanation of this fact
will be obvious when we come to treat of selection. Fourthly, pigeons
have been watched, and tended with the utmost care, and loved by many
people. They have been domesticated for thousands of years in several
quarters of the world; the earliest known record of pigeons is in the
fifth Aegyptian dynasty, about  B.C., as was pointed out to me by
Professor Lepsius; but Mr. Birch informs me that pigeons are given in a
bill of fare in the previous dynasty. In the time of the Romans, as we
hear from Pliny, immense prices were given for pigeons; "nay, they are
come to this pass, that they can reckon up their pedigree and race."
Pigeons were much valued by Akber Khan in India, about the year ;
never less than , pigeons were taken with the court. "The monarchs
of Iran and Turan sent him some very rare birds;" and, continues the
courtly historian, "His Majesty by crossing the breeds, which method
was never practised before, has improved them astonishingly." About
this same period the Dutch were as eager about pigeons as were the old
Romans. The paramount importance of these considerations in explaining
the immense amount of variation which pigeons have undergone, will be
obvious when we treat of Selection. We shall then, also, see how it is
that the breeds so often have a somewhat monstrous character. It is also
a most favourable circumstance for the production of distinct breeds,
that male and female pigeons can be easily mated for life; and thus
different breeds can be kept together in the same aviary.

I have discussed the probable origin of domestic pigeons at some,
yet quite insufficient, length; because when I first kept pigeons and
watched the several kinds, knowing well how true they bred, I felt fully
as much difficulty in believing that they could ever have descended
from a common parent, as any naturalist could in coming to a similar
conclusion in regard to the many species of finches, or other large
groups of birds, in nature. One circumstance has struck me much;
namely, that all the breeders of the various domestic animals and
the cultivators of plants, with whom I have ever conversed, or whose
treatises I have read, are firmly convinced that the several breeds
to which each has attended, are descended from so many aboriginally
distinct species. Ask, as I have asked, a celebrated raiser of Hereford
cattle, whether his cattle might not have descended from long horns, and
he will laugh you to scorn. I have never met a pigeon, or poultry, or
duck, or rabbit fancier, who was not fully convinced that each main
breed was descended from a distinct species. Van Mons, in his treatise
on pears and apples, shows how utterly he disbelieves that the several
sorts, for instance a Ribston-pippin or Codlin-apple, could ever have
proceeded from the seeds of the same tree. Innumerable other examples
could be given. The explanation, I think, is simple: from long-continued
study they are strongly impressed with the differences between the
several races; and though they well know that each race varies slightly,
for they win their prizes by selecting such slight differences, yet they
ignore all general arguments, and refuse to sum up in their minds slight
differences accumulated during many successive generations. May not
those naturalists who, knowing far less of the laws of inheritance than
does the breeder, and knowing no more than he does of the intermediate
links in the long lines of descent, yet admit that many of our domestic
races have descended from the same parents--may they not learn a lesson
of caution, when they deride the idea of species in a state of nature
being lineal descendants of other species?

SELECTION.

Let us now briefly consider the steps by which domestic races have been
produced, either from one or from several allied species. Some little
effect may, perhaps, be attributed to the direct action of the external
conditions of life, and some little to habit; but he would be a bold
man who would account by such agencies for the differences of a dray and
race horse, a greyhound and bloodhound, a carrier and tumbler pigeon.
One of the most remarkable features in our domesticated races is that we
see in them adaptation, not indeed to the animal's or plant's own good,
but to man's use or fancy. Some variations useful to him have probably
arisen suddenly, or by one step; many botanists, for instance, believe
that the fuller's teazle, with its hooks, which cannot be rivalled by
any mechanical contrivance, is only a variety of the wild Dipsacus; and
this amount of change may have suddenly arisen in a seedling. So it has
probably been with the turnspit dog; and this is known to have been
the case with the ancon sheep. But when we compare the dray-horse and
race-horse, the dromedary and camel, the various breeds of sheep fitted
either for cultivated land or mountain pasture, with the wool of one
breed good for one purpose, and that of another breed for another
purpose; when we compare the many breeds of dogs, each good for man in
very different ways; when we compare the game-cock, so pertinacious
in battle, with other breeds so little quarrelsome, with "everlasting
layers" which never desire to sit, and with the bantam so small and
elegant; when we compare the host of agricultural, culinary, orchard,
and flower-garden races of plants, most useful to man at different
seasons and for different purposes, or so beautiful in his eyes, we
must, I think, look further than to mere variability. We cannot suppose
that all the breeds were suddenly produced as perfect and as useful as
we now see them; indeed, in several cases, we know that this has not
been their history. The key is man's power of accumulative selection:
nature gives successive variations; man adds them up in certain
directions useful to him. In this sense he may be said to make for
himself useful breeds.

The great power of this principle of selection is not hypothetical.
It is certain that several of our eminent breeders have, even within a
single lifetime, modified to a large extent some breeds of cattle and
sheep. In order fully to realise what they have done, it is almost
necessary to read several of the many treatises devoted to this subject,
and to inspect the animals. Breeders habitually speak of an animal's
organisation as something quite plastic, which they can model almost
as they please. If I had space I could quote numerous passages to this
effect from highly competent authorities. Youatt, who was probably
better acquainted with the works of agriculturalists than almost any
other individual, and who was himself a very good judge of an animal,
speaks of the principle of selection as "that which enables the
agriculturist, not only to modify the character of his flock, but to
change it altogether. It is the magician's wand, by means of which
he may summon into life whatever form and mould he pleases." Lord
Somerville, speaking of what breeders have done for sheep, says:--"It
would seem as if they had chalked out upon a wall a form perfect in
itself, and then had given it existence." That most skilful breeder,
Sir John Sebright, used to say, with respect to pigeons, that "he would
produce any given feather in three years, but it would take him
six years to obtain head and beak." In Saxony the importance of the
principle of selection in regard to merino sheep is so fully recognised,
that men follow it as a trade: the sheep are placed on a table and are
studied, like a picture by a connoisseur; this is done three times at
intervals of months, and the sheep are each time marked and classed, so
that the very best may ultimately be selected for breeding.

What English breeders have actually effected is proved by the enormous
prices given for animals with a good pedigree; and these have now been
exported to almost every quarter of the world. The improvement is by no
means generally due to crossing different breeds; all the best breeders
are strongly opposed to this practice, except sometimes amongst closely
allied sub-breeds. And when a cross has been made, the closest selection
is far more indispensable even than in ordinary cases. If selection
consisted merely in separating some very distinct variety, and breeding
from it, the principle would be so obvious as hardly to be worth
notice; but its importance consists in the great effect produced by
the accumulation in one direction, during successive generations, of
differences absolutely inappreciable by an uneducated eye--differences
which I for one have vainly attempted to appreciate. Not one man in
a thousand has accuracy of eye and judgment sufficient to become an
eminent breeder. If gifted with these qualities, and he studies his
subject for years, and devotes his lifetime to it with indomitable
perseverance, he will succeed, and may make great improvements; if he
wants any of these qualities, he will assuredly fail. Few would readily
believe in the natural capacity and years of practice requisite to
become even a skilful pigeon-fancier.
