No complex instinct can possibly be produced through natural selection,
except by the slow and gradual accumulation of numerous, slight, yet
profitable, variations. Hence, as in the case of corporeal structures,
we ought to find in nature, not the actual transitional gradations by
which each complex instinct has been acquired--for these could be found
only in the lineal ancestors of each species--but we ought to find in
the collateral lines of descent some evidence of such gradations; or
we ought at least to be able to show that gradations of some kind are
possible; and this we certainly can do. I have been surprised to find,
making allowance for the instincts of animals having been but little
observed except in Europe and North America, and for no instinct being
known amongst extinct species, how very generally gradations, leading to
the most complex instincts, can be discovered. The canon of "Natura non
facit saltum" applies with almost equal force to instincts as to bodily
organs. Changes of instinct may sometimes be facilitated by the same
species having different instincts at different periods of life, or
at different seasons of the year, or when placed under different
circumstances, etc.; in which case either one or the other instinct
might be preserved by natural selection. And such instances of diversity
of instinct in the same species can be shown to occur in nature.

Again as in the case of corporeal structure, and conformably with my
theory, the instinct of each species is good for itself, but has never,
as far as we can judge, been produced for the exclusive good of others.
One of the strongest instances of an animal apparently performing an
action for the sole good of another, with which I am acquainted, is that
of aphides voluntarily yielding their sweet excretion to ants: that they
do so voluntarily, the following facts show. I removed all the ants from
a group of about a dozen aphides on a dock-plant, and prevented their
attendance during several hours. After this interval, I felt sure that
the aphides would want to excrete. I watched them for some time through
a lens, but not one excreted; I then tickled and stroked them with a
hair in the same manner, as well as I could, as the ants do with their
antennae; but not one excreted. Afterwards I allowed an ant to visit
them, and it immediately seemed, by its eager way of running about, to
be well aware what a rich flock it had discovered; it then began to play
with its antennae on the abdomen first of one aphis and then of another;
and each aphis, as soon as it felt the antennae, immediately lifted up
its abdomen and excreted a limpid drop of sweet juice, which was eagerly
devoured by the ant. Even the quite young aphides behaved in this
manner, showing that the action was instinctive, and not the result of
experience. But as the excretion is extremely viscid, it is probably a
convenience to the aphides to have it removed; and therefore probably
the aphides do not instinctively excrete for the sole good of the ants.
Although I do not believe that any animal in the world performs an
action for the exclusive good of another of a distinct species, yet
each species tries to take advantage of the instincts of others, as each
takes advantage of the weaker bodily structure of others. So again, in
some few cases, certain instincts cannot be considered as absolutely
perfect; but as details on this and other such points are not
indispensable, they may be here passed over.

As some degree of variation in instincts under a state of nature, and
the inheritance of such variations, are indispensable for the action of
natural selection, as many instances as possible ought to have been here
given; but want of space prevents me. I can only assert, that instincts
certainly do vary--for instance, the migratory instinct, both in extent
and direction, and in its total loss. So it is with the nests of birds,
which vary partly in dependence on the situations chosen, and on the
nature and temperature of the country inhabited, but often from causes
wholly unknown to us: Audubon has given several remarkable cases of
differences in nests of the same species in the northern and southern
United States. Fear of any particular enemy is certainly an instinctive
quality, as may be seen in nestling birds, though it is strengthened by
experience, and by the sight of fear of the same enemy in other animals.
But fear of man is slowly acquired, as I have elsewhere shown, by
various animals inhabiting desert islands; and we may see an instance
of this, even in England, in the greater wildness of all our large birds
than of our small birds; for the large birds have been most persecuted
by man. We may safely attribute the greater wildness of our large birds
to this cause; for in uninhabited islands large birds are not more
fearful than small; and the magpie, so wary in England, is tame in
Norway, as is the hooded crow in Egypt.

That the general disposition of individuals of the same species, born in
a state of nature, is extremely diversified, can be shown by a multitude
of facts. Several cases also, could be given, of occasional and strange
habits in certain species, which might, if advantageous to the species,
give rise, through natural selection, to quite new instincts. But I am
well aware that these general statements, without facts given in detail,
can produce but a feeble effect on the reader's mind. I can only repeat
my assurance, that I do not speak without good evidence.

The possibility, or even probability, of inherited variations
of instinct in a state of nature will be strengthened by briefly
considering a few cases under domestication. We shall thus also be
enabled to see the respective parts which habit and the selection of
so-called accidental variations have played in modifying the mental
qualities of our domestic animals. A number of curious and authentic
instances could be given of the inheritance of all shades of disposition
and tastes, and likewise of the oddest tricks, associated with certain
frames of mind or periods of time. But let us look to the familiar case
of the several breeds of dogs: it cannot be doubted that young pointers
(I have myself seen a striking instance) will sometimes point and even
back other dogs the very first time that they are taken out; retrieving
is certainly in some degree inherited by retrievers; and a tendency to
run round, instead of at, a flock of sheep, by shepherd-dogs. I cannot
see that these actions, performed without experience by the young,
and in nearly the same manner by each individual, performed with eager
delight by each breed, and without the end being known,--for the young
pointer can no more know that he points to aid his master, than
the white butterfly knows why she lays her eggs on the leaf of the
cabbage,--I cannot see that these actions differ essentially from true
instincts. If we were to see one kind of wolf, when young and without
any training, as soon as it scented its prey, stand motionless like a
statue, and then slowly crawl forward with a peculiar gait; and another
kind of wolf rushing round, instead of at, a herd of deer, and driving
them to a distant point, we should assuredly call these actions
instinctive. Domestic instincts, as they may be called, are certainly
far less fixed or invariable than natural instincts; but they have been
acted on by far less rigorous selection, and have been transmitted for
an incomparably shorter period, under less fixed conditions of life.

How strongly these domestic instincts, habits, and dispositions are
inherited, and how curiously they become mingled, is well shown when
different breeds of dogs are crossed. Thus it is known that a cross with
a bull-dog has affected for many generations the courage and obstinacy
of greyhounds; and a cross with a greyhound has given to a whole family
of shepherd-dogs a tendency to hunt hares. These domestic instincts,
when thus tested by crossing, resemble natural instincts, which in a
like manner become curiously blended together, and for a long period
exhibit traces of the instincts of either parent: for example, Le Roy
describes a dog, whose great-grandfather was a wolf, and this dog
showed a trace of its wild parentage only in one way, by not coming in a
straight line to his master when called.

Domestic instincts are sometimes spoken of as actions which have become
inherited solely from long-continued and compulsory habit, but this,
I think, is not true. No one would ever have thought of teaching, or
probably could have taught, the tumbler-pigeon to tumble,--an action
which, as I have witnessed, is performed by young birds, that have
never seen a pigeon tumble. We may believe that some one pigeon showed
a slight tendency to this strange habit, and that the long-continued
selection of the best individuals in successive generations made
tumblers what they now are; and near Glasgow there are house-tumblers,
as I hear from Mr. Brent, which cannot fly eighteen inches high without
going head over heels. It may be doubted whether any one would have
thought of training a dog to point, had not some one dog naturally shown
a tendency in this line; and this is known occasionally to happen, as I
once saw in a pure terrier. When the first tendency was once displayed,
methodical selection and the inherited effects of compulsory training in
each successive generation would soon complete the work; and unconscious
selection is still at work, as each man tries to procure, without
intending to improve the breed, dogs which will stand and hunt best.
On the other hand, habit alone in some cases has sufficed; no animal is
more difficult to tame than the young of the wild rabbit; scarcely any
animal is tamer than the young of the tame rabbit; but I do not suppose
that domestic rabbits have ever been selected for tameness; and I
presume that we must attribute the whole of the inherited change from
extreme wildness to extreme tameness, simply to habit and long-continued
