as would a secondary fauna by an eocene, and a palaeozoic fauna by a
secondary fauna. I do not doubt that this process of improvement has
affected in a marked and sensible manner the organisation of the more
recent and victorious forms of life, in comparison with the ancient and
beaten forms; but I can see no way of testing this sort of progress.
Crustaceans, for instance, not the highest in their own class, may have
beaten the highest molluscs. From the extraordinary manner in which
European productions have recently spread over New Zealand, and have
seized on places which must have been previously occupied, we may
believe, if all the animals and plants of Great Britain were set free
in New Zealand, that in the course of time a multitude of British forms
would become thoroughly naturalized there, and would exterminate many
of the natives. On the other hand, from what we see now occurring in New
Zealand, and from hardly a single inhabitant of the southern hemisphere
having become wild in any part of Europe, we may doubt, if all the
productions of New Zealand were set free in Great Britain, whether any
considerable number would be enabled to seize on places now occupied by
our native plants and animals. Under this point of view, the productions
of Great Britain may be said to be higher than those of New Zealand. Yet
the most skilful naturalist from an examination of the species of the
two countries could not have foreseen this result.

Agassiz insists that ancient animals resemble to a certain extent the
embryos of recent animals of the same classes; or that the geological
succession of extinct forms is in some degree parallel to the
embryological development of recent forms. I must follow Pictet and
Huxley in thinking that the truth of this doctrine is very far from
proved. Yet I fully expect to see it hereafter confirmed, at least in
regard to subordinate groups, which have branched off from each other
within comparatively recent times. For this doctrine of Agassiz accords
well with the theory of natural selection. In a future chapter I
shall attempt to show that the adult differs from its embryo, owing
to variations supervening at a not early age, and being inherited at
a corresponding age. This process, whilst it leaves the embryo almost
unaltered, continually adds, in the course of successive generations,
more and more difference to the adult.

Thus the embryo comes to be left as a sort of picture, preserved by
nature, of the ancient and less modified condition of each animal. This
view may be true, and yet it may never be capable of full proof. Seeing,
for instance, that the oldest known mammals, reptiles, and fish strictly
belong to their own proper classes, though some of these old forms are
in a slight degree less distinct from each other than are the typical
members of the same groups at the present day, it would be vain to look
for animals having the common embryological character of the Vertebrata,
until beds far beneath the lowest Silurian strata are discovered--a
discovery of which the chance is very small.

ON THE SUCCESSION OF THE SAME TYPES WITHIN THE SAME AREAS, DURING THE
LATER TERTIARY PERIODS.

Mr. Clift many years ago showed that the fossil mammals from the
Australian caves were closely allied to the living marsupials of that
continent. In South America, a similar relationship is manifest, even
to an uneducated eye, in the gigantic pieces of armour like those of the
armadillo, found in several parts of La Plata; and Professor Owen has
shown in the most striking manner that most of the fossil mammals,
buried there in such numbers, are related to South American types. This
relationship is even more clearly seen in the wonderful collection of
fossil bones made by MM. Lund and Clausen in the caves of Brazil. I was
so much impressed with these facts that I strongly insisted, in 
and , on this "law of the succession of types,"--on "this wonderful
relationship in the same continent between the dead and the living."
Professor Owen has subsequently extended the same generalisation to
the mammals of the Old World. We see the same law in this author's
restorations of the extinct and gigantic birds of New Zealand. We see
it also in the birds of the caves of Brazil. Mr. Woodward has shown that
the same law holds good with sea-shells, but from the wide distribution
of most genera of molluscs, it is not well displayed by them. Other
cases could be added, as the relation between the extinct and
living land-shells of Madeira; and between the extinct and living
brackish-water shells of the Aralo-Caspian Sea.

Now what does this remarkable law of the succession of the same types
within the same areas mean? He would be a bold man, who after comparing
the present climate of Australia and of parts of South America under the
same latitude, would attempt to account, on the one hand, by dissimilar
physical conditions for the dissimilarity of the inhabitants of these
two continents, and, on the other hand, by similarity of conditions,
for the uniformity of the same types in each during the later tertiary
periods. Nor can it be pretended that it is an immutable law that
marsupials should have been chiefly or solely produced in Australia; or
that Edentata and other American types should have been solely produced
in South America. For we know that Europe in ancient times was peopled
by numerous marsupials; and I have shown in the publications above
alluded to, that in America the law of distribution of terrestrial
mammals was formerly different from what it now is. North America
formerly partook strongly of the present character of the southern
half of the continent; and the southern half was formerly more closely
allied, than it is at present, to the northern half. In a similar manner
we know from Falconer and Cautley's discoveries, that northern India was
formerly more closely related in its mammals to Africa than it is at
the present time. Analogous facts could be given in relation to the
distribution of marine animals.

On the theory of descent with modification, the great law of the long
enduring, but not immutable, succession of the same types within the
same areas, is at once explained; for the inhabitants of each quarter of
the world will obviously tend to leave in that quarter, during the next
succeeding period of time, closely allied though in some degree modified
descendants. If the inhabitants of one continent formerly differed
greatly from those of another continent, so will their modified
descendants still differ in nearly the same manner and degree. But
after very long intervals of time and after great geographical changes,
permitting much inter-migration, the feebler will yield to the more
dominant forms, and there will be nothing immutable in the laws of past
and present distribution.

It may be asked in ridicule, whether I suppose that the megatherium and
other allied huge monsters have left behind them in South America the
sloth, armadillo, and anteater, as their degenerate descendants. This
cannot for an instant be admitted. These huge animals have become wholly
extinct, and have left no progeny. But in the caves of Brazil, there
are many extinct species which are closely allied in size and in other
characters to the species still living in South America; and some of
these fossils may be the actual progenitors of living species. It must
not be forgotten that, on my theory, all the species of the same genus
have descended from some one species; so that if six genera, each having
eight species, be found in one geological formation, and in the next
succeeding formation there be six other allied or representative genera
with the same number of species, then we may conclude that only one
species of each of the six older genera has left modified descendants,
constituting the six new genera. The other seven species of the old
genera have all died out and have left no progeny. Or, which would
probably be a far commoner case, two or three species of two or three
alone of the six older genera will have been the parents of the six new
genera; the other old species and the other whole genera having
become utterly extinct. In failing orders, with the genera and species
decreasing in numbers, as apparently is the case of the Edentata of
South America, still fewer genera and species will have left modified
blood-descendants.

SUMMARY OF THE PRECEDING AND PRESENT CHAPTERS.

I have attempted to show that the geological record is extremely
imperfect; that only a small portion of the globe has been geologically
explored with care; that only certain classes of organic beings have
been largely preserved in a fossil state; that the number both of
specimens and of species, preserved in our museums, is absolutely as
nothing compared with the incalculable number of generations which
must have passed away even during a single formation; that, owing
to subsidence being necessary for the accumulation of fossiliferous
deposits thick enough to resist future degradation, enormous intervals
of time have elapsed between the successive formations; that there has
probably been more extinction during the periods of subsidence, and more
variation during the periods of elevation, and during the latter the
record will have been least perfectly kept; that each single formation
has not been continuously deposited; that the duration of each formation
is, perhaps, short compared with the average duration of specific forms;
that migration has played an important part in the first appearance of
