three-quarters British miles. Some of these formations, which are
represented in England by thin beds, are thousands of feet in thickness
on the Continent. Moreover, between each successive formation, we have,
in the opinion of most geologists, enormously long blank periods.
So that the lofty pile of sedimentary rocks in Britain, gives but an
inadequate idea of the time which has elapsed during their accumulation;
yet what time this must have consumed! Good observers have estimated
that sediment is deposited by the great Mississippi river at the rate
of only  feet in a hundred thousand years. This estimate may be quite
erroneous; yet, considering over what wide spaces very fine sediment is
transported by the currents of the sea, the process of accumulation in
any one area must be extremely slow.

But the amount of denudation which the strata have in many places
suffered, independently of the rate of accumulation of the degraded
matter, probably offers the best evidence of the lapse of time. I
remember having been much struck with the evidence of denudation, when
viewing volcanic islands, which have been worn by the waves and pared
all round into perpendicular cliffs of one or two thousand feet in
height; for the gentle slope of the lava-streams, due to their formerly
liquid state, showed at a glance how far the hard, rocky beds had once
extended into the open ocean. The same story is still more plainly told
by faults,--those great cracks along which the strata have been upheaved
on one side, or thrown down on the other, to the height or depth of
thousands of feet; for since the crust cracked, the surface of the land
has been so completely planed down by the action of the sea, that no
trace of these vast dislocations is externally visible.

The Craven fault, for instance, extends for upwards of  miles, and
along this line the vertical displacement of the strata has varied
from  to  feet. Professor Ramsay has published an account of
a downthrow in Anglesea of  feet; and he informs me that he fully
believes there is one in Merionethshire of , feet; yet in these
cases there is nothing on the surface to show such prodigious movements;
the pile of rocks on the one or other side having been smoothly swept
away. The consideration of these facts impresses my mind almost in
the same manner as does the vain endeavour to grapple with the idea of
eternity.

I am tempted to give one other case, the well-known one of the
denudation of the Weald. Though it must be admitted that the denudation
of the Weald has been a mere trifle, in comparison with that which has
removed masses of our palaeozoic strata, in parts ten thousand feet
in thickness, as shown in Professor Ramsay's masterly memoir on this
subject. Yet it is an admirable lesson to stand on the North Downs and
to look at the distant South Downs; for, remembering that at no great
distance to the west the northern and southern escarpments meet and
close, one can safely picture to oneself the great dome of rocks which
must have covered up the Weald within so limited a period as since the
latter part of the Chalk formation. The distance from the northern to
the southern Downs is about  miles, and the thickness of the several
formations is on an average about  feet, as I am informed by
Professor Ramsay. But if, as some geologists suppose, a range of
older rocks underlies the Weald, on the flanks of which the overlying
sedimentary deposits might have accumulated in thinner masses than
elsewhere, the above estimate would be erroneous; but this source of
doubt probably would not greatly affect the estimate as applied to the
western extremity of the district. If, then, we knew the rate at which
the sea commonly wears away a line of cliff of any given height, we
could measure the time requisite to have denuded the Weald. This, of
course, cannot be done; but we may, in order to form some crude notion
on the subject, assume that the sea would eat into cliffs  feet in
height at the rate of one inch in a century. This will at first appear
much too small an allowance; but it is the same as if we were to assume
a cliff one yard in height to be eaten back along a whole line of
coast at the rate of one yard in nearly every twenty-two years. I
doubt whether any rock, even as soft as chalk, would yield at this rate
excepting on the most exposed coasts; though no doubt the degradation
of a lofty cliff would be more rapid from the breakage of the fallen
fragments. On the other hand, I do not believe that any line of coast,
ten or twenty miles in length, ever suffers degradation at the same time
along its whole indented length; and we must remember that almost all
strata contain harder layers or nodules, which from long resisting
attrition form a breakwater at the base. Hence, under ordinary
circumstances, I conclude that for a cliff  feet in height, a
denudation of one inch per century for the whole length would be an
ample allowance. At this rate, on the above data, the denudation of the
Weald must have required ,, years; or say three hundred million
years.

The action of fresh water on the gently inclined Wealden district, when
upraised, could hardly have been great, but it would somewhat reduce the
above estimate. On the other hand, during oscillations of level, which
we know this area has undergone, the surface may have existed for
millions of years as land, and thus have escaped the action of the
sea: when deeply submerged for perhaps equally long periods, it would,
likewise, have escaped the action of the coast-waves. So that in all
probability a far longer period than  million years has elapsed since
the latter part of the Secondary period.

I have made these few remarks because it is highly important for us to
gain some notion, however imperfect, of the lapse of years. During each
of these years, over the whole world, the land and the water has
been peopled by hosts of living forms. What an infinite number of
generations, which the mind cannot grasp, must have succeeded each other
in the long roll of years! Now turn to our richest geological museums,
and what a paltry display we behold!

ON THE POORNESS OF OUR PALAEONTOLOGICAL COLLECTIONS.

That our palaeontological collections are very imperfect, is admitted by
every one. The remark of that admirable palaeontologist, the late Edward
Forbes, should not be forgotten, namely, that numbers of our fossil
species are known and named from single and often broken specimens, or
from a few specimens collected on some one spot. Only a small portion
of the surface of the earth has been geologically explored, and no part
with sufficient care, as the important discoveries made every year in
Europe prove. No organism wholly soft can be preserved. Shells and
bones will decay and disappear when left on the bottom of the sea, where
sediment is not accumulating. I believe we are continually taking a
most erroneous view, when we tacitly admit to ourselves that sediment
is being deposited over nearly the whole bed of the sea, at a rate
sufficiently quick to embed and preserve fossil remains. Throughout an
enormously large proportion of the ocean, the bright blue tint of the
water bespeaks its purity. The many cases on record of a formation
conformably covered, after an enormous interval of time, by another
and later formation, without the underlying bed having suffered in the
interval any wear and tear, seem explicable only on the view of the
bottom of the sea not rarely lying for ages in an unaltered condition.
The remains which do become embedded, if in sand or gravel, will when
the beds are upraised generally be dissolved by the percolation of
rain-water. I suspect that but few of the very many animals which live
on the beach between high and low watermark are preserved. For instance,
the several species of the Chthamalinae (a sub-family of sessile
cirripedes) coat the rocks all over the world in infinite numbers: they
are all strictly littoral, with the exception of a single Mediterranean
species, which inhabits deep water and has been found fossil in Sicily,
whereas not one other species has hitherto been found in any tertiary
formation: yet it is now known that the genus Chthamalus existed
during the chalk period. The molluscan genus Chiton offers a partially
analogous case.

With respect to the terrestrial productions which lived during the
Secondary and Palaeozoic periods, it is superfluous to state that our
evidence from fossil remains is fragmentary in an extreme degree. For
instance, not a land shell is known belonging to either of these
vast periods, with one exception discovered by Sir C. Lyell in the
carboniferous strata of North America. In regard to mammiferous remains,
a single glance at the historical table published in the Supplement to
Lyell's Manual, will bring home the truth, how accidental and rare is
their preservation, far better than pages of detail. Nor is their rarity
surprising, when we remember how large a proportion of the bones of
tertiary mammals have been discovered either in caves or in lacustrine
deposits; and that not a cave or true lacustrine bed is known belonging
to the age of our secondary or palaeozoic formations.

But the imperfection in the geological record mainly results from
another and more important cause than any of the foregoing; namely, from
the several formations being separated from each other by wide intervals
of time. When we see the formations tabulated in written works, or when
