produce neuters, either all of large size with one form of jaw, or all
of small size with jaws having a widely different structure; or lastly,
and this is our climax of difficulty, one set of workers of one size and
structure, and simultaneously another set of workers of a different size
and structure;--a graduated series having been first formed, as in the
case of the driver ant, and then the extreme forms, from being the most
useful to the community, having been produced in greater and greater
numbers through the natural selection of the parents which generated
them; until none with an intermediate structure were produced.

Thus, as I believe, the wonderful fact of two distinctly defined castes
of sterile workers existing in the same nest, both widely different from
each other and from their parents, has originated. We can see how useful
their production may have been to a social community of insects, on the
same principle that the division of labour is useful to civilised man.
As ants work by inherited instincts and by inherited tools or weapons,
and not by acquired knowledge and manufactured instruments, a perfect
division of labour could be effected with them only by the workers being
sterile; for had they been fertile, they would have intercrossed, and
their instincts and structure would have become blended. And nature
has, as I believe, effected this admirable division of labour in the
communities of ants, by the means of natural selection. But I am bound
to confess, that, with all my faith in this principle, I should never
have anticipated that natural selection could have been efficient in so
high a degree, had not the case of these neuter insects convinced me
of the fact. I have, therefore, discussed this case, at some little
but wholly insufficient length, in order to show the power of natural
selection, and likewise because this is by far the most serious special
difficulty, which my theory has encountered. The case, also, is very
interesting, as it proves that with animals, as with plants, any amount
of modification in structure can be effected by the accumulation of
numerous, slight, and as we must call them accidental, variations, which
are in any manner profitable, without exercise or habit having come into
play. For no amount of exercise, or habit, or volition, in the utterly
sterile members of a community could possibly have affected the
structure or instincts of the fertile members, which alone leave
descendants. I am surprised that no one has advanced this demonstrative
case of neuter insects, against the well-known doctrine of Lamarck.

SUMMARY.

I have endeavoured briefly in this chapter to show that the mental
qualities of our domestic animals vary, and that the variations are
inherited. Still more briefly I have attempted to show that instincts
vary slightly in a state of nature. No one will dispute that instincts
are of the highest importance to each animal. Therefore I can see no
difficulty, under changing conditions of life, in natural selection
accumulating slight modifications of instinct to any extent, in any
useful direction. In some cases habit or use and disuse have probably
come into play. I do not pretend that the facts given in this chapter
strengthen in any great degree my theory; but none of the cases of
difficulty, to the best of my judgment, annihilate it. On the other
hand, the fact that instincts are not always absolutely perfect and
are liable to mistakes;--that no instinct has been produced for the
exclusive good of other animals, but that each animal takes advantage of
the instincts of others;--that the canon in natural history, of "natura
non facit saltum" is applicable to instincts as well as to corporeal
structure, and is plainly explicable on the foregoing views, but is
otherwise inexplicable,--all tend to corroborate the theory of natural
selection.

This theory is, also, strengthened by some few other facts in regard
to instincts; as by that common case of closely allied, but certainly
distinct, species, when inhabiting distant parts of the world and living
under considerably different conditions of life, yet often retaining
nearly the same instincts. For instance, we can understand on the
principle of inheritance, how it is that the thrush of South America
lines its nest with mud, in the same peculiar manner as does our British
thrush: how it is that the male wrens (Troglodytes) of North America,
build "cock-nests," to roost in, like the males of our distinct
Kitty-wrens,--a habit wholly unlike that of any other known bird.
Finally, it may not be a logical deduction, but to my imagination it
is far more satisfactory to look at such instincts as the young cuckoo
ejecting its foster-brothers,--ants making slaves,--the larvae of
ichneumonidae feeding within the live bodies of caterpillars,--not as
specially endowed or created instincts, but as small consequences of one
general law, leading to the advancement of all organic beings, namely,
multiply, vary, let the strongest live and the weakest die.




. HYBRIDISM.

Distinction between the sterility of first crosses and of hybrids.
Sterility various in degree, not universal, affected by close
interbreeding, removed by domestication. Laws governing the sterility
of hybrids. Sterility not a special endowment, but incidental on other
differences. Causes of the sterility of first crosses and of hybrids.
Parallelism between the effects of changed conditions of life and
crossing. Fertility of varieties when crossed and of their mongrel
offspring not universal. Hybrids and mongrels compared independently of
their fertility. Summary.

The view generally entertained by naturalists is that species, when
intercrossed, have been specially endowed with the quality of sterility,
in order to prevent the confusion of all organic forms. This view
certainly seems at first probable, for species within the same country
could hardly have kept distinct had they been capable of crossing
freely. The importance of the fact that hybrids are very generally
sterile, has, I think, been much underrated by some late writers. On the
theory of natural selection the case is especially important, inasmuch
as the sterility of hybrids could not possibly be of any advantage
to them, and therefore could not have been acquired by the continued
preservation of successive profitable degrees of sterility. I hope,
however, to be able to show that sterility is not a specially acquired
or endowed quality, but is incidental on other acquired differences.

In treating this subject, two classes of facts, to a large extent
fundamentally different, have generally been confounded together;
namely, the sterility of two species when first crossed, and the
sterility of the hybrids produced from them.

Pure species have of course their organs of reproduction in a perfect
condition, yet when intercrossed they produce either few or no
offspring. Hybrids, on the other hand, have their reproductive organs
functionally impotent, as may be clearly seen in the state of the male
element in both plants and animals; though the organs themselves are
perfect in structure, as far as the microscope reveals. In the first
case the two sexual elements which go to form the embryo are perfect; in
the second case they are either not at all developed, or are imperfectly
developed. This distinction is important, when the cause of the
sterility, which is common to the two cases, has to be considered. The
distinction has probably been slurred over, owing to the sterility in
both cases being looked on as a special endowment, beyond the province
of our reasoning powers.

The fertility of varieties, that is of the forms known or believed to
have descended from common parents, when intercrossed, and likewise
the fertility of their mongrel offspring, is, on my theory, of equal
importance with the sterility of species; for it seems to make a broad
and clear distinction between varieties and species.

First, for the sterility of species when crossed and of their hybrid
offspring. It is impossible to study the several memoirs and works of
those two conscientious and admirable observers, Kolreuter and Gartner,
who almost devoted their lives to this subject, without being deeply
impressed with the high generality of some degree of sterility.
Kolreuter makes the rule universal; but then he cuts the knot, for in
ten cases in which he found two forms, considered by most authors as
distinct species, quite fertile together, he unhesitatingly ranks them
as varieties. Gartner, also, makes the rule equally universal; and he
disputes the entire fertility of Kolreuter's ten cases. But in these and
in many other cases, Gartner is obliged carefully to count the seeds, in
order to show that there is any degree of sterility. He always compares
the maximum number of seeds produced by two species when crossed and by
their hybrid offspring, with the average number produced by both pure
parent-species in a state of nature. But a serious cause of error seems
to me to be here introduced: a plant to be hybridised must be castrated,
and, what is often more important, must be secluded in order to prevent
