
The same principles are followed by horticulturists; but the variations
are here often more abrupt. No one supposes that our choicest
productions have been produced by a single variation from the aboriginal
stock. We have proofs that this is not so in some cases, in which exact
records have been kept; thus, to give a very trifling instance, the
steadily-increasing size of the common gooseberry may be quoted. We see
an astonishing improvement in many florists' flowers, when the flowers
of the present day are compared with drawings made only twenty or thirty
years ago. When a race of plants is once pretty well established, the
seed-raisers do not pick out the best plants, but merely go over their
seed-beds, and pull up the "rogues," as they call the plants that
deviate from the proper standard. With animals this kind of selection
is, in fact, also followed; for hardly any one is so careless as to
allow his worst animals to breed.

In regard to plants, there is another means of observing the accumulated
effects of selection--namely, by comparing the diversity of flowers in
the different varieties of the same species in the flower-garden; the
diversity of leaves, pods, or tubers, or whatever part is valued, in the
kitchen-garden, in comparison with the flowers of the same varieties;
and the diversity of fruit of the same species in the orchard, in
comparison with the leaves and flowers of the same set of varieties. See
how different the leaves of the cabbage are, and how extremely alike the
flowers; how unlike the flowers of the heartsease are, and how alike the
leaves; how much the fruit of the different kinds of gooseberries differ
in size, colour, shape, and hairiness, and yet the flowers present very
slight differences. It is not that the varieties which differ largely
in some one point do not differ at all in other points; this is hardly
ever, perhaps never, the case. The laws of correlation of growth,
the importance of which should never be overlooked, will ensure some
differences; but, as a general rule, I cannot doubt that the continued
selection of slight variations, either in the leaves, the flowers, or
the fruit, will produce races differing from each other chiefly in these
characters.

It may be objected that the principle of selection has been reduced to
methodical practice for scarcely more than three-quarters of a century;
it has certainly been more attended to of late years, and many treatises
have been published on the subject; and the result, I may add, has been,
in a corresponding degree, rapid and important. But it is very far from
true that the principle is a modern discovery. I could give several
references to the full acknowledgment of the importance of the principle
in works of high antiquity. In rude and barbarous periods of English
history choice animals were often imported, and laws were passed to
prevent their exportation: the destruction of horses under a certain
size was ordered, and this may be compared to the "roguing" of plants
by nurserymen. The principle of selection I find distinctly given in an
ancient Chinese encyclopaedia. Explicit rules are laid down by some of
the Roman classical writers. From passages in Genesis, it is clear that
the colour of domestic animals was at that early period attended to.
Savages now sometimes cross their dogs with wild canine animals, to
improve the breed, and they formerly did so, as is attested by passages
in Pliny. The savages in South Africa match their draught cattle by
colour, as do some of the Esquimaux their teams of dogs. Livingstone
shows how much good domestic breeds are valued by the negroes of the
interior of Africa who have not associated with Europeans. Some of these
facts do not show actual selection, but they show that the breeding of
domestic animals was carefully attended to in ancient times, and is now
attended to by the lowest savages. It would, indeed, have been a strange
fact, had attention not been paid to breeding, for the inheritance of
good and bad qualities is so obvious.

At the present time, eminent breeders try by methodical selection, with
a distinct object in view, to make a new strain or sub-breed, superior
to anything existing in the country. But, for our purpose, a kind of
Selection, which may be called Unconscious, and which results from every
one trying to possess and breed from the best individual animals, is
more important. Thus, a man who intends keeping pointers naturally tries
to get as good dogs as he can, and afterwards breeds from his own best
dogs, but he has no wish or expectation of permanently altering the
breed. Nevertheless I cannot doubt that this process, continued during
centuries, would improve and modify any breed, in the same way as
Bakewell, Collins, etc., by this very same process, only carried on more
methodically, did greatly modify, even during their own lifetimes, the
forms and qualities of their cattle. Slow and insensible changes of this
kind could never be recognised unless actual measurements or careful
drawings of the breeds in question had been made long ago, which might
serve for comparison. In some cases, however, unchanged or but little
changed individuals of the same breed may be found in less civilised
districts, where the breed has been less improved. There is reason to
believe that King Charles's spaniel has been unconsciously modified to
a large extent since the time of that monarch. Some highly competent
authorities are convinced that the setter is directly derived from the
spaniel, and has probably been slowly altered from it. It is known that
the English pointer has been greatly changed within the last century,
and in this case the change has, it is believed, been chiefly effected
by crosses with the fox-hound; but what concerns us is, that the change
has been effected unconsciously and gradually, and yet so effectually,
that, though the old Spanish pointer certainly came from Spain, Mr.
Borrow has not seen, as I am informed by him, any native dog in Spain
like our pointer.

By a similar process of selection, and by careful training, the whole
body of English racehorses have come to surpass in fleetness and size
the parent Arab stock, so that the latter, by the regulations for the
Goodwood Races, are favoured in the weights they carry. Lord Spencer and
others have shown how the cattle of England have increased in weight
and in early maturity, compared with the stock formerly kept in this
country. By comparing the accounts given in old pigeon treatises of
carriers and tumblers with these breeds as now existing in Britain,
India, and Persia, we can, I think, clearly trace the stages through
which they have insensibly passed, and come to differ so greatly from
the rock-pigeon.

Youatt gives an excellent illustration of the effects of a course of
selection, which may be considered as unconsciously followed, in so far
that the breeders could never have expected or even have wished to have
produced the result which ensued--namely, the production of two distinct
strains. The two flocks of Leicester sheep kept by Mr. Buckley and Mr.
Burgess, as Mr. Youatt remarks, "have been purely bred from the original
stock of Mr. Bakewell for upwards of fifty years. There is not a
suspicion existing in the mind of any one at all acquainted with
the subject that the owner of either of them has deviated in any one
instance from the pure blood of Mr. Bakewell's flock, and yet the
difference between the sheep possessed by these two gentlemen is so
great that they have the appearance of being quite different varieties."

If there exist savages so barbarous as never to think of the inherited
character of the offspring of their domestic animals, yet any one animal
particularly useful to them, for any special purpose, would be carefully
preserved during famines and other accidents, to which savages are
so liable, and such choice animals would thus generally leave more
offspring than the inferior ones; so that in this case there would be a
kind of unconscious selection going on. We see the value set on animals
even by the barbarians of Tierra del Fuego, by their killing and
devouring their old women, in times of dearth, as of less value than
their dogs.

In plants the same gradual process of improvement, through the
occasional preservation of the best individuals, whether or not
sufficiently distinct to be ranked at their first appearance as distinct
varieties, and whether or not two or more species or races have become
blended together by crossing, may plainly be recognised in the increased
size and beauty which we now see in the varieties of the heartsease,
rose, pelargonium, dahlia, and other plants, when compared with the
older varieties or with their parent-stocks. No one would ever expect to
get a first-rate heartsease or dahlia from the seed of a wild plant. No
one would expect to raise a first-rate melting pear from the seed of a
wild pear, though he might succeed from a poor seedling growing wild,
if it had come from a garden-stock. The pear, though cultivated in
classical times, appears, from Pliny's description, to have been a
fruit of very inferior quality. I have seen great surprise expressed
in horticultural works at the wonderful skill of gardeners, in having
produced such splendid results from such poor materials; but the art,
I cannot doubt, has been simple, and, as far as the final result is
concerned, has been followed almost unconsciously. It has consisted in
always cultivating the best known variety, sowing its seeds, and, when
a slightly better variety has chanced to appear, selecting it, and so
onwards. But the gardeners of the classical period, who cultivated
