produced as monstrous as a whale.

As we sometimes see individuals of a species following habits widely
different from those both of their own species and of the other species
of the same genus, we might expect, on my theory, that such individuals
would occasionally have given rise to new species, having anomalous
habits, and with their structure either slightly or considerably
modified from that of their proper type. And such instances do occur in
nature. Can a more striking instance of adaptation be given than that of
a woodpecker for climbing trees and for seizing insects in the chinks of
the bark? Yet in North America there are woodpeckers which feed largely
on fruit, and others with elongated wings which chase insects on the
wing; and on the plains of La Plata, where not a tree grows, there is a
woodpecker, which in every essential part of its organisation, even in
its colouring, in the harsh tone of its voice, and undulatory flight,
told me plainly of its close blood-relationship to our common species;
yet it is a woodpecker which never climbs a tree!

Petrels are the most aerial and oceanic of birds, yet in the quiet
Sounds of Tierra del Fuego, the Puffinuria berardi, in its general
habits, in its astonishing power of diving, its manner of swimming, and
of flying when unwillingly it takes flight, would be mistaken by any one
for an auk or grebe; nevertheless, it is essentially a petrel, but with
many parts of its organisation profoundly modified. On the other hand,
the acutest observer by examining the dead body of the water-ouzel would
never have suspected its sub-aquatic habits; yet this anomalous
member of the strictly terrestrial thrush family wholly subsists by
diving,--grasping the stones with its feet and using its wings under
water.

He who believes that each being has been created as we now see it, must
occasionally have felt surprise when he has met with an animal having
habits and structure not at all in agreement. What can be plainer than
that the webbed feet of ducks and geese are formed for swimming? yet
there are upland geese with webbed feet which rarely or never go near
the water; and no one except Audubon has seen the frigate-bird, which
has all its four toes webbed, alight on the surface of the sea. On the
other hand, grebes and coots are eminently aquatic, although their toes
are only bordered by membrane. What seems plainer than that the long
toes of grallatores are formed for walking over swamps and floating
plants, yet the water-hen is nearly as aquatic as the coot; and the
landrail nearly as terrestrial as the quail or partridge. In such
cases, and many others could be given, habits have changed without a
corresponding change of structure. The webbed feet of the upland goose
may be said to have become rudimentary in function, though not in
structure. In the frigate-bird, the deeply-scooped membrane between the
toes shows that structure has begun to change.

He who believes in separate and innumerable acts of creation will say,
that in these cases it has pleased the Creator to cause a being of one
type to take the place of one of another type; but this seems to me
only restating the fact in dignified language. He who believes in the
struggle for existence and in the principle of natural selection, will
acknowledge that every organic being is constantly endeavouring to
increase in numbers; and that if any one being vary ever so little,
either in habits or structure, and thus gain an advantage over some
other inhabitant of the country, it will seize on the place of that
inhabitant, however different it may be from its own place. Hence it
will cause him no surprise that there should be geese and frigate-birds
with webbed feet, either living on the dry land or most rarely alighting
on the water; that there should be long-toed corncrakes living in
meadows instead of in swamps; that there should be woodpeckers where not
a tree grows; that there should be diving thrushes, and petrels with the
habits of auks.

ORGANS OF EXTREME PERFECTION AND COMPLICATION.

To suppose that the eye, with all its inimitable contrivances for
adjusting the focus to different distances, for admitting different
amounts of light, and for the correction of spherical and chromatic
aberration, could have been formed by natural selection, seems, I freely
confess, absurd in the highest possible degree. Yet reason tells me,
that if numerous gradations from a perfect and complex eye to one very
imperfect and simple, each grade being useful to its possessor, can be
shown to exist; if further, the eye does vary ever so slightly, and
the variations be inherited, which is certainly the case; and if any
variation or modification in the organ be ever useful to an animal under
changing conditions of life, then the difficulty of believing that a
perfect and complex eye could be formed by natural selection, though
insuperable by our imagination, can hardly be considered real. How a
nerve comes to be sensitive to light, hardly concerns us more than how
life itself first originated; but I may remark that several facts make
me suspect that any sensitive nerve may be rendered sensitive to light,
and likewise to those coarser vibrations of the air which produce sound.

In looking for the gradations by which an organ in any species has been
perfected, we ought to look exclusively to its lineal ancestors; but
this is scarcely ever possible, and we are forced in each case to look
to species of the same group, that is to the collateral descendants
from the same original parent-form, in order to see what gradations are
possible, and for the chance of some gradations having been transmitted
from the earlier stages of descent, in an unaltered or little altered
condition. Amongst existing Vertebrata, we find but a small amount of
gradation in the structure of the eye, and from fossil species we can
learn nothing on this head. In this great class we should probably
have to descend far beneath the lowest known fossiliferous stratum to
discover the earlier stages, by which the eye has been perfected.

In the Articulata we can commence a series with an optic nerve merely
coated with pigment, and without any other mechanism; and from this
low stage, numerous gradations of structure, branching off in two
fundamentally different lines, can be shown to exist, until we reach
a moderately high stage of perfection. In certain crustaceans, for
instance, there is a double cornea, the inner one divided into
facets, within each of which there is a lens-shaped swelling. In other
crustaceans the transparent cones which are coated by pigment, and which
properly act only by excluding lateral pencils of light, are convex at
their upper ends and must act by convergence; and at their lower ends
there seems to be an imperfect vitreous substance. With these facts,
here far too briefly and imperfectly given, which show that there is
much graduated diversity in the eyes of living crustaceans, and bearing
in mind how small the number of living animals is in proportion to those
which have become extinct, I can see no very great difficulty (not more
than in the case of many other structures) in believing that natural
selection has converted the simple apparatus of an optic nerve merely
coated with pigment and invested by transparent membrane, into an
optical instrument as perfect as is possessed by any member of the great
Articulate class.

He who will go thus far, if he find on finishing this treatise that
large bodies of facts, otherwise inexplicable, can be explained by the
theory of descent, ought not to hesitate to go further, and to admit
that a structure even as perfect as the eye of an eagle might be formed
by natural selection, although in this case he does not know any of the
transitional grades. His reason ought to conquer his imagination; though
I have felt the difficulty far too keenly to be surprised at any degree
of hesitation in extending the principle of natural selection to such
startling lengths.

It is scarcely possible to avoid comparing the eye to a telescope.
We know that this instrument has been perfected by the long-continued
efforts of the highest human intellects; and we naturally infer that the
eye has been formed by a somewhat analogous process. But may not this
inference be presumptuous? Have we any right to assume that the Creator
works by intellectual powers like those of man? If we must compare the
eye to an optical instrument, we ought in imagination to take a thick
layer of transparent tissue, with a nerve sensitive to light beneath,
and then suppose every part of this layer to be continually changing
slowly in density, so as to separate into layers of different densities
and thicknesses, placed at different distances from each other, and
with the surfaces of each layer slowly changing in form. Further we
must suppose that there is a power always intently watching each slight
accidental alteration in the transparent layers; and carefully selecting
each alteration which, under varied circumstances, may in any way, or in
any degree, tend to produce a distincter image. We must suppose each new
state of the instrument to be multiplied by the million; and each to
be preserved till a better be produced, and then the old ones to
be destroyed. In living bodies, variation will cause the slight
alterations, generation will multiply them almost infinitely, and
natural selection will pick out with unerring skill each improvement.
