close confinement.

Natural instincts are lost under domestication: a remarkable instance of
this is seen in those breeds of fowls which very rarely or never become
"broody," that is, never wish to sit on their eggs. Familiarity alone
prevents our seeing how universally and largely the minds of our
domestic animals have been modified by domestication. It is scarcely
possible to doubt that the love of man has become instinctive in the
dog. All wolves, foxes, jackals, and species of the cat genus, when
kept tame, are most eager to attack poultry, sheep, and pigs; and this
tendency has been found incurable in dogs which have been brought home
as puppies from countries, such as Tierra del Fuego and Australia, where
the savages do not keep these domestic animals. How rarely, on the other
hand, do our civilised dogs, even when quite young, require to be taught
not to attack poultry, sheep, and pigs! No doubt they occasionally
do make an attack, and are then beaten; and if not cured, they are
destroyed; so that habit, with some degree of selection, has probably
concurred in civilising by inheritance our dogs. On the other hand,
young chickens have lost, wholly by habit, that fear of the dog and cat
which no doubt was originally instinctive in them, in the same way as it
is so plainly instinctive in young pheasants, though reared under a hen.
It is not that chickens have lost all fear, but fear only of dogs and
cats, for if the hen gives the danger-chuckle, they will run (more
especially young turkeys) from under her, and conceal themselves in
the surrounding grass or thickets; and this is evidently done for the
instinctive purpose of allowing, as we see in wild ground-birds, their
mother to fly away. But this instinct retained by our chickens has
become useless under domestication, for the mother-hen has almost lost
by disuse the power of flight.

Hence, we may conclude, that domestic instincts have been acquired and
natural instincts have been lost partly by habit, and partly by man
selecting and accumulating during successive generations, peculiar
mental habits and actions, which at first appeared from what we must in
our ignorance call an accident. In some cases compulsory habit alone
has sufficed to produce such inherited mental changes; in other cases
compulsory habit has done nothing, and all has been the result of
selection, pursued both methodically and unconsciously; but in most
cases, probably, habit and selection have acted together.

We shall, perhaps, best understand how instincts in a state of nature
have become modified by selection, by considering a few cases. I will
select only three, out of the several which I shall have to discuss in
my future work,--namely, the instinct which leads the cuckoo to lay her
eggs in other birds' nests; the slave-making instinct of certain ants;
and the comb-making power of the hive-bee: these two latter instincts
have generally, and most justly, been ranked by naturalists as the most
wonderful of all known instincts.

It is now commonly admitted that the more immediate and final cause
of the cuckoo's instinct is, that she lays her eggs, not daily, but at
intervals of two or three days; so that, if she were to make her own
nest and sit on her own eggs, those first laid would have to be left
for some time unincubated, or there would be eggs and young birds of
different ages in the same nest. If this were the case, the process of
laying and hatching might be inconveniently long, more especially as she
has to migrate at a very early period; and the first hatched young would
probably have to be fed by the male alone. But the American cuckoo is
in this predicament; for she makes her own nest and has eggs and young
successively hatched, all at the same time. It has been asserted that
the American cuckoo occasionally lays her eggs in other birds' nests;
but I hear on the high authority of Dr. Brewer, that this is a mistake.
Nevertheless, I could give several instances of various birds which have
been known occasionally to lay their eggs in other birds' nests. Now let
us suppose that the ancient progenitor of our European cuckoo had the
habits of the American cuckoo; but that occasionally she laid an egg in
another bird's nest. If the old bird profited by this occasional habit,
or if the young were made more vigorous by advantage having been taken
of the mistaken maternal instinct of another bird, than by their own
mother's care, encumbered as she can hardly fail to be by having eggs
and young of different ages at the same time; then the old birds or the
fostered young would gain an advantage. And analogy would lead me
to believe, that the young thus reared would be apt to follow by
inheritance the occasional and aberrant habit of their mother, and in
their turn would be apt to lay their eggs in other birds' nests, and
thus be successful in rearing their young. By a continued process of
this nature, I believe that the strange instinct of our cuckoo could be,
and has been, generated. I may add that, according to Dr. Gray and
to some other observers, the European cuckoo has not utterly lost all
maternal love and care for her own offspring.

The occasional habit of birds laying their eggs in other birds' nests,
either of the same or of a distinct species, is not very uncommon with
the Gallinaceae; and this perhaps explains the origin of a singular
instinct in the allied group of ostriches. For several hen ostriches,
at least in the case of the American species, unite and lay first a
few eggs in one nest and then in another; and these are hatched by the
males. This instinct may probably be accounted for by the fact of the
hens laying a large number of eggs; but, as in the case of the cuckoo,
at intervals of two or three days. This instinct, however, of the
American ostrich has not as yet been perfected; for a surprising number
of eggs lie strewed over the plains, so that in one day's hunting I
picked up no less than twenty lost and wasted eggs.

Many bees are parasitic, and always lay their eggs in the nests of bees
of other kinds. This case is more remarkable than that of the cuckoo;
for these bees have not only their instincts but their structure
modified in accordance with their parasitic habits; for they do not
possess the pollen-collecting apparatus which would be necessary if
they had to store food for their own young. Some species, likewise, of
Sphegidae (wasp-like insects) are parasitic on other species; and M.
Fabre has lately shown good reason for believing that although the
Tachytes nigra generally makes its own burrow and stores it with
paralysed prey for its own larvae to feed on, yet that when this insect
finds a burrow already made and stored by another sphex, it takes
advantage of the prize, and becomes for the occasion parasitic. In this
case, as with the supposed case of the cuckoo, I can see no difficulty
in natural selection making an occasional habit permanent, if of
advantage to the species, and if the insect whose nest and stored food
are thus feloniously appropriated, be not thus exterminated.

SLAVE-MAKING INSTINCT.

This remarkable instinct was first discovered in the Formica (Polyerges)
rufescens by Pierre Huber, a better observer even than his celebrated
father. This ant is absolutely dependent on its slaves; without their
aid, the species would certainly become extinct in a single year. The
males and fertile females do no work. The workers or sterile females,
though most energetic and courageous in capturing slaves, do no other
work. They are incapable of making their own nests, or of feeding their
own larvae. When the old nest is found inconvenient, and they have to
migrate, it is the slaves which determine the migration, and actually
carry their masters in their jaws. So utterly helpless are the masters,
that when Huber shut up thirty of them without a slave, but with plenty
of the food which they like best, and with their larvae and pupae to
stimulate them to work, they did nothing; they could not even feed
themselves, and many perished of hunger. Huber then introduced a single
slave (F. fusca), and she instantly set to work, fed and saved the
survivors; made some cells and tended the larvae, and put all to rights.
What can be more extraordinary than these well-ascertained facts? If we
had not known of any other slave-making ant, it would have been
hopeless to have speculated how so wonderful an instinct could have been
perfected.

Formica sanguinea was likewise first discovered by P. Huber to be
a slave-making ant. This species is found in the southern parts of
England, and its habits have been attended to by Mr. F. Smith, of the
British Museum, to whom I am much indebted for information on this and
other subjects. Although fully trusting to the statements of Huber and
Mr. Smith, I tried to approach the subject in a sceptical frame of
mind, as any one may well be excused for doubting the truth of so
extraordinary and odious an instinct as that of making slaves. Hence
I will give the observations which I have myself made, in some little
detail. I opened fourteen nests of F. sanguinea, and found a few slaves
in all. Males and fertile females of the slave-species are found only in
their own proper communities, and have never been observed in the nests
of F. sanguinea. The slaves are black and not above half the size of
their red masters, so that the contrast in their appearance is very
great. When the nest is slightly disturbed, the slaves occasionally come
out, and like their masters are much agitated and defend the nest: when
