Consequently, whatever part of the structure of the common progenitor,
or of its early descendants, became variable; variations of this part
would it is highly probable, be taken advantage of by natural and sexual
selection, in order to fit the several species to their several places
in the economy of nature, and likewise to fit the two sexes of the same
species to each other, or to fit the males and females to different
habits of life, or the males to struggle with other males for the
possession of the females.

Finally, then, I conclude that the greater variability of specific
characters, or those which distinguish species from species, than of
generic characters, or those which the species possess in common;--that
the frequent extreme variability of any part which is developed in a
species in an extraordinary manner in comparison with the same part
in its congeners; and the not great degree of variability in a part,
however extraordinarily it may be developed, if it be common to a
whole group of species;--that the great variability of secondary sexual
characters, and the great amount of difference in these same characters
between closely allied species;--that secondary sexual and ordinary
specific differences are generally displayed in the same parts of the
organisation,--are all principles closely connected together. All being
mainly due to the species of the same group having descended from a
common progenitor, from whom they have inherited much in common,--to
parts which have recently and largely varied being more likely still
to go on varying than parts which have long been inherited and have not
varied,--to natural selection having more or less completely, according
to the lapse of time, overmastered the tendency to reversion and to
further variability,--to sexual selection being less rigid than ordinary
selection,--and to variations in the same parts having been accumulated
by natural and sexual selection, and thus adapted for secondary sexual,
and for ordinary specific purposes.

DISTINCT SPECIES PRESENT ANALOGOUS VARIATIONS; AND A VARIETY OF ONE
SPECIES OFTEN ASSUMES SOME OF THE CHARACTERS OF AN ALLIED SPECIES, OR
REVERTS TO SOME OF THE CHARACTERS OF AN EARLY PROGENITOR.

These propositions will be most readily understood by looking to our
domestic races. The most distinct breeds of pigeons, in countries most
widely apart, present sub-varieties with reversed feathers on the head
and feathers on the feet,--characters not possessed by the aboriginal
rock-pigeon; these then are analogous variations in two or more distinct
races. The frequent presence of fourteen or even sixteen tail-feathers
in the pouter, may be considered as a variation representing the normal
structure of another race, the fantail. I presume that no one will doubt
that all such analogous variations are due to the several races of the
pigeon having inherited from a common parent the same constitution and
tendency to variation, when acted on by similar unknown influences.
In the vegetable kingdom we have a case of analogous variation, in the
enlarged stems, or roots as commonly called, of the Swedish turnip and
Ruta baga, plants which several botanists rank as varieties produced by
cultivation from a common parent: if this be not so, the case will then
be one of analogous variation in two so-called distinct species; and to
these a third may be added, namely, the common turnip. According to
the ordinary view of each species having been independently created, we
should have to attribute this similarity in the enlarged stems of these
three plants, not to the vera causa of community of descent, and a
consequent tendency to vary in a like manner, but to three separate yet
closely related acts of creation.

With pigeons, however, we have another case, namely, the occasional
appearance in all the breeds, of slaty-blue birds with two black bars
on the wings, a white rump, a bar at the end of the tail, with the outer
feathers externally edged near their bases with white. As all these
marks are characteristic of the parent rock-pigeon, I presume that no
one will doubt that this is a case of reversion, and not of a new yet
analogous variation appearing in the several breeds. We may I think
confidently come to this conclusion, because, as we have seen, these
coloured marks are eminently liable to appear in the crossed offspring
of two distinct and differently coloured breeds; and in this case there
is nothing in the external conditions of life to cause the reappearance
of the slaty-blue, with the several marks, beyond the influence of the
mere act of crossing on the laws of inheritance.

No doubt it is a very surprising fact that characters should reappear
after having been lost for many, perhaps for hundreds of generations.
But when a breed has been crossed only once by some other breed, the
offspring occasionally show a tendency to revert in character to the
foreign breed for many generations--some say, for a dozen or even a
score of generations. After twelve generations, the proportion of blood,
to use a common expression, of any one ancestor, is only  in ; and
yet, as we see, it is generally believed that a tendency to reversion
is retained by this very small proportion of foreign blood. In a breed
which has not been crossed, but in which BOTH parents have lost some
character which their progenitor possessed, the tendency, whether strong
or weak, to reproduce the lost character might be, as was formerly
remarked, for all that we can see to the contrary, transmitted for
almost any number of generations. When a character which has been lost
in a breed, reappears after a great number of generations, the most
probable hypothesis is, not that the offspring suddenly takes after an
ancestor some hundred generations distant, but that in each successive
generation there has been a tendency to reproduce the character in
question, which at last, under unknown favourable conditions, gains an
ascendancy. For instance, it is probable that in each generation of the
barb-pigeon, which produces most rarely a blue and black-barred bird,
there has been a tendency in each generation in the plumage to assume
this colour. This view is hypothetical, but could be supported by some
facts; and I can see no more abstract improbability in a tendency
to produce any character being inherited for an endless number of
generations, than in quite useless or rudimentary organs being, as we
all know them to be, thus inherited. Indeed, we may sometimes observe
a mere tendency to produce a rudiment inherited: for instance, in the
common snapdragon (Antirrhinum) a rudiment of a fifth stamen so often
appears, that this plant must have an inherited tendency to produce it.

As all the species of the same genus are supposed, on my theory, to have
descended from a common parent, it might be expected that they would
occasionally vary in an analogous manner; so that a variety of one
species would resemble in some of its characters another species; this
other species being on my view only a well-marked and permanent variety.
But characters thus gained would probably be of an unimportant nature,
for the presence of all important characters will be governed by natural
selection, in accordance with the diverse habits of the species, and
will not be left to the mutual action of the conditions of life and of
a similar inherited constitution. It might further be expected that the
species of the same genus would occasionally exhibit reversions to lost
ancestral characters. As, however, we never know the exact character
of the common ancestor of a group, we could not distinguish these two
cases: if, for instance, we did not know that the rock-pigeon was not
feather-footed or turn-crowned, we could not have told, whether these
characters in our domestic breeds were reversions or only analogous
variations; but we might have inferred that the blueness was a case of
reversion, from the number of the markings, which are correlated with
the blue tint, and which it does not appear probable would all appear
together from simple variation. More especially we might have inferred
this, from the blue colour and marks so often appearing when distinct
breeds of diverse colours are crossed. Hence, though under nature
it must generally be left doubtful, what cases are reversions to an
anciently existing character, and what are new but analogous variations,
yet we ought, on my theory, sometimes to find the varying offspring of
a species assuming characters (either from reversion or from analogous
variation) which already occur in some other members of the same group.
And this undoubtedly is the case in nature.

A considerable part of the difficulty in recognising a variable species
in our systematic works, is due to its varieties mocking, as it were,
some of the other species of the same genus. A considerable catalogue,
also, could be given of forms intermediate between two other forms,
which themselves must be doubtfully ranked as either varieties or
species; and this shows, unless all these forms be considered as
independently created species, that the one in varying has assumed some
of the characters of the other, so as to produce the intermediate form.
But the best evidence is afforded by parts or organs of an important and
uniform nature occasionally varying so as to acquire, in some degree,
the character of the same part or organ in an allied species. I have
collected a long list of such cases; but here, as before, I lie under
a great disadvantage in not being able to give them. I can only repeat
that such cases certainly do occur, and seem to me very remarkable.

I will, however, give one curious and complex case, not indeed as
affecting any important character, but from occurring in several species
