development, and secondly, from their following exactly the same habits
of life with their parents; for in this case, it would be indispensable
for the existence of the species, that the child should be modified at
a very early age in the same manner with its parents, in accordance with
their similar habits. Some further explanation, however, of the embryo
not undergoing any metamorphosis is perhaps requisite. If, on the other
hand, it profited the young to follow habits of life in any degree
different from those of their parent, and consequently to be constructed
in a slightly different manner, then, on the principle of inheritance at
corresponding ages, the active young or larvae might easily be rendered
by natural selection different to any conceivable extent from their
parents. Such differences might, also, become correlated with successive
stages of development; so that the larvae, in the first stage, might
differ greatly from the larvae in the second stage, as we have seen to
be the case with cirripedes. The adult might become fitted for sites or
habits, in which organs of locomotion or of the senses, etc., would be
useless; and in this case the final metamorphosis would be said to be
retrograde.

As all the organic beings, extinct and recent, which have ever lived on
this earth have to be classed together, and as all have been connected
by the finest gradations, the best, or indeed, if our collections were
nearly perfect, the only possible arrangement, would be genealogical.
Descent being on my view the hidden bond of connexion which naturalists
have been seeking under the term of the natural system. On this view
we can understand how it is that, in the eyes of most naturalists, the
structure of the embryo is even more important for classification than
that of the adult. For the embryo is the animal in its less modified
state; and in so far it reveals the structure of its progenitor. In
two groups of animal, however much they may at present differ from each
other in structure and habits, if they pass through the same or similar
embryonic stages, we may feel assured that they have both descended from
the same or nearly similar parents, and are therefore in that degree
closely related. Thus, community in embryonic structure reveals
community of descent. It will reveal this community of descent, however
much the structure of the adult may have been modified and obscured; we
have seen, for instance, that cirripedes can at once be recognised by
their larvae as belonging to the great class of crustaceans. As the
embryonic state of each species and group of species partially shows us
the structure of their less modified ancient progenitors, we can clearly
see why ancient and extinct forms of life should resemble the embryos of
their descendants,--our existing species. Agassiz believes this to be a
law of nature; but I am bound to confess that I only hope to see the
law hereafter proved true. It can be proved true in those cases alone in
which the ancient state, now supposed to be represented in many embryos,
has not been obliterated, either by the successive variations in a long
course of modification having supervened at a very early age, or by the
variations having been inherited at an earlier period than that at which
they first appeared. It should also be borne in mind, that the supposed
law of resemblance of ancient forms of life to the embryonic stages of
recent forms, may be true, but yet, owing to the geological record not
extending far enough back in time, may remain for a long period, or for
ever, incapable of demonstration.

Thus, as it seems to me, the leading facts in embryology, which are
second in importance to none in natural history, are explained on the
principle of slight modifications not appearing, in the many descendants
from some one ancient progenitor, at a very early period in the life of
each, though perhaps caused at the earliest, and being inherited at a
corresponding not early period. Embryology rises greatly in interest,
when we thus look at the embryo as a picture, more or less obscured, of
the common parent-form of each great class of animals.

RUDIMENTARY, ATROPHIED, OR ABORTED ORGANS.

Organs or parts in this strange condition, bearing the stamp of
inutility, are extremely common throughout nature. For instance,
rudimentary mammae are very general in the males of mammals: I presume
that the "bastard-wing" in birds may be safely considered as a digit
in a rudimentary state: in very many snakes one lobe of the lungs is
rudimentary; in other snakes there are rudiments of the pelvis and hind
limbs. Some of the cases of rudimentary organs are extremely curious;
for instance, the presence of teeth in foetal whales, which when grown
up have not a tooth in their heads; and the presence of teeth, which
never cut through the gums, in the upper jaws of our unborn calves. It
has even been stated on good authority that rudiments of teeth can be
detected in the beaks of certain embryonic birds. Nothing can be plainer
than that wings are formed for flight, yet in how many insects do we see
wings so reduced in size as to be utterly incapable of flight, and not
rarely lying under wing-cases, firmly soldered together!

The meaning of rudimentary organs is often quite unmistakeable: for
instance there are beetles of the same genus (and even of the same
species) resembling each other most closely in all respects, one
of which will have full-sized wings, and another mere rudiments of
membrane; and here it is impossible to doubt, that the rudiments
represent wings. Rudimentary organs sometimes retain their potentiality,
and are merely not developed: this seems to be the case with the mammae
of male mammals, for many instances are on record of these organs having
become well developed in full-grown males, and having secreted milk. So
again there are normally four developed and two rudimentary teats in
the udders of the genus Bos, but in our domestic cows the two sometimes
become developed and give milk. In individual plants of the same
species the petals sometimes occur as mere rudiments, and sometimes in
a well-developed state. In plants with separated sexes, the male flowers
often have a rudiment of a pistil; and Kolreuter found that by crossing
such male plants with an hermaphrodite species, the rudiment of the
pistil in the hybrid offspring was much increased in size; and this
shows that the rudiment and the perfect pistil are essentially alike in
nature.

An organ serving for two purposes, may become rudimentary or utterly
aborted for one, even the more important purpose; and remain perfectly
efficient for the other. Thus in plants, the office of the pistil is to
allow the pollen-tubes to reach the ovules protected in the ovarium at
its base. The pistil consists of a stigma supported on the style; but in
some Compositae, the male florets, which of course cannot be fecundated,
have a pistil, which is in a rudimentary state, for it is not crowned
with a stigma; but the style remains well developed, and is clothed with
hairs as in other compositae, for the purpose of brushing the pollen out
of the surrounding anthers. Again, an organ may become rudimentary for
its proper purpose, and be used for a distinct object: in certain fish
the swim-bladder seems to be rudimentary for its proper function of
giving buoyancy, but has become converted into a nascent breathing organ
or lung. Other similar instances could be given.

Rudimentary organs in the individuals of the same species are very
liable to vary in degree of development and in other respects. Moreover,
in closely allied species, the degree to which the same organ has been
rendered rudimentary occasionally differs much. This latter fact is well
exemplified in the state of the wings of the female moths in certain
groups. Rudimentary organs may be utterly aborted; and this implies,
that we find in an animal or plant no trace of an organ, which analogy
would lead us to expect to find, and which is occasionally found
in monstrous individuals of the species. Thus in the snapdragon
(antirrhinum) we generally do not find a rudiment of a fifth stamen; but
this may sometimes be seen. In tracing the homologies of the same
part in different members of a class, nothing is more common, or more
necessary, than the use and discovery of rudiments. This is well shown
in the drawings given by Owen of the bones of the leg of the horse, ox,
and rhinoceros.

It is an important fact that rudimentary organs, such as teeth in the
upper jaws of whales and ruminants, can often be detected in the embryo,
but afterwards wholly disappear. It is also, I believe, a universal
rule, that a rudimentary part or organ is of greater size relatively to
the adjoining parts in the embryo, than in the adult; so that the organ
at this early age is less rudimentary, or even cannot be said to be in
any degree rudimentary. Hence, also, a rudimentary organ in the adult,
is often said to have retained its embryonic condition.

I have now given the leading facts with respect to rudimentary organs.
In reflecting on them, every one must be struck with astonishment: for
the same reasoning power which tells us plainly that most parts and
organs are exquisitely adapted for certain purposes, tells us with equal
plainness that these rudimentary or atrophied organs, are imperfect and
useless. In works on natural history rudimentary organs are generally
said to have been created "for the sake of symmetry," or in order "to
complete the scheme of nature;" but this seems to me no explanation,
merely a restatement of the fact. Would it be thought sufficient to
