may at least admit as probable that the glacial action was simultaneous
on the eastern and western sides of North America, in the Cordillera
under the equator and under the warmer temperate zones, and on both
sides of the southern extremity of the continent. If this be admitted,
it is difficult to avoid believing that the temperature of the whole
world was at this period simultaneously cooler. But it would suffice for
my purpose, if the temperature was at the same time lower along certain
broad belts of longitude.

On this view of the whole world, or at least of broad longitudinal
belts, having been simultaneously colder from pole to pole, much light
can be thrown on the present distribution of identical and allied
species. In America, Dr. Hooker has shown that between forty and fifty
of the flowering plants of Tierra del Fuego, forming no inconsiderable
part of its scanty flora, are common to Europe, enormously remote as
these two points are; and there are many closely allied species. On
the lofty mountains of equatorial America a host of peculiar species
belonging to European genera occur. On the highest mountains of Brazil,
some few European genera were found by Gardner, which do not exist in
the wide intervening hot countries. So on the Silla of Caraccas
the illustrious Humboldt long ago found species belonging to genera
characteristic of the Cordillera. On the mountains of Abyssinia, several
European forms and some few representatives of the peculiar flora of the
Cape of Good Hope occur. At the Cape of Good Hope a very few European
species, believed not to have been introduced by man, and on the
mountains, some few representative European forms are found, which
have not been discovered in the intertropical parts of Africa. On the
Himalaya, and on the isolated mountain-ranges of the peninsula of India,
on the heights of Ceylon, and on the volcanic cones of Java, many plants
occur, either identically the same or representing each other, and
at the same time representing plants of Europe, not found in the
intervening hot lowlands. A list of the genera collected on the loftier
peaks of Java raises a picture of a collection made on a hill in Europe!
Still more striking is the fact that southern Australian forms are
clearly represented by plants growing on the summits of the mountains
of Borneo. Some of these Australian forms, as I hear from Dr. Hooker,
extend along the heights of the peninsula of Malacca, and are thinly
scattered, on the one hand over India and on the other as far north as
Japan.

On the southern mountains of Australia, Dr. F. Muller has discovered
several European species; other species, not introduced by man, occur
on the lowlands; and a long list can be given, as I am informed by
Dr. Hooker, of European genera, found in Australia, but not in the
intermediate torrid regions. In the admirable 'Introduction to the Flora
of New Zealand,' by Dr. Hooker, analogous and striking facts are
given in regard to the plants of that large island. Hence we see that
throughout the world, the plants growing on the more lofty mountains,
and on the temperate lowlands of the northern and southern hemispheres,
are sometimes identically the same; but they are much oftener
specifically distinct, though related to each other in a most remarkable
manner.

This brief abstract applies to plants alone: some strictly analogous
facts could be given on the distribution of terrestrial animals. In
marine productions, similar cases occur; as an example, I may quote a
remark by the highest authority, Professor Dana, that "it is certainly a
wonderful fact that New Zealand should have a closer resemblance in its
crustacea to Great Britain, its antipode, than to any other part of
the world." Sir J. Richardson, also, speaks of the reappearance on the
shores of New Zealand, Tasmania, etc., of northern forms of fish. Dr.
Hooker informs me that twenty-five species of Algae are common to New
Zealand and to Europe, but have not been found in the intermediate
tropical seas.

It should be observed that the northern species and forms found in the
southern parts of the southern hemisphere, and on the mountain-ranges
of the intertropical regions, are not arctic, but belong to the northern
temperate zones. As Mr. H. C. Watson has recently remarked, "In receding
from polar towards equatorial latitudes, the Alpine or mountain floras
really become less and less arctic." Many of the forms living on
the mountains of the warmer regions of the earth and in the southern
hemisphere are of doubtful value, being ranked by some naturalists as
specifically distinct, by others as varieties; but some are certainly
identical, and many, though closely related to northern forms, must be
ranked as distinct species.

Now let us see what light can be thrown on the foregoing facts, on the
belief, supported as it is by a large body of geological evidence, that
the whole world, or a large part of it, was during the Glacial period
simultaneously much colder than at present. The Glacial period, as
measured by years, must have been very long; and when we remember over
what vast spaces some naturalised plants and animals have spread within
a few centuries, this period will have been ample for any amount of
migration. As the cold came slowly on, all the tropical plants and other
productions will have retreated from both sides towards the equator,
followed in the rear by the temperate productions, and these by the
arctic; but with the latter we are not now concerned. The tropical
plants probably suffered much extinction; how much no one can say;
perhaps formerly the tropics supported as many species as we see at the
present day crowded together at the Cape of Good Hope, and in parts of
temperate Australia. As we know that many tropical plants and animals
can withstand a considerable amount of cold, many might have escaped
extermination during a moderate fall of temperature, more especially by
escaping into the warmest spots. But the great fact to bear in mind is,
that all tropical productions will have suffered to a certain extent. On
the other hand, the temperate productions, after migrating nearer to
the equator, though they will have been placed under somewhat new
conditions, will have suffered less. And it is certain that many
temperate plants, if protected from the inroads of competitors, can
withstand a much warmer climate than their own. Hence, it seems to
me possible, bearing in mind that the tropical productions were in
a suffering state and could not have presented a firm front against
intruders, that a certain number of the more vigorous and dominant
temperate forms might have penetrated the native ranks and have reached
or even crossed the equator. The invasion would, of course, have been
greatly favoured by high land, and perhaps by a dry climate; for Dr.
Falconer informs me that it is the damp with the heat of the tropics
which is so destructive to perennial plants from a temperate climate. On
the other hand, the most humid and hottest districts will have afforded
an asylum to the tropical natives. The mountain-ranges north-west of the
Himalaya, and the long line of the Cordillera, seem to have afforded two
great lines of invasion: and it is a striking fact, lately communicated
to me by Dr. Hooker, that all the flowering plants, about forty-six in
number, common to Tierra del Fuego and to Europe still exist in North
America, which must have lain on the line of march. But I do not doubt
that some temperate productions entered and crossed even the LOWLANDS of
the tropics at the period when the cold was most intense,--when arctic
forms had migrated some twenty-five degrees of latitude from their
native country and covered the land at the foot of the Pyrenees. At this
period of extreme cold, I believe that the climate under the equator at
the level of the sea was about the same with that now felt there at the
height of six or seven thousand feet. During this the coldest period, I
suppose that large spaces of the tropical lowlands were clothed with a
mingled tropical and temperate vegetation, like that now growing with
strange luxuriance at the base of the Himalaya, as graphically described
by Hooker.

Thus, as I believe, a considerable number of plants, a few terrestrial
animals, and some marine productions, migrated during the Glacial period
from the northern and southern temperate zones into the intertropical
regions, and some even crossed the equator. As the warmth returned,
these temperate forms would naturally ascend the higher mountains, being
exterminated on the lowlands; those which had not reached the equator,
would re-migrate northward or southward towards their former homes; but
the forms, chiefly northern, which had crossed the equator, would travel
still further from their homes into the more temperate latitudes of the
opposite hemisphere. Although we have reason to believe from geological
evidence that the whole body of arctic shells underwent scarcely any
modification during their long southern migration and re-migration
northward, the case may have been wholly different with those intruding
forms which settled themselves on the intertropical mountains, and in
the southern hemisphere. These being surrounded by strangers will have
had to compete with many new forms of life; and it is probable that
selected modifications in their structure, habits, and constitutions
will have profited them. Thus many of these wanderers, though still
plainly related by inheritance to their brethren of the northern or
southern hemispheres, now exist in their new homes as well-marked
varieties or as distinct species.

