remarked, to exterminate the parent forms and the intermediate links.
Consequently evidence of their former existence could be found only
amongst fossil remains, which are preserved, as we shall in a future
chapter attempt to show, in an extremely imperfect and intermittent
record.

ON THE ORIGIN AND TRANSITIONS OF ORGANIC BEINGS WITH PECULIAR HABITS AND
STRUCTURE.

It has been asked by the opponents of such views as I hold, how, for
instance, a land carnivorous animal could have been converted into one
with aquatic habits; for how could the animal in its transitional state
have subsisted? It would be easy to show that within the same group
carnivorous animals exist having every intermediate grade between
truly aquatic and strictly terrestrial habits; and as each exists by a
struggle for life, it is clear that each is well adapted in its habits
to its place in nature. Look at the Mustela vison of North America,
which has webbed feet and which resembles an otter in its fur, short
legs, and form of tail; during summer this animal dives for and preys on
fish, but during the long winter it leaves the frozen waters, and preys
like other polecats on mice and land animals. If a different case had
been taken, and it had been asked how an insectivorous quadruped could
possibly have been converted into a flying bat, the question would have
been far more difficult, and I could have given no answer. Yet I think
such difficulties have very little weight.

Here, as on other occasions, I lie under a heavy disadvantage, for out
of the many striking cases which I have collected, I can give only one
or two instances of transitional habits and structures in closely allied
species of the same genus; and of diversified habits, either constant
or occasional, in the same species. And it seems to me that nothing less
than a long list of such cases is sufficient to lessen the difficulty in
any particular case like that of the bat.

Look at the family of squirrels; here we have the finest gradation from
animals with their tails only slightly flattened, and from others, as
Sir J. Richardson has remarked, with the posterior part of their bodies
rather wide and with the skin on their flanks rather full, to the
so-called flying squirrels; and flying squirrels have their limbs and
even the base of the tail united by a broad expanse of skin, which
serves as a parachute and allows them to glide through the air to
an astonishing distance from tree to tree. We cannot doubt that each
structure is of use to each kind of squirrel in its own country, by
enabling it to escape birds or beasts of prey, or to collect food more
quickly, or, as there is reason to believe, by lessening the danger
from occasional falls. But it does not follow from this fact that the
structure of each squirrel is the best that it is possible to conceive
under all natural conditions. Let the climate and vegetation change,
let other competing rodents or new beasts of prey immigrate, or old ones
become modified, and all analogy would lead us to believe that some at
least of the squirrels would decrease in numbers or become exterminated,
unless they also became modified and improved in structure in a
corresponding manner. Therefore, I can see no difficulty, more
especially under changing conditions of life, in the continued
preservation of individuals with fuller and fuller flank-membranes,
each modification being useful, each being propagated, until by the
accumulated effects of this process of natural selection, a perfect
so-called flying squirrel was produced.

Now look at the Galeopithecus or flying lemur, which formerly was
falsely ranked amongst bats. It has an extremely wide flank-membrane,
stretching from the corners of the jaw to the tail, and including the
limbs and the elongated fingers: the flank membrane is, also, furnished
with an extensor muscle. Although no graduated links of structure,
fitted for gliding through the air, now connect the Galeopithecus with
the other Lemuridae, yet I can see no difficulty in supposing that such
links formerly existed, and that each had been formed by the same steps
as in the case of the less perfectly gliding squirrels; and that each
grade of structure had been useful to its possessor. Nor can I see
any insuperable difficulty in further believing it possible that the
membrane-connected fingers and fore-arm of the Galeopithecus might be
greatly lengthened by natural selection; and this, as far as the organs
of flight are concerned, would convert it into a bat. In bats which have
the wing-membrane extended from the top of the shoulder to the
tail, including the hind-legs, we perhaps see traces of an apparatus
originally constructed for gliding through the air rather than for
flight.

If about a dozen genera of birds had become extinct or were unknown, who
would have ventured to have surmised that birds might have existed
which used their wings solely as flappers, like the logger-headed duck
(Micropterus of Eyton); as fins in the water and front legs on the land,
like the penguin; as sails, like the ostrich; and functionally for no
purpose, like the Apteryx. Yet the structure of each of these birds is
good for it, under the conditions of life to which it is exposed, for
each has to live by a struggle; but it is not necessarily the best
possible under all possible conditions. It must not be inferred from
these remarks that any of the grades of wing-structure here alluded to,
which perhaps may all have resulted from disuse, indicate the natural
steps by which birds have acquired their perfect power of flight; but
they serve, at least, to show what diversified means of transition are
possible.

Seeing that a few members of such water-breathing classes as the
Crustacea and Mollusca are adapted to live on the land, and seeing that
we have flying birds and mammals, flying insects of the most diversified
types, and formerly had flying reptiles, it is conceivable that
flying-fish, which now glide far through the air, slightly rising and
turning by the aid of their fluttering fins, might have been modified
into perfectly winged animals. If this had been effected, who would
have ever imagined that in an early transitional state they had been
inhabitants of the open ocean, and had used their incipient organs of
flight exclusively, as far as we know, to escape being devoured by other
fish?

When we see any structure highly perfected for any particular habit,
as the wings of a bird for flight, we should bear in mind that animals
displaying early transitional grades of the structure will seldom
continue to exist to the present day, for they will have been
supplanted by the very process of perfection through natural selection.
Furthermore, we may conclude that transitional grades between structures
fitted for very different habits of life will rarely have been developed
at an early period in great numbers and under many subordinate forms.
Thus, to return to our imaginary illustration of the flying-fish, it
does not seem probable that fishes capable of true flight would have
been developed under many subordinate forms, for taking prey of many
kinds in many ways, on the land and in the water, until their organs of
flight had come to a high stage of perfection, so as to have given them
a decided advantage over other animals in the battle for life. Hence the
chance of discovering species with transitional grades of structure in
a fossil condition will always be less, from their having existed
in lesser numbers, than in the case of species with fully developed
structures.

I will now give two or three instances of diversified and of changed
habits in the individuals of the same species. When either case occurs,
it would be easy for natural selection to fit the animal, by some
modification of its structure, for its changed habits, or exclusively
for one of its several different habits. But it is difficult to tell,
and immaterial for us, whether habits generally change first and
structure afterwards; or whether slight modifications of structure lead
to changed habits; both probably often change almost simultaneously. Of
cases of changed habits it will suffice merely to allude to that of the
many British insects which now feed on exotic plants, or exclusively on
artificial substances. Of diversified habits innumerable instances
could be given: I have often watched a tyrant flycatcher (Saurophagus
sulphuratus) in South America, hovering over one spot and then
proceeding to another, like a kestrel, and at other times standing
stationary on the margin of water, and then dashing like a kingfisher at
a fish. In our own country the larger titmouse (Parus major) may be seen
climbing branches, almost like a creeper; it often, like a shrike, kills
small birds by blows on the head; and I have many times seen and heard
it hammering the seeds of the yew on a branch, and thus breaking them
like a nuthatch. In North America the black bear was seen by Hearne
swimming for hours with widely open mouth, thus catching, like a whale,
insects in the water. Even in so extreme a case as this, if the supply
of insects were constant, and if better adapted competitors did not
already exist in the country, I can see no difficulty in a race of bears
being rendered, by natural selection, more and more aquatic in their
structure and habits, with larger and larger mouths, till a creature was
