descent with modification through natural selection, I do not deny. I
have endeavoured to give to them their full force. Nothing at first can
appear more difficult to believe than that the more complex organs and
instincts should have been perfected, not by means superior to, though
analogous with, human reason, but by the accumulation of innumerable
slight variations, each good for the individual possessor. Nevertheless,
this difficulty, though appearing to our imagination insuperably great,
cannot be considered real if we admit the following propositions,
namely,--that gradations in the perfection of any organ or instinct,
which we may consider, either do now exist or could have existed, each
good of its kind,--that all organs and instincts are, in ever so slight
a degree, variable,--and, lastly, that there is a struggle for existence
leading to the preservation of each profitable deviation of structure or
instinct. The truth of these propositions cannot, I think, be disputed.

It is, no doubt, extremely difficult even to conjecture by what
gradations many structures have been perfected, more especially amongst
broken and failing groups of organic beings; but we see so many strange
gradations in nature, as is proclaimed by the canon, "Natura non facit
saltum," that we ought to be extremely cautious in saying that any organ
or instinct, or any whole being, could not have arrived at its present
state by many graduated steps. There are, it must be admitted, cases of
special difficulty on the theory of natural selection; and one of the
most curious of these is the existence of two or three defined castes
of workers or sterile females in the same community of ants; but I have
attempted to show how this difficulty can be mastered.

With respect to the almost universal sterility of species when first
crossed, which forms so remarkable a contrast with the almost universal
fertility of varieties when crossed, I must refer the reader to the
recapitulation of the facts given at the end of the eighth chapter,
which seem to me conclusively to show that this sterility is no more
a special endowment than is the incapacity of two trees to be grafted
together, but that it is incidental on constitutional differences in the
reproductive systems of the intercrossed species. We see the truth of
this conclusion in the vast difference in the result, when the same two
species are crossed reciprocally; that is, when one species is first
used as the father and then as the mother.

The fertility of varieties when intercrossed and of their mongrel
offspring cannot be considered as universal; nor is their very general
fertility surprising when we remember that it is not likely that either
their constitutions or their reproductive systems should have been
profoundly modified. Moreover, most of the varieties which have been
experimentised on have been produced under domestication; and as
domestication apparently tends to eliminate sterility, we ought not to
expect it also to produce sterility.

The sterility of hybrids is a very different case from that of first
crosses, for their reproductive organs are more or less functionally
impotent; whereas in first crosses the organs on both sides are in a
perfect condition. As we continually see that organisms of all kinds
are rendered in some degree sterile from their constitutions having been
disturbed by slightly different and new conditions of life, we need
not feel surprise at hybrids being in some degree sterile, for their
constitutions can hardly fail to have been disturbed from being
compounded of two distinct organisations. This parallelism is supported
by another parallel, but directly opposite, class of facts; namely, that
the vigour and fertility of all organic beings are increased by slight
changes in their conditions of life, and that the offspring of slightly
modified forms or varieties acquire from being crossed increased vigour
and fertility. So that, on the one hand, considerable changes in the
conditions of life and crosses between greatly modified forms, lessen
fertility; and on the other hand, lesser changes in the conditions of
life and crosses between less modified forms, increase fertility.

Turning to geographical distribution, the difficulties encountered
on the theory of descent with modification are grave enough. All the
individuals of the same species, and all the species of the same genus,
or even higher group, must have descended from common parents; and
therefore, in however distant and isolated parts of the world they are
now found, they must in the course of successive generations have passed
from some one part to the others. We are often wholly unable even to
conjecture how this could have been effected. Yet, as we have reason to
believe that some species have retained the same specific form for very
long periods, enormously long as measured by years, too much stress
ought not to be laid on the occasional wide diffusion of the same
species; for during very long periods of time there will always be a
good chance for wide migration by many means. A broken or interrupted
range may often be accounted for by the extinction of the species in
the intermediate regions. It cannot be denied that we are as yet very
ignorant of the full extent of the various climatal and geographical
changes which have affected the earth during modern periods; and
such changes will obviously have greatly facilitated migration. As an
example, I have attempted to show how potent has been the influence
of the Glacial period on the distribution both of the same and of
representative species throughout the world. We are as yet profoundly
ignorant of the many occasional means of transport. With respect to
distinct species of the same genus inhabiting very distant and isolated
regions, as the process of modification has necessarily been slow,
all the means of migration will have been possible during a very long
period; and consequently the difficulty of the wide diffusion of species
of the same genus is in some degree lessened.

As on the theory of natural selection an interminable number of
intermediate forms must have existed, linking together all the species
in each group by gradations as fine as our present varieties, it may be
asked, Why do we not see these linking forms all around us? Why are
not all organic beings blended together in an inextricable chaos? With
respect to existing forms, we should remember that we have no right to
expect (excepting in rare cases) to discover DIRECTLY connecting links
between them, but only between each and some extinct and supplanted
form. Even on a wide area, which has during a long period remained
continuous, and of which the climate and other conditions of life change
insensibly in going from a district occupied by one species into another
district occupied by a closely allied species, we have no just right to
expect often to find intermediate varieties in the intermediate zone.
For we have reason to believe that only a few species are undergoing
change at any one period; and all changes are slowly effected. I have
also shown that the intermediate varieties which will at first probably
exist in the intermediate zones, will be liable to be supplanted by the
allied forms on either hand; and the latter, from existing in greater
numbers, will generally be modified and improved at a quicker rate than
the intermediate varieties, which exist in lesser numbers; so that
the intermediate varieties will, in the long run, be supplanted and
exterminated.

On this doctrine of the extermination of an infinitude of connecting
links, between the living and extinct inhabitants of the world, and at
each successive period between the extinct and still older species, why
is not every geological formation charged with such links? Why does
not every collection of fossil remains afford plain evidence of the
gradation and mutation of the forms of life? We meet with no such
evidence, and this is the most obvious and forcible of the many
objections which may be urged against my theory. Why, again, do whole
groups of allied species appear, though certainly they often falsely
appear, to have come in suddenly on the several geological stages? Why
do we not find great piles of strata beneath the Silurian system, stored
with the remains of the progenitors of the Silurian groups of fossils?
For certainly on my theory such strata must somewhere have been
deposited at these ancient and utterly unknown epochs in the world's
history.

I can answer these questions and grave objections only on the
supposition that the geological record is far more imperfect than most
geologists believe. It cannot be objected that there has not been time
sufficient for any amount of organic change; for the lapse of time has
been so great as to be utterly inappreciable by the human intellect. The
number of specimens in all our museums is absolutely as nothing compared
with the countless generations of countless species which certainly have
existed. We should not be able to recognise a species as the parent
of any one or more species if we were to examine them ever so closely,
unless we likewise possessed many of the intermediate links between
their past or parent and present states; and these many links we
could hardly ever expect to discover, owing to the imperfection of the
geological record. Numerous existing doubtful forms could be named which
are probably varieties; but who will pretend that in future ages so
many fossil links will be discovered, that naturalists will be able
to decide, on the common view, whether or not these doubtful forms are
varieties? As long as most of the links between any two species are
