natural selection might be most effective in giving the proper colour
to each kind of grouse, and in keeping that colour, when once acquired,
true and constant. Nor ought we to think that the occasional destruction
of an animal of any particular colour would produce little effect: we
should remember how essential it is in a flock of white sheep to destroy
every lamb with the faintest trace of black. In plants the down on
the fruit and the colour of the flesh are considered by botanists
as characters of the most trifling importance: yet we hear from
an excellent horticulturist, Downing, that in the United States
smooth-skinned fruits suffer far more from a beetle, a curculio, than
those with down; that purple plums suffer far more from a certain
disease than yellow plums; whereas another disease attacks
yellow-fleshed peaches far more than those with other coloured flesh.
If, with all the aids of art, these slight differences make a great
difference in cultivating the several varieties, assuredly, in a state
of nature, where the trees would have to struggle with other trees and
with a host of enemies, such differences would effectually settle which
variety, whether a smooth or downy, a yellow or purple fleshed fruit,
should succeed.

In looking at many small points of difference between species, which, as
far as our ignorance permits us to judge, seem to be quite unimportant,
we must not forget that climate, food, etc., probably produce some
slight and direct effect. It is, however, far more necessary to bear in
mind that there are many unknown laws of correlation of growth, which,
when one part of the organisation is modified through variation, and the
modifications are accumulated by natural selection for the good of the
being, will cause other modifications, often of the most unexpected
nature.

As we see that those variations which under domestication appear at any
particular period of life, tend to reappear in the offspring at the
same period;--for instance, in the seeds of the many varieties of our
culinary and agricultural plants; in the caterpillar and cocoon stages
of the varieties of the silkworm; in the eggs of poultry, and in the
colour of the down of their chickens; in the horns of our sheep and
cattle when nearly adult;--so in a state of nature, natural selection
will be enabled to act on and modify organic beings at any age, by
the accumulation of profitable variations at that age, and by their
inheritance at a corresponding age. If it profit a plant to have its
seeds more and more widely disseminated by the wind, I can see no
greater difficulty in this being effected through natural selection,
than in the cotton-planter increasing and improving by selection the
down in the pods on his cotton-trees. Natural selection may modify
and adapt the larva of an insect to a score of contingencies,
wholly different from those which concern the mature insect. These
modifications will no doubt affect, through the laws of correlation, the
structure of the adult; and probably in the case of those insects which
live only for a few hours, and which never feed, a large part of their
structure is merely the correlated result of successive changes in the
structure of their larvae. So, conversely, modifications in the adult
will probably often affect the structure of the larva; but in all cases
natural selection will ensure that modifications consequent on other
modifications at a different period of life, shall not be in the least
degree injurious: for if they became so, they would cause the extinction
of the species.

Natural selection will modify the structure of the young in relation
to the parent, and of the parent in relation to the young. In social
animals it will adapt the structure of each individual for the benefit
of the community; if each in consequence profits by the selected change.
What natural selection cannot do, is to modify the structure of one
species, without giving it any advantage, for the good of another
species; and though statements to this effect may be found in works of
natural history, I cannot find one case which will bear investigation.
A structure used only once in an animal's whole life, if of high
importance to it, might be modified to any extent by natural selection;
for instance, the great jaws possessed by certain insects, and used
exclusively for opening the cocoon--or the hard tip to the beak of
nestling birds, used for breaking the egg. It has been asserted, that
of the best short-beaked tumbler-pigeons more perish in the egg than are
able to get out of it; so that fanciers assist in the act of hatching.
Now, if nature had to make the beak of a full-grown pigeon very short
for the bird's own advantage, the process of modification would be very
slow, and there would be simultaneously the most rigorous selection of
the young birds within the egg, which had the most powerful and hardest
beaks, for all with weak beaks would inevitably perish: or, more
delicate and more easily broken shells might be selected, the thickness
of the shell being known to vary like every other structure.

SEXUAL SELECTION.

Inasmuch as peculiarities often appear under domestication in one sex
and become hereditarily attached to that sex, the same fact probably
occurs under nature, and if so, natural selection will be able to modify
one sex in its functional relations to the other sex, or in relation to
wholly different habits of life in the two sexes, as is sometimes the
case with insects. And this leads me to say a few words on what I call
Sexual Selection. This depends, not on a struggle for existence, but on
a struggle between the males for possession of the females; the result
is not death to the unsuccessful competitor, but few or no offspring.
Sexual selection is, therefore, less rigorous than natural selection.
Generally, the most vigorous males, those which are best fitted for
their places in nature, will leave most progeny. But in many cases,
victory will depend not on general vigour, but on having special
weapons, confined to the male sex. A hornless stag or spurless cock
would have a poor chance of leaving offspring. Sexual selection by
always allowing the victor to breed might surely give indomitable
courage, length to the spur, and strength to the wing to strike in the
spurred leg, as well as the brutal cock-fighter, who knows well that he
can improve his breed by careful selection of the best cocks. How low
in the scale of nature this law of battle descends, I know not; male
alligators have been described as fighting, bellowing, and whirling
round, like Indians in a war-dance, for the possession of the females;
male salmons have been seen fighting all day long; male stag-beetles
often bear wounds from the huge mandibles of other males. The war is,
perhaps, severest between the males of polygamous animals, and these
seem oftenest provided with special weapons. The males of carnivorous
animals are already well armed; though to them and to others, special
means of defence may be given through means of sexual selection, as the
mane to the lion, the shoulder-pad to the boar, and the hooked jaw to
the male salmon; for the shield may be as important for victory, as the
sword or spear.

Amongst birds, the contest is often of a more peaceful character.
All those who have attended to the subject, believe that there is the
severest rivalry between the males of many species to attract by singing
the females. The rock-thrush of Guiana, birds of Paradise, and some
others, congregate; and successive males display their gorgeous plumage
and perform strange antics before the females, which standing by as
spectators, at last choose the most attractive partner. Those who have
closely attended to birds in confinement well know that they often take
individual preferences and dislikes: thus Sir R. Heron has described how
one pied peacock was eminently attractive to all his hen birds. It may
appear childish to attribute any effect to such apparently weak means: I
cannot here enter on the details necessary to support this view; but if
man can in a short time give elegant carriage and beauty to his bantams,
according to his standard of beauty, I can see no good reason to doubt
that female birds, by selecting, during thousands of generations,
the most melodious or beautiful males, according to their standard of
beauty, might produce a marked effect. I strongly suspect that some
well-known laws with respect to the plumage of male and female birds, in
comparison with the plumage of the young, can be explained on the view
of plumage having been chiefly modified by sexual selection, acting when
the birds have come to the breeding age or during the breeding season;
the modifications thus produced being inherited at corresponding ages or
seasons, either by the males alone, or by the males and females; but I
have not space here to enter on this subject.

Thus it is, as I believe, that when the males and females of any animal
have the same general habits of life, but differ in structure, colour,
or ornament, such differences have been mainly caused by sexual
selection; that is, individual males have had, in successive
generations, some slight advantage over other males, in their weapons,
means of defence, or charms; and have transmitted these advantages to
their male offspring. Yet, I would not wish to attribute all such
sexual differences to this agency: for we see peculiarities arising and
becoming attached to the male sex in our domestic animals (as the wattle
in male carriers, horn-like protuberances in the cocks of certain fowls,
etc.), which we cannot believe to be either useful to the males in
