the best pear they could procure, never thought what splendid fruit we
should eat; though we owe our excellent fruit, in some small degree,
to their having naturally chosen and preserved the best varieties they
could anywhere find.

A large amount of change in our cultivated plants, thus slowly and
unconsciously accumulated, explains, as I believe, the well-known fact,
that in a vast number of cases we cannot recognise, and therefore do
not know, the wild parent-stocks of the plants which have been longest
cultivated in our flower and kitchen gardens. If it has taken centuries
or thousands of years to improve or modify most of our plants up to
their present standard of usefulness to man, we can understand how it
is that neither Australia, the Cape of Good Hope, nor any other region
inhabited by quite uncivilised man, has afforded us a single plant worth
culture. It is not that these countries, so rich in species, do not by
a strange chance possess the aboriginal stocks of any useful plants, but
that the native plants have not been improved by continued selection up
to a standard of perfection comparable with that given to the plants in
countries anciently civilised.

In regard to the domestic animals kept by uncivilised man, it should
not be overlooked that they almost always have to struggle for their
own food, at least during certain seasons. And in two countries very
differently circumstanced, individuals of the same species, having
slightly different constitutions or structure, would often succeed
better in the one country than in the other, and thus by a process of
"natural selection," as will hereafter be more fully explained, two
sub-breeds might be formed. This, perhaps, partly explains what has been
remarked by some authors, namely, that the varieties kept by savages
have more of the character of species than the varieties kept in
civilised countries.

On the view here given of the all-important part which selection by
man has played, it becomes at once obvious, how it is that our domestic
races show adaptation in their structure or in their habits to man's
wants or fancies. We can, I think, further understand the frequently
abnormal character of our domestic races, and likewise their differences
being so great in external characters and relatively so slight in
internal parts or organs. Man can hardly select, or only with much
difficulty, any deviation of structure excepting such as is externally
visible; and indeed he rarely cares for what is internal. He can never
act by selection, excepting on variations which are first given to
him in some slight degree by nature. No man would ever try to make
a fantail, till he saw a pigeon with a tail developed in some slight
degree in an unusual manner, or a pouter till he saw a pigeon with a
crop of somewhat unusual size; and the more abnormal or unusual any
character was when it first appeared, the more likely it would be to
catch his attention. But to use such an expression as trying to make a
fantail, is, I have no doubt, in most cases, utterly incorrect. The man
who first selected a pigeon with a slightly larger tail, never dreamed
what the descendants of that pigeon would become through long-continued,
partly unconscious and partly methodical selection. Perhaps the parent
bird of all fantails had only fourteen tail-feathers somewhat expanded,
like the present Java fantail, or like individuals of other and distinct
breeds, in which as many as seventeen tail-feathers have been counted.
Perhaps the first pouter-pigeon did not inflate its crop much more than
the turbit now does the upper part of its oesophagus,--a habit which
is disregarded by all fanciers, as it is not one of the points of the
breed.

Nor let it be thought that some great deviation of structure would
be necessary to catch the fancier's eye: he perceives extremely small
differences, and it is in human nature to value any novelty, however
slight, in one's own possession. Nor must the value which would formerly
be set on any slight differences in the individuals of the same species,
be judged of by the value which would now be set on them, after several
breeds have once fairly been established. Many slight differences might,
and indeed do now, arise amongst pigeons, which are rejected as faults
or deviations from the standard of perfection of each breed. The common
goose has not given rise to any marked varieties; hence the Thoulouse
and the common breed, which differ only in colour, that most fleeting of
characters, have lately been exhibited as distinct at our poultry-shows.

I think these views further explain what has sometimes been
noticed--namely that we know nothing about the origin or history of
any of our domestic breeds. But, in fact, a breed, like a dialect of
a language, can hardly be said to have had a definite origin. A man
preserves and breeds from an individual with some slight deviation of
structure, or takes more care than usual in matching his best animals
and thus improves them, and the improved individuals slowly spread in
the immediate neighbourhood. But as yet they will hardly have a distinct
name, and from being only slightly valued, their history will be
disregarded. When further improved by the same slow and gradual process,
they will spread more widely, and will get recognised as something
distinct and valuable, and will then probably first receive a provincial
name. In semi-civilised countries, with little free communication, the
spreading and knowledge of any new sub-breed will be a slow process.
As soon as the points of value of the new sub-breed are once fully
acknowledged, the principle, as I have called it, of unconscious
selection will always tend,--perhaps more at one period than at another,
as the breed rises or falls in fashion,--perhaps more in one district
than in another, according to the state of civilisation of the
inhabitants--slowly to add to the characteristic features of the breed,
whatever they may be. But the chance will be infinitely small of any
record having been preserved of such slow, varying, and insensible
changes.

I must now say a few words on the circumstances, favourable, or the
reverse, to man's power of selection. A high degree of variability is
obviously favourable, as freely giving the materials for selection to
work on; not that mere individual differences are not amply sufficient,
with extreme care, to allow of the accumulation of a large amount
of modification in almost any desired direction. But as variations
manifestly useful or pleasing to man appear only occasionally, the
chance of their appearance will be much increased by a large number
of individuals being kept; and hence this comes to be of the highest
importance to success. On this principle Marshall has remarked, with
respect to the sheep of parts of Yorkshire, that "as they generally
belong to poor people, and are mostly IN SMALL LOTS, they never can be
improved." On the other hand, nurserymen, from raising large stocks
of the same plants, are generally far more successful than amateurs in
getting new and valuable varieties. The keeping of a large number of
individuals of a species in any country requires that the species should
be placed under favourable conditions of life, so as to breed freely in
that country. When the individuals of any species are scanty, all the
individuals, whatever their quality may be, will generally be allowed
to breed, and this will effectually prevent selection. But probably the
most important point of all, is, that the animal or plant should be
so highly useful to man, or so much valued by him, that the closest
attention should be paid to even the slightest deviation in the
qualities or structure of each individual. Unless such attention be paid
nothing can be effected. I have seen it gravely remarked, that it was
most fortunate that the strawberry began to vary just when gardeners
began to attend closely to this plant. No doubt the strawberry had
always varied since it was cultivated, but the slight varieties had been
neglected. As soon, however, as gardeners picked out individual plants
with slightly larger, earlier, or better fruit, and raised seedlings
from them, and again picked out the best seedlings and bred from them,
then, there appeared (aided by some crossing with distinct species)
those many admirable varieties of the strawberry which have been raised
during the last thirty or forty years.

In the case of animals with separate sexes, facility in preventing
crosses is an important element of success in the formation of new
races,--at least, in a country which is already stocked with other
races. In this respect enclosure of the land plays a part. Wandering
savages or the inhabitants of open plains rarely possess more than one
breed of the same species. Pigeons can be mated for life, and this is a
great convenience to the fancier, for thus many races may be kept true,
though mingled in the same aviary; and this circumstance must have
largely favoured the improvement and formation of new breeds. Pigeons,
I may add, can be propagated in great numbers and at a very quick rate,
and inferior birds may be freely rejected, as when killed they serve
for food. On the other hand, cats, from their nocturnal rambling habits,
cannot be matched, and, although so much valued by women and children,
we hardly ever see a distinct breed kept up; such breeds as we do
sometimes see are almost always imported from some other country, often
from islands. Although I do not doubt that some domestic animals vary
less than others, yet the rarity or absence of distinct breeds of the
cat, the donkey, peacock, goose, etc., may be attributed in main part
