tend to disappear. Looking to the future, we can predict that the groups
of organic beings which are now large and triumphant, and which are
least broken up, that is, which as yet have suffered least extinction,
will for a long period continue to increase. But which groups will
ultimately prevail, no man can predict; for we well know that many
groups, formerly most extensively developed, have now become extinct.
Looking still more remotely to the future, we may predict that, owing to
the continued and steady increase of the larger groups, a multitude
of smaller groups will become utterly extinct, and leave no modified
descendants; and consequently that of the species living at any one
period, extremely few will transmit descendants to a remote futurity. I
shall have to return to this subject in the chapter on Classification,
but I may add that on this view of extremely few of the more ancient
species having transmitted descendants, and on the view of all the
descendants of the same species making a class, we can understand how
it is that there exist but very few classes in each main division of
the animal and vegetable kingdoms. Although extremely few of the most
ancient species may now have living and modified descendants, yet at the
most remote geological period, the earth may have been as well peopled
with many species of many genera, families, orders, and classes, as at
the present day.

SUMMARY OF CHAPTER.

If during the long course of ages and under varying conditions of life,
organic beings vary at all in the several parts of their organisation,
and I think this cannot be disputed; if there be, owing to the high
geometrical powers of increase of each species, at some age, season, or
year, a severe struggle for life, and this certainly cannot be disputed;
then, considering the infinite complexity of the relations of all
organic beings to each other and to their conditions of existence,
causing an infinite diversity in structure, constitution, and habits, to
be advantageous to them, I think it would be a most extraordinary fact
if no variation ever had occurred useful to each being's own welfare, in
the same way as so many variations have occurred useful to man. But if
variations useful to any organic being do occur, assuredly individuals
thus characterised will have the best chance of being preserved in the
struggle for life; and from the strong principle of inheritance they
will tend to produce offspring similarly characterised. This principle
of preservation, I have called, for the sake of brevity, Natural
Selection. Natural selection, on the principle of qualities being
inherited at corresponding ages, can modify the egg, seed, or young, as
easily as the adult. Amongst many animals, sexual selection will give
its aid to ordinary selection, by assuring to the most vigorous and best
adapted males the greatest number of offspring. Sexual selection will
also give characters useful to the males alone, in their struggles with
other males.

Whether natural selection has really thus acted in nature, in modifying
and adapting the various forms of life to their several conditions
and stations, must be judged of by the general tenour and balance of
evidence given in the following chapters. But we already see how it
entails extinction; and how largely extinction has acted in the world's
history, geology plainly declares. Natural selection, also, leads to
divergence of character; for more living beings can be supported on the
same area the more they diverge in structure, habits, and constitution,
of which we see proof by looking at the inhabitants of any small spot
or at naturalised productions. Therefore during the modification of the
descendants of any one species, and during the incessant struggle of all
species to increase in numbers, the more diversified these descendants
become, the better will be their chance of succeeding in the battle of
life. Thus the small differences distinguishing varieties of the same
species, will steadily tend to increase till they come to equal the
greater differences between species of the same genus, or even of
distinct genera.

We have seen that it is the common, the widely-diffused, and
widely-ranging species, belonging to the larger genera, which vary
most; and these will tend to transmit to their modified offspring
that superiority which now makes them dominant in their own countries.
Natural selection, as has just been remarked, leads to divergence of
character and to much extinction of the less improved and intermediate
forms of life. On these principles, I believe, the nature of the
affinities of all organic beings may be explained. It is a truly
wonderful fact--the wonder of which we are apt to overlook from
familiarity--that all animals and all plants throughout all time and
space should be related to each other in group subordinate to group,
in the manner which we everywhere behold--namely, varieties of the same
species most closely related together, species of the same genus less
closely and unequally related together, forming sections and sub-genera,
species of distinct genera much less closely related, and genera
related in different degrees, forming sub-families, families, orders,
sub-classes, and classes. The several subordinate groups in any class
cannot be ranked in a single file, but seem rather to be clustered
round points, and these round other points, and so on in almost endless
cycles. On the view that each species has been independently created, I
can see no explanation of this great fact in the classification of all
organic beings; but, to the best of my judgment, it is explained through
inheritance and the complex action of natural selection, entailing
extinction and divergence of character, as we have seen illustrated in
the diagram.

The affinities of all the beings of the same class have sometimes been
represented by a great tree. I believe this simile largely speaks the
truth. The green and budding twigs may represent existing species; and
those produced during each former year may represent the long succession
of extinct species. At each period of growth all the growing twigs
have tried to branch out on all sides, and to overtop and kill the
surrounding twigs and branches, in the same manner as species and groups
of species have tried to overmaster other species in the great battle
for life. The limbs divided into great branches, and these into lesser
and lesser branches, were themselves once, when the tree was small,
budding twigs; and this connexion of the former and present buds by
ramifying branches may well represent the classification of all extinct
and living species in groups subordinate to groups. Of the many twigs
which flourished when the tree was a mere bush, only two or three, now
grown into great branches, yet survive and bear all the other branches;
so with the species which lived during long-past geological periods,
very few now have living and modified descendants. From the first growth
of the tree, many a limb and branch has decayed and dropped off; and
these lost branches of various sizes may represent those whole orders,
families, and genera which have now no living representatives, and which
are known to us only from having been found in a fossil state. As we
here and there see a thin straggling branch springing from a fork low
down in a tree, and which by some chance has been favoured and is
still alive on its summit, so we occasionally see an animal like the
Ornithorhynchus or Lepidosiren, which in some small degree connects by
its affinities two large branches of life, and which has apparently been
saved from fatal competition by having inhabited a protected station. As
buds give rise by growth to fresh buds, and these, if vigorous, branch
out and overtop on all sides many a feebler branch, so by generation I
believe it has been with the great Tree of Life, which fills with its
dead and broken branches the crust of the earth, and covers the surface
with its ever branching and beautiful ramifications.




. LAWS OF VARIATION.

Effects of external conditions. Use and disuse, combined with natural
selection; organs of flight and of vision. Acclimatisation. Correlation
of growth. Compensation and economy of growth. False correlations.
Multiple, rudimentary, and lowly organised structures variable. Parts
developed in an unusual manner are highly variable: specific characters
more variable than generic: secondary sexual characters variable.
Species of the same genus vary in an analogous manner. Reversions to
long lost characters. Summary.

I have hitherto sometimes spoken as if the variations--so common and
multiform in organic beings under domestication, and in a lesser degree
in those in a state of nature--had been due to chance. This, of course,
is a wholly incorrect expression, but it serves to acknowledge plainly
our ignorance of the cause of each particular variation. Some authors
believe it to be as much the function of the reproductive system to
produce individual differences, or very slight deviations of structure,
as to make the child like its parents. But the much greater variability,
as well as the greater frequency of monstrosities, under domestication
or cultivation, than under nature, leads me to believe that deviations
of structure are in some way due to the nature of the conditions of
