Sedgwick, etc., have unanimously, often vehemently, maintained the
immutability of species. But I have reason to believe that one great
authority, Sir Charles Lyell, from further reflexion entertains grave
doubts on this subject. I feel how rash it is to differ from these great
authorities, to whom, with others, we owe all our knowledge. Those who
think the natural geological record in any degree perfect, and who do
not attach much weight to the facts and arguments of other kinds given
in this volume, will undoubtedly at once reject my theory. For my part,
following out Lyell's metaphor, I look at the natural geological record,
as a history of the world imperfectly kept, and written in a changing
dialect; of this history we possess the last volume alone, relating only
to two or three countries. Of this volume, only here and there a short
chapter has been preserved; and of each page, only here and there a few
lines. Each word of the slowly-changing language, in which the
history is supposed to be written, being more or less different in
the interrupted succession of chapters, may represent the apparently
abruptly changed forms of life, entombed in our consecutive, but widely
separated formations. On this view, the difficulties above discussed are
greatly diminished, or even disappear.




. ON THE GEOLOGICAL SUCCESSION OF ORGANIC BEINGS.

On the slow and successive appearance of new species. On their different
rates of change. Species once lost do not reappear. Groups of species
follow the same general rules in their appearance and disappearance as
do single species. On Extinction. On simultaneous changes in the forms
of life throughout the world. On the affinities of extinct species to
each other and to living species. On the state of development of ancient
forms. On the succession of the same types within the same areas.
Summary of preceding and present chapters.

Let us now see whether the several facts and rules relating to the
geological succession of organic beings, better accord with the common
view of the immutability of species, or with that of their slow and
gradual modification, through descent and natural selection.

New species have appeared very slowly, one after another, both on the
land and in the waters. Lyell has shown that it is hardly possible to
resist the evidence on this head in the case of the several tertiary
stages; and every year tends to fill up the blanks between them, and to
make the percentage system of lost and new forms more gradual. In
some of the most recent beds, though undoubtedly of high antiquity if
measured by years, only one or two species are lost forms, and only one
or two are new forms, having here appeared for the first time, either
locally, or, as far as we know, on the face of the earth. If we may
trust the observations of Philippi in Sicily, the successive changes in
the marine inhabitants of that island have been many and most gradual.
The secondary formations are more broken; but, as Bronn has remarked,
neither the appearance nor disappearance of their many now extinct
species has been simultaneous in each separate formation.

Species of different genera and classes have not changed at the same
rate, or in the same degree. In the oldest tertiary beds a few living
shells may still be found in the midst of a multitude of extinct forms.
Falconer has given a striking instance of a similar fact, in an existing
crocodile associated with many strange and lost mammals and reptiles in
the sub-Himalayan deposits. The Silurian Lingula differs but little from
the living species of this genus; whereas most of the other Silurian
Molluscs and all the Crustaceans have changed greatly. The productions
of the land seem to change at a quicker rate than those of the sea, of
which a striking instance has lately been observed in Switzerland. There
is some reason to believe that organisms, considered high in the scale
of nature, change more quickly than those that are low: though there
are exceptions to this rule. The amount of organic change, as Pictet
has remarked, does not strictly correspond with the succession of our
geological formations; so that between each two consecutive formations,
the forms of life have seldom changed in exactly the same degree. Yet if
we compare any but the most closely related formations, all the species
will be found to have undergone some change. When a species has once
disappeared from the face of the earth, we have reason to believe
that the same identical form never reappears. The strongest apparent
exception to this latter rule, is that of the so-called "colonies" of M.
Barrande, which intrude for a period in the midst of an older formation,
and then allow the pre-existing fauna to reappear; but Lyell's
explanation, namely, that it is a case of temporary migration from a
distinct geographical province, seems to me satisfactory.

These several facts accord well with my theory. I believe in no fixed
law of development, causing all the inhabitants of a country to change
abruptly, or simultaneously, or to an equal degree. The process of
modification must be extremely slow. The variability of each species
is quite independent of that of all others. Whether such variability be
taken advantage of by natural selection, and whether the variations be
accumulated to a greater or lesser amount, thus causing a greater or
lesser amount of modification in the varying species, depends on many
complex contingencies,--on the variability being of a beneficial nature,
on the power of intercrossing, on the rate of breeding, on the slowly
changing physical conditions of the country, and more especially on the
nature of the other inhabitants with which the varying species comes
into competition. Hence it is by no means surprising that one species
should retain the same identical form much longer than others; or,
if changing, that it should change less. We see the same fact in
geographical distribution; for instance, in the land-shells and
coleopterous insects of Madeira having come to differ considerably from
their nearest allies on the continent of Europe, whereas the marine
shells and birds have remained unaltered. We can perhaps understand
the apparently quicker rate of change in terrestrial and in more highly
organised productions compared with marine and lower productions, by
the more complex relations of the higher beings to their organic and
inorganic conditions of life, as explained in a former chapter. When
many of the inhabitants of a country have become modified and improved,
we can understand, on the principle of competition, and on that of the
many all-important relations of organism to organism, that any form
which does not become in some degree modified and improved, will be
liable to be exterminated. Hence we can see why all the species in the
same region do at last, if we look to wide enough intervals of time,
become modified; for those which do not change will become extinct.

In members of the same class the average amount of change, during long
and equal periods of time, may, perhaps, be nearly the same; but as the
accumulation of long-enduring fossiliferous formations depends on great
masses of sediment having been deposited on areas whilst subsiding,
our formations have been almost necessarily accumulated at wide and
irregularly intermittent intervals; consequently the amount of organic
change exhibited by the fossils embedded in consecutive formations
is not equal. Each formation, on this view, does not mark a new and
complete act of creation, but only an occasional scene, taken almost at
hazard, in a slowly changing drama.

We can clearly understand why a species when once lost should never
reappear, even if the very same conditions of life, organic and
inorganic, should recur. For though the offspring of one species might
be adapted (and no doubt this has occurred in innumerable instances) to
fill the exact place of another species in the economy of nature, and
thus supplant it; yet the two forms--the old and the new--would not be
identically the same; for both would almost certainly inherit different
characters from their distinct progenitors. For instance, it is just
possible, if our fantail-pigeons were all destroyed, that fanciers, by
striving during long ages for the same object, might make a new breed
hardly distinguishable from our present fantail; but if the parent
rock-pigeon were also destroyed, and in nature we have every reason
to believe that the parent-form will generally be supplanted and
exterminated by its improved offspring, it is quite incredible that a
fantail, identical with the existing breed, could be raised from any
other species of pigeon, or even from the other well-established races
of the domestic pigeon, for the newly-formed fantail would be almost
sure to inherit from its new progenitor some slight characteristic
differences.

Groups of species, that is, genera and families, follow the same general
rules in their appearance and disappearance as do single species,
changing more or less quickly, and in a greater or lesser degree. A
group does not reappear after it has once disappeared; or its existence,
as long as it lasts, is continuous. I am aware that there are some
apparent exceptions to this rule, but the exceptions are surprisingly
few, so few, that E. Forbes, Pictet, and Woodward (though all strongly
opposed to such views as I maintain) admit its truth; and the rule
