of the sea, and subsequently become modified and adapted to the fresh
waters of a distant land.

Some species of fresh-water shells have a very wide range, and allied
species, which, on my theory, are descended from a common parent and
must have proceeded from a single source, prevail throughout the world.
Their distribution at first perplexed me much, as their ova are not
likely to be transported by birds, and they are immediately killed
by sea water, as are the adults. I could not even understand how some
naturalised species have rapidly spread throughout the same country. But
two facts, which I have observed--and no doubt many others remain to be
observed--throw some light on this subject. When a duck suddenly emerges
from a pond covered with duck-weed, I have twice seen these little
plants adhering to its back; and it has happened to me, in removing
a little duck-weed from one aquarium to another, that I have quite
unintentionally stocked the one with fresh-water shells from the other.
But another agency is perhaps more effectual: I suspended a duck's feet,
which might represent those of a bird sleeping in a natural pond, in
an aquarium, where many ova of fresh-water shells were hatching; and
I found that numbers of the extremely minute and just hatched shells
crawled on the feet, and clung to them so firmly that when taken out
of the water they could not be jarred off, though at a somewhat more
advanced age they would voluntarily drop off. These just hatched
molluscs, though aquatic in their nature, survived on the duck's feet,
in damp air, from twelve to twenty hours; and in this length of time a
duck or heron might fly at least six or seven hundred miles, and would
be sure to alight on a pool or rivulet, if blown across sea to an
oceanic island or to any other distant point. Sir Charles Lyell also
informs me that a Dyticus has been caught with an Ancylus (a fresh-water
shell like a limpet) firmly adhering to it; and a water-beetle of
the same family, a Colymbetes, once flew on board the 'Beagle,' when
forty-five miles distant from the nearest land: how much farther it
might have flown with a favouring gale no one can tell.

With respect to plants, it has long been known what enormous ranges many
fresh-water and even marsh-species have, both over continents and to the
most remote oceanic islands. This is strikingly shown, as remarked by
Alph. de Candolle, in large groups of terrestrial plants, which have
only a very few aquatic members; for these latter seem immediately to
acquire, as if in consequence, a very wide range. I think favourable
means of dispersal explain this fact. I have before mentioned that earth
occasionally, though rarely, adheres in some quantity to the feet and
beaks of birds. Wading birds, which frequent the muddy edges of ponds,
if suddenly flushed, would be the most likely to have muddy feet.
Birds of this order I can show are the greatest wanderers, and are
occasionally found on the most remote and barren islands in the open
ocean; they would not be likely to alight on the surface of the sea, so
that the dirt would not be washed off their feet; when making land,
they would be sure to fly to their natural fresh-water haunts. I do not
believe that botanists are aware how charged the mud of ponds is with
seeds: I have tried several little experiments, but will here give only
the most striking case: I took in February three table-spoonfuls of
mud from three different points, beneath water, on the edge of a little
pond; this mud when dry weighed only  / ounces; I kept it covered
up in my study for six months, pulling up and counting each plant as it
grew; the plants were of many kinds, and were altogether  in number;
and yet the viscid mud was all contained in a breakfast cup! Considering
these facts, I think it would be an inexplicable circumstance if
water-birds did not transport the seeds of fresh-water plants to vast
distances, and if consequently the range of these plants was not very
great. The same agency may have come into play with the eggs of some of
the smaller fresh-water animals.

Other and unknown agencies probably have also played a part. I have
stated that fresh-water fish eat some kinds of seeds, though they reject
many other kinds after having swallowed them; even small fish swallow
seeds of moderate size, as of the yellow water-lily and Potamogeton.
Herons and other birds, century after century, have gone on daily
devouring fish; they then take flight and go to other waters, or are
blown across the sea; and we have seen that seeds retain their power
of germination, when rejected in pellets or in excrement, many hours
afterwards. When I saw the great size of the seeds of that fine
water-lily, the Nelumbium, and remembered Alph. de Candolle's remarks
on this plant, I thought that its distribution must remain quite
inexplicable; but Audubon states that he found the seeds of the great
southern water-lily (probably, according to Dr. Hooker, the Nelumbium
luteum) in a heron's stomach; although I do not know the fact, yet
analogy makes me believe that a heron flying to another pond and getting
a hearty meal of fish, would probably reject from its stomach a pellet
containing the seeds of the Nelumbium undigested; or the seeds might be
dropped by the bird whilst feeding its young, in the same way as fish
are known sometimes to be dropped.

In considering these several means of distribution, it should be
remembered that when a pond or stream is first formed, for instance,
on a rising islet, it will be unoccupied; and a single seed or egg
will have a good chance of succeeding. Although there will always be a
struggle for life between the individuals of the species, however
few, already occupying any pond, yet as the number of kinds is small,
compared with those on the land, the competition will probably be less
severe between aquatic than between terrestrial species; consequently
an intruder from the waters of a foreign country, would have a better
chance of seizing on a place, than in the case of terrestrial colonists.
We should, also, remember that some, perhaps many, fresh-water
productions are low in the scale of nature, and that we have reason to
believe that such low beings change or become modified less quickly
than the high; and this will give longer time than the average for
the migration of the same aquatic species. We should not forget the
probability of many species having formerly ranged as continuously as
fresh-water productions ever can range, over immense areas, and having
subsequently become extinct in intermediate regions. But the wide
distribution of fresh-water plants and of the lower animals, whether
retaining the same identical form or in some degree modified, I believe
mainly depends on the wide dispersal of their seeds and eggs by animals,
more especially by fresh-water birds, which have large powers of flight,
and naturally travel from one to another and often distant piece of
water. Nature, like a careful gardener, thus takes her seeds from a bed
of a particular nature, and drops them in another equally well fitted
for them.

ON THE INHABITANTS OF OCEANIC ISLANDS.

We now come to the last of the three classes of facts, which I have
selected as presenting the greatest amount of difficulty, on the view
that all the individuals both of the same and of allied species have
descended from a single parent; and therefore have all proceeded from a
common birthplace, notwithstanding that in the course of time they have
come to inhabit distant points of the globe. I have already stated that
I cannot honestly admit Forbes's view on continental extensions, which,
if legitimately followed out, would lead to the belief that within the
recent period all existing islands have been nearly or quite joined to
some continent. This view would remove many difficulties, but it would
not, I think, explain all the facts in regard to insular productions. In
the following remarks I shall not confine myself to the mere question of
dispersal; but shall consider some other facts, which bear on the
truth of the two theories of independent creation and of descent with
modification.

The species of all kinds which inhabit oceanic islands are few in number
compared with those on equal continental areas: Alph. de Candolle admits
this for plants, and Wollaston for insects. If we look to the large
size and varied stations of New Zealand, extending over  miles of
latitude, and compare its flowering plants, only  in number, with
those on an equal area at the Cape of Good Hope or in Australia,
we must, I think, admit that something quite independently of any
difference in physical conditions has caused so great a difference in
number. Even the uniform county of Cambridge has  plants, and the
little island of Anglesea , but a few ferns and a few introduced
plants are included in these numbers, and the comparison in some other
respects is not quite fair. We have evidence that the barren island of
Ascension aboriginally possessed under half-a-dozen flowering plants;
yet many have become naturalised on it, as they have on New Zealand and
on every other oceanic island which can be named. In St. Helena there is
reason to believe that the naturalised plants and animals have nearly or
quite exterminated many native productions. He who admits the doctrine
of the creation of each separate species, will have to admit, that a
sufficient number of the best adapted plants and animals have not been
created on oceanic islands; for man has unintentionally stocked them
from various sources far more fully and perfectly than has nature.

