unknown, if any one link or intermediate variety be discovered, it will
simply be classed as another and distinct species. Only a small portion
of the world has been geologically explored. Only organic beings of
certain classes can be preserved in a fossil condition, at least in any
great number. Widely ranging species vary most, and varieties are often
at first local,--both causes rendering the discovery of intermediate
links less likely. Local varieties will not spread into other and
distant regions until they are considerably modified and improved; and
when they do spread, if discovered in a geological formation, they will
appear as if suddenly created there, and will be simply classed as new
species. Most formations have been intermittent in their accumulation;
and their duration, I am inclined to believe, has been shorter than the
average duration of specific forms. Successive formations are separated
from each other by enormous blank intervals of time; for fossiliferous
formations, thick enough to resist future degradation, can be
accumulated only where much sediment is deposited on the subsiding bed
of the sea. During the alternate periods of elevation and of stationary
level the record will be blank. During these latter periods there will
probably be more variability in the forms of life; during periods of
subsidence, more extinction.

With respect to the absence of fossiliferous formations beneath the
lowest Silurian strata, I can only recur to the hypothesis given in the
ninth chapter. That the geological record is imperfect all will admit;
but that it is imperfect to the degree which I require, few will be
inclined to admit. If we look to long enough intervals of time, geology
plainly declares that all species have changed; and they have changed in
the manner which my theory requires, for they have changed slowly and
in a graduated manner. We clearly see this in the fossil remains from
consecutive formations invariably being much more closely related to
each other, than are the fossils from formations distant from each other
in time.

Such is the sum of the several chief objections and difficulties
which may justly be urged against my theory; and I have now briefly
recapitulated the answers and explanations which can be given to them. I
have felt these difficulties far too heavily during many years to doubt
their weight. But it deserves especial notice that the more important
objections relate to questions on which we are confessedly ignorant;
nor do we know how ignorant we are. We do not know all the possible
transitional gradations between the simplest and the most perfect
organs; it cannot be pretended that we know all the varied means
of Distribution during the long lapse of years, or that we know how
imperfect the Geological Record is. Grave as these several difficulties
are, in my judgment they do not overthrow the theory of descent with
modification.

Now let us turn to the other side of the argument. Under domestication
we see much variability. This seems to be mainly due to the reproductive
system being eminently susceptible to changes in the conditions of life;
so that this system, when not rendered impotent, fails to reproduce
offspring exactly like the parent-form. Variability is governed by many
complex laws,--by correlation of growth, by use and disuse, and by
the direct action of the physical conditions of life. There is
much difficulty in ascertaining how much modification our domestic
productions have undergone; but we may safely infer that the amount has
been large, and that modifications can be inherited for long periods.
As long as the conditions of life remain the same, we have reason to
believe that a modification, which has already been inherited for many
generations, may continue to be inherited for an almost infinite number
of generations. On the other hand we have evidence that variability,
when it has once come into play, does not wholly cease; for new
varieties are still occasionally produced by our most anciently
domesticated productions.

Man does not actually produce variability; he only unintentionally
exposes organic beings to new conditions of life, and then nature acts
on the organisation, and causes variability. But man can and does select
the variations given to him by nature, and thus accumulate them in any
desired manner. He thus adapts animals and plants for his own benefit or
pleasure. He may do this methodically, or he may do it unconsciously by
preserving the individuals most useful to him at the time, without
any thought of altering the breed. It is certain that he can largely
influence the character of a breed by selecting, in each successive
generation, individual differences so slight as to be quite
inappreciable by an uneducated eye. This process of selection has been
the great agency in the production of the most distinct and useful
domestic breeds. That many of the breeds produced by man have to a large
extent the character of natural species, is shown by the inextricable
doubts whether very many of them are varieties or aboriginal species.

There is no obvious reason why the principles which have acted so
efficiently under domestication should not have acted under nature.
In the preservation of favoured individuals and races, during the
constantly-recurrent Struggle for Existence, we see the most powerful
and ever-acting means of selection. The struggle for existence
inevitably follows from the high geometrical ratio of increase which is
common to all organic beings. This high rate of increase is proved by
calculation, by the effects of a succession of peculiar seasons, and by
the results of naturalisation, as explained in the third chapter. More
individuals are born than can possibly survive. A grain in the balance
will determine which individual shall live and which shall die,--which
variety or species shall increase in number, and which shall decrease,
or finally become extinct. As the individuals of the same species
come in all respects into the closest competition with each other, the
struggle will generally be most severe between them; it will be almost
equally severe between the varieties of the same species, and next in
severity between the species of the same genus. But the struggle will
often be very severe between beings most remote in the scale of nature.
The slightest advantage in one being, at any age or during any season,
over those with which it comes into competition, or better adaptation
in however slight a degree to the surrounding physical conditions, will
turn the balance.

With animals having separated sexes there will in most cases be a
struggle between the males for possession of the females. The most
vigorous individuals, or those which have most successfully struggled
with their conditions of life, will generally leave most progeny. But
success will often depend on having special weapons or means of defence,
or on the charms of the males; and the slightest advantage will lead to
victory.

As geology plainly proclaims that each land has undergone great physical
changes, we might have expected that organic beings would have varied
under nature, in the same way as they generally have varied under the
changed conditions of domestication. And if there be any variability
under nature, it would be an unaccountable fact if natural selection
had not come into play. It has often been asserted, but the assertion is
quite incapable of proof, that the amount of variation under nature is
a strictly limited quantity. Man, though acting on external characters
alone and often capriciously, can produce within a short period a
great result by adding up mere individual differences in his domestic
productions; and every one admits that there are at least individual
differences in species under nature. But, besides such differences, all
naturalists have admitted the existence of varieties, which they think
sufficiently distinct to be worthy of record in systematic works. No one
can draw any clear distinction between individual differences and slight
varieties; or between more plainly marked varieties and sub-species,
and species. Let it be observed how naturalists differ in the rank
which they assign to the many representative forms in Europe and North
America.

If then we have under nature variability and a powerful agent always
ready to act and select, why should we doubt that variations in any way
useful to beings, under their excessively complex relations of life,
would be preserved, accumulated, and inherited? Why, if man can by
patience select variations most useful to himself, should nature fail in
selecting variations useful, under changing conditions of life, to her
living products? What limit can be put to this power, acting during long
ages and rigidly scrutinising the whole constitution, structure, and
habits of each creature,--favouring the good and rejecting the bad? I
can see no limit to this power, in slowly and beautifully adapting
each form to the most complex relations of life. The theory of natural
selection, even if we looked no further than this, seems to me to be in
itself probable. I have already recapitulated, as fairly as I could,
the opposed difficulties and objections: now let us turn to the special
facts and arguments in favour of the theory.

On the view that species are only strongly marked and permanent
varieties, and that each species first existed as a variety, we can
