have been of simple signification, if one group had been exclusively
fitted to inhabit the land, and another the water; one to feed on flesh,
another on vegetable matter, and so on; but the case is widely different
in nature; for it is notorious how commonly members of even the same
subgroup have different habits. In our second and fourth chapters, on
Variation and on Natural Selection, I have attempted to show that it is
the widely ranging, the much diffused and common, that is the dominant
species belonging to the larger genera, which vary most. The varieties,
or incipient species, thus produced ultimately become converted, as I
believe, into new and distinct species; and these, on the principle
of inheritance, tend to produce other new and dominant species.
Consequently the groups which are now large, and which generally include
many dominant species, tend to go on increasing indefinitely in size.
I further attempted to show that from the varying descendants of each
species trying to occupy as many and as different places as possible in
the economy of nature, there is a constant tendency in their characters
to diverge. This conclusion was supported by looking at the great
diversity of the forms of life which, in any small area, come into the
closest competition, and by looking to certain facts in naturalisation.

I attempted also to show that there is a constant tendency in the forms
which are increasing in number and diverging in character, to supplant
and exterminate the less divergent, the less improved, and preceding
forms. I request the reader to turn to the diagram illustrating the
action, as formerly explained, of these several principles; and he
will see that the inevitable result is that the modified descendants
proceeding from one progenitor become broken up into groups subordinate
to groups. In the diagram each letter on the uppermost line may
represent a genus including several species; and all the genera on this
line form together one class, for all have descended from one ancient
but unseen parent, and, consequently, have inherited something in
common. But the three genera on the left hand have, on this same
principle, much in common, and form a sub-family, distinct from that
including the next two genera on the right hand, which diverged from a
common parent at the fifth stage of descent. These five genera have also
much, though less, in common; and they form a family distinct from
that including the three genera still further to the right hand, which
diverged at a still earlier period. And all these genera, descended from
(A), form an order distinct from the genera descended from (I). So that
we here have many species descended from a single progenitor grouped
into genera; and the genera are included in, or subordinate to,
sub-families, families, and orders, all united into one class. Thus, the
grand fact in natural history of the subordination of group under group,
which, from its familiarity, does not always sufficiently strike us, is
in my judgment fully explained.

Naturalists try to arrange the species, genera, and families in each
class, on what is called the Natural System. But what is meant by
this system? Some authors look at it merely as a scheme for arranging
together those living objects which are most alike, and for separating
those which are most unlike; or as an artificial means for enunciating,
as briefly as possible, general propositions,--that is, by one sentence
to give the characters common, for instance, to all mammals, by another
those common to all carnivora, by another those common to the dog-genus,
and then by adding a single sentence, a full description is given
of each kind of dog. The ingenuity and utility of this system are
indisputable. But many naturalists think that something more is meant
by the Natural System; they believe that it reveals the plan of the
Creator; but unless it be specified whether order in time or space,
or what else is meant by the plan of the Creator, it seems to me that
nothing is thus added to our knowledge. Such expressions as that
famous one of Linnaeus, and which we often meet with in a more or less
concealed form, that the characters do not make the genus, but that
the genus gives the characters, seem to imply that something more is
included in our classification, than mere resemblance. I believe that
something more is included; and that propinquity of descent,--the only
known cause of the similarity of organic beings,--is the bond, hidden as
it is by various degrees of modification, which is partially revealed to
us by our classifications.

Let us now consider the rules followed in classification, and the
difficulties which are encountered on the view that classification
either gives some unknown plan of creation, or is simply a scheme for
enunciating general propositions and of placing together the forms most
like each other. It might have been thought (and was in ancient times
thought) that those parts of the structure which determined the habits
of life, and the general place of each being in the economy of nature,
would be of very high importance in classification. Nothing can be more
false. No one regards the external similarity of a mouse to a shrew, of
a dugong to a whale, of a whale to a fish, as of any importance. These
resemblances, though so intimately connected with the whole life of the
being, are ranked as merely "adaptive or analogical characters;" but to
the consideration of these resemblances we shall have to recur. It
may even be given as a general rule, that the less any part of the
organisation is concerned with special habits, the more important it
becomes for classification. As an instance: Owen, in speaking of the
dugong, says, "The generative organs being those which are most remotely
related to the habits and food of an animal, I have always regarded as
affording very clear indications of its true affinities. We are least
likely in the modifications of these organs to mistake a merely adaptive
for an essential character." So with plants, how remarkable it is that
the organs of vegetation, on which their whole life depends, are of
little signification, excepting in the first main divisions; whereas the
organs of reproduction, with their product the seed, are of paramount
importance!

We must not, therefore, in classifying, trust to resemblances in parts
of the organisation, however important they may be for the welfare of
the being in relation to the outer world. Perhaps from this cause it has
partly arisen, that almost all naturalists lay the greatest stress on
resemblances in organs of high vital or physiological importance. No
doubt this view of the classificatory importance of organs which
are important is generally, but by no means always, true. But their
importance for classification, I believe, depends on their greater
constancy throughout large groups of species; and this constancy depends
on such organs having generally been subjected to less change in the
adaptation of the species to their conditions of life. That the
mere physiological importance of an organ does not determine its
classificatory value, is almost shown by the one fact, that in allied
groups, in which the same organ, as we have every reason to suppose, has
nearly the same physiological value, its classificatory value is widely
different. No naturalist can have worked at any group without being
struck with this fact; and it has been most fully acknowledged in the
writings of almost every author. It will suffice to quote the highest
authority, Robert Brown, who in speaking of certain organs in the
Proteaceae, says their generic importance, "like that of all their
parts, not only in this but, as I apprehend, in every natural family,
is very unequal, and in some cases seems to be entirely lost." Again in
another work he says, the genera of the Connaraceae "differ in having
one or more ovaria, in the existence or absence of albumen, in the
imbricate or valvular aestivation. Any one of these characters singly
is frequently of more than generic importance, though here even when
all taken together they appear insufficient to separate Cnestis from
Connarus." To give an example amongst insects, in one great division
of the Hymenoptera, the antennae, as Westwood has remarked, are most
constant in structure; in another division they differ much, and the
differences are of quite subordinate value in classification; yet no one
probably will say that the antennae in these two divisions of the same
order are of unequal physiological importance. Any number of instances
could be given of the varying importance for classification of the same
important organ within the same group of beings.

Again, no one will say that rudimentary or atrophied organs are of high
physiological or vital importance; yet, undoubtedly, organs in this
condition are often of high value in classification. No one will dispute
that the rudimentary teeth in the upper jaws of young ruminants,
and certain rudimentary bones of the leg, are highly serviceable in
exhibiting the close affinity between Ruminants and Pachyderms. Robert
Brown has strongly insisted on the fact that the rudimentary florets are
of the highest importance in the classification of the Grasses.

Numerous instances could be given of characters derived from parts which
must be considered of very trifling physiological importance, but which
are universally admitted as highly serviceable in the definition of
whole groups. For instance, whether or not there is an open passage from
the nostrils to the mouth, the only character, according to Owen, which
absolutely distinguishes fishes and reptiles--the inflection of the
angle of the jaws in Marsupials--the manner in which the wings of
insects are folded--mere colour in certain Algae--mere pubescence on
parts of the flower in grasses--the nature of the dermal covering, as
