specialised to any particular function, so that their modifications have
not been closely checked by natural selection. It is probably from
this same cause that organic beings low in the scale of nature are
more variable than those which have their whole organisation more
specialised, and are higher in the scale. Rudimentary organs, from being
useless, will be disregarded by natural selection, and hence probably
are variable. Specific characters--that is, the characters which have
come to differ since the several species of the same genus branched
off from a common parent--are more variable than generic characters, or
those which have long been inherited, and have not differed within
this same period. In these remarks we have referred to special parts or
organs being still variable, because they have recently varied and thus
come to differ; but we have also seen in the second Chapter that the
same principle applies to the whole individual; for in a district where
many species of any genus are found--that is, where there has been much
former variation and differentiation, or where the manufactory of new
specific forms has been actively at work--there, on an average, we now
find most varieties or incipient species. Secondary sexual characters
are highly variable, and such characters differ much in the species of
the same group. Variability in the same parts of the organisation has
generally been taken advantage of in giving secondary sexual differences
to the sexes of the same species, and specific differences to the
several species of the same genus. Any part or organ developed to an
extraordinary size or in an extraordinary manner, in comparison with
the same part or organ in the allied species, must have gone through an
extraordinary amount of modification since the genus arose; and thus we
can understand why it should often still be variable in a much higher
degree than other parts; for variation is a long-continued and slow
process, and natural selection will in such cases not as yet have had
time to overcome the tendency to further variability and to
reversion to a less modified state. But when a species with any
extraordinarily-developed organ has become the parent of many modified
descendants--which on my view must be a very slow process, requiring
a long lapse of time--in this case, natural selection may readily
have succeeded in giving a fixed character to the organ, in however
extraordinary a manner it may be developed. Species inheriting nearly
the same constitution from a common parent and exposed to similar
influences will naturally tend to present analogous variations, and
these same species may occasionally revert to some of the characters of
their ancient progenitors. Although new and important modifications may
not arise from reversion and analogous variation, such modifications
will add to the beautiful and harmonious diversity of nature.

Whatever the cause may be of each slight difference in the offspring
from their parents--and a cause for each must exist--it is the steady
accumulation, through natural selection, of such differences, when
beneficial to the individual, that gives rise to all the more important
modifications of structure, by which the innumerable beings on the face
of this earth are enabled to struggle with each other, and the best
adapted to survive.




. DIFFICULTIES ON THEORY.

Difficulties on the theory of descent with modification. Transitions.
Absence or rarity of transitional varieties. Transitions in habits of
life. Diversified habits in the same species. Species with habits widely
different from those of their allies. Organs of extreme perfection.
Means of transition. Cases of difficulty. Natura non facit saltum.
Organs of small importance. Organs not in all cases absolutely perfect.
The law of Unity of Type and of the Conditions of Existence embraced by
the theory of Natural Selection.

Long before having arrived at this part of my work, a crowd of
difficulties will have occurred to the reader. Some of them are so grave
that to this day I can never reflect on them without being staggered;
but, to the best of my judgment, the greater number are only apparent,
and those that are real are not, I think, fatal to my theory.

These difficulties and objections may be classed under the following
heads:--

Firstly, why, if species have descended from other species by insensibly
fine gradations, do we not everywhere see innumerable transitional
forms? Why is not all nature in confusion instead of the species being,
as we see them, well defined?

Secondly, is it possible that an animal having, for instance,
the structure and habits of a bat, could have been formed by the
modification of some animal with wholly different habits? Can we
believe that natural selection could produce, on the one hand, organs
of trifling importance, such as the tail of a giraffe, which serves as a
fly-flapper, and, on the other hand, organs of such wonderful structure,
as the eye, of which we hardly as yet fully understand the inimitable
perfection?

Thirdly, can instincts be acquired and modified through natural
selection? What shall we say to so marvellous an instinct as that which
leads the bee to make cells, which have practically anticipated the
discoveries of profound mathematicians?

Fourthly, how can we account for species, when crossed, being sterile
and producing sterile offspring, whereas, when varieties are crossed,
their fertility is unimpaired?

The two first heads shall be here discussed--Instinct and Hybridism in
separate chapters.

ON THE ABSENCE OR RARITY OF TRANSITIONAL VARIETIES.

As natural selection acts solely by the preservation of profitable
modifications, each new form will tend in a fully-stocked country to
take the place of, and finally to exterminate, its own less improved
parent or other less-favoured forms with which it comes into
competition. Thus extinction and natural selection will, as we have
seen, go hand in hand. Hence, if we look at each species as descended
from some other unknown form, both the parent and all the transitional
varieties will generally have been exterminated by the very process of
formation and perfection of the new form.

But, as by this theory innumerable transitional forms must have existed,
why do we not find them embedded in countless numbers in the crust of
the earth? It will be much more convenient to discuss this question in
the chapter on the Imperfection of the geological record; and I will
here only state that I believe the answer mainly lies in the record
being incomparably less perfect than is generally supposed; the
imperfection of the record being chiefly due to organic beings not
inhabiting profound depths of the sea, and to their remains being
embedded and preserved to a future age only in masses of sediment
sufficiently thick and extensive to withstand an enormous amount of
future degradation; and such fossiliferous masses can be accumulated
only where much sediment is deposited on the shallow bed of the sea,
whilst it slowly subsides. These contingencies will concur only rarely,
and after enormously long intervals. Whilst the bed of the sea
is stationary or is rising, or when very little sediment is being
deposited, there will be blanks in our geological history. The crust of
the earth is a vast museum; but the natural collections have been made
only at intervals of time immensely remote.

But it may be urged that when several closely-allied species inhabit
the same territory we surely ought to find at the present time many
transitional forms. Let us take a simple case: in travelling from north
to south over a continent, we generally meet at successive intervals
with closely allied or representative species, evidently filling nearly
the same place in the natural economy of the land. These representative
species often meet and interlock; and as the one becomes rarer and
rarer, the other becomes more and more frequent, till the one replaces
the other. But if we compare these species where they intermingle, they
are generally as absolutely distinct from each other in every detail of
structure as are specimens taken from the metropolis inhabited by each.
By my theory these allied species have descended from a common parent;
and during the process of modification, each has become adapted to
the conditions of life of its own region, and has supplanted and
exterminated its original parent and all the transitional varieties
between its past and present states. Hence we ought not to expect at
the present time to meet with numerous transitional varieties in each
region, though they must have existed there, and may be embedded
there in a fossil condition. But in the intermediate region, having
