experience seems the only guide to follow. We must, however, in many
cases, decide by a majority of naturalists, for few well-marked and
well-known varieties can be named which have not been ranked as species
by at least some competent judges.

That varieties of this doubtful nature are far from uncommon cannot be
disputed. Compare the several floras of Great Britain, of France or
of the United States, drawn up by different botanists, and see what
a surprising number of forms have been ranked by one botanist as good
species, and by another as mere varieties. Mr. H. C. Watson, to whom I
lie under deep obligation for assistance of all kinds, has marked for
me  British plants, which are generally considered as varieties, but
which have all been ranked by botanists as species; and in making this
list he has omitted many trifling varieties, but which nevertheless have
been ranked by some botanists as species, and he has entirely omitted
several highly polymorphic genera. Under genera, including the most
polymorphic forms, Mr. Babington gives  species, whereas Mr. Bentham
gives only ,--a difference of  doubtful forms! Amongst animals
which unite for each birth, and which are highly locomotive, doubtful
forms, ranked by one zoologist as a species and by another as a variety,
can rarely be found within the same country, but are common in separated
areas. How many of those birds and insects in North America and Europe,
which differ very slightly from each other, have been ranked by one
eminent naturalist as undoubted species, and by another as varieties,
or, as they are often called, as geographical races! Many years ago,
when comparing, and seeing others compare, the birds from the separate
islands of the Galapagos Archipelago, both one with another, and with
those from the American mainland, I was much struck how entirely vague
and arbitrary is the distinction between species and varieties. On the
islets of the little Madeira group there are many insects which are
characterized as varieties in Mr. Wollaston's admirable work, but
which it cannot be doubted would be ranked as distinct species by many
entomologists. Even Ireland has a few animals, now generally regarded
as varieties, but which have been ranked as species by some zoologists.
Several most experienced ornithologists consider our British red grouse
as only a strongly-marked race of a Norwegian species, whereas the
greater number rank it as an undoubted species peculiar to Great
Britain. A wide distance between the homes of two doubtful forms leads
many naturalists to rank both as distinct species; but what distance, it
has been well asked, will suffice? if that between America and Europe
is ample, will that between the Continent and the Azores, or Madeira, or
the Canaries, or Ireland, be sufficient? It must be admitted that many
forms, considered by highly-competent judges as varieties, have so
perfectly the character of species that they are ranked by other
highly-competent judges as good and true species. But to discuss whether
they are rightly called species or varieties, before any definition of
these terms has been generally accepted, is vainly to beat the air.

Many of the cases of strongly-marked varieties or doubtful species well
deserve consideration; for several interesting lines of argument, from
geographical distribution, analogical variation, hybridism, etc., have
been brought to bear on the attempt to determine their rank. I will here
give only a single instance,--the well-known one of the primrose and
cowslip, or Primula veris and elatior. These plants differ considerably
in appearance; they have a different flavour and emit a different
odour; they flower at slightly different periods; they grow in somewhat
different stations; they ascend mountains to different heights; they
have different geographical ranges; and lastly, according to very
numerous experiments made during several years by that most careful
observer Gartner, they can be crossed only with much difficulty.
We could hardly wish for better evidence of the two forms being
specifically distinct. On the other hand, they are united by many
intermediate links, and it is very doubtful whether these links are
hybrids; and there is, as it seems to me, an overwhelming amount of
experimental evidence, showing that they descend from common parents,
and consequently must be ranked as varieties.

Close investigation, in most cases, will bring naturalists to an
agreement how to rank doubtful forms. Yet it must be confessed, that it
is in the best-known countries that we find the greatest number of forms
of doubtful value. I have been struck with the fact, that if any animal
or plant in a state of nature be highly useful to man, or from any cause
closely attract his attention, varieties of it will almost universally
be found recorded. These varieties, moreover, will be often ranked by
some authors as species. Look at the common oak, how closely it has
been studied; yet a German author makes more than a dozen species out
of forms, which are very generally considered as varieties; and in
this country the highest botanical authorities and practical men can be
quoted to show that the sessile and pedunculated oaks are either good
and distinct species or mere varieties.

When a young naturalist commences the study of a group of organisms
quite unknown to him, he is at first much perplexed to determine what
differences to consider as specific, and what as varieties; for he
knows nothing of the amount and kind of variation to which the group
is subject; and this shows, at least, how very generally there is some
variation. But if he confine his attention to one class within one
country, he will soon make up his mind how to rank most of the doubtful
forms. His general tendency will be to make many species, for he will
become impressed, just like the pigeon or poultry-fancier before alluded
to, with the amount of difference in the forms which he is continually
studying; and he has little general knowledge of analogical variation
in other groups and in other countries, by which to correct his first
impressions. As he extends the range of his observations, he will meet
with more cases of difficulty; for he will encounter a greater number
of closely-allied forms. But if his observations be widely extended, he
will in the end generally be enabled to make up his own mind which to
call varieties and which species; but he will succeed in this at the
expense of admitting much variation,--and the truth of this admission
will often be disputed by other naturalists. When, moreover, he comes to
study allied forms brought from countries not now continuous, in which
case he can hardly hope to find the intermediate links between his
doubtful forms, he will have to trust almost entirely to analogy, and
his difficulties will rise to a climax.

Certainly no clear line of demarcation has as yet been drawn between
species and sub-species--that is, the forms which in the opinion of some
naturalists come very near to, but do not quite arrive at the rank of
species; or, again, between sub-species and well-marked varieties, or
between lesser varieties and individual differences. These differences
blend into each other in an insensible series; and a series impresses
the mind with the idea of an actual passage.

Hence I look at individual differences, though of small interest to
the systematist, as of high importance for us, as being the first step
towards such slight varieties as are barely thought worth recording
in works on natural history. And I look at varieties which are in any
degree more distinct and permanent, as steps leading to more strongly
marked and more permanent varieties; and at these latter, as leading to
sub-species, and to species. The passage from one stage of difference
to another and higher stage may be, in some cases, due merely to the
long-continued action of different physical conditions in two different
regions; but I have not much faith in this view; and I attribute the
passage of a variety, from a state in which it differs very slightly
from its parent to one in which it differs more, to the action of
natural selection in accumulating (as will hereafter be more fully
explained) differences of structure in certain definite directions.
Hence I believe a well-marked variety may be justly called an incipient
species; but whether this belief be justifiable must be judged of by
the general weight of the several facts and views given throughout this
work.

It need not be supposed that all varieties or incipient species
necessarily attain the rank of species. They may whilst in this
incipient state become extinct, or they may endure as varieties for very
long periods, as has been shown to be the case by Mr. Wollaston with the
varieties of certain fossil land-shells in Madeira. If a variety were
to flourish so as to exceed in numbers the parent species, it would then
rank as the species, and the species as the variety; or it might come to
supplant and exterminate the parent species; or both might co-exist, and
both rank as independent species. But we shall hereafter have to return
to this subject.

From these remarks it will be seen that I look at the term species,
as one arbitrarily given for the sake of convenience to a set of
individuals closely resembling each other, and that it does not
essentially differ from the term variety, which is given to less
distinct and more fluctuating forms. The term variety, again,
in comparison with mere individual differences, is also applied
arbitrarily, and for mere convenience sake.
