having sometimes a higher organisation than the mature animal, into
which it is developed. I believe that all these facts can be explained,
as follows, on the view of descent with modification.

It is commonly assumed, perhaps from monstrosities often affecting the
embryo at a very early period, that slight variations necessarily
appear at an equally early period. But we have little evidence on
this head--indeed the evidence rather points the other way; for it is
notorious that breeders of cattle, horses, and various fancy animals,
cannot positively tell, until some time after the animal has been born,
what its merits or form will ultimately turn out. We see this plainly in
our own children; we cannot always tell whether the child will be tall
or short, or what its precise features will be. The question is not, at
what period of life any variation has been caused, but at what period
it is fully displayed. The cause may have acted, and I believe generally
has acted, even before the embryo is formed; and the variation may be
due to the male and female sexual elements having been affected by
the conditions to which either parent, or their ancestors, have been
exposed. Nevertheless an effect thus caused at a very early period, even
before the formation of the embryo, may appear late in life; as when
an hereditary disease, which appears in old age alone, has been
communicated to the offspring from the reproductive element of one
parent. Or again, as when the horns of cross-bred cattle have been
affected by the shape of the horns of either parent. For the welfare of
a very young animal, as long as it remains in its mother's womb, or in
the egg, or as long as it is nourished and protected by its parent,
it must be quite unimportant whether most of its characters are fully
acquired a little earlier or later in life. It would not signify, for
instance, to a bird which obtained its food best by having a long beak,
whether or not it assumed a beak of this particular length, as long as
it was fed by its parents. Hence, I conclude, that it is quite possible,
that each of the many successive modifications, by which each species
has acquired its present structure, may have supervened at a not very
early period of life; and some direct evidence from our domestic animals
supports this view. But in other cases it is quite possible that each
successive modification, or most of them, may have appeared at an
extremely early period.

I have stated in the first chapter, that there is some evidence to
render it probable, that at whatever age any variation first appears
in the parent, it tends to reappear at a corresponding age in the
offspring. Certain variations can only appear at corresponding ages, for
instance, peculiarities in the caterpillar, cocoon, or imago states of
the silk-moth; or, again, in the horns of almost full-grown cattle. But
further than this, variations which, for all that we can see, might have
appeared earlier or later in life, tend to appear at a corresponding
age in the offspring and parent. I am far from meaning that this is
invariably the case; and I could give a good many cases of variations
(taking the word in the largest sense) which have supervened at an
earlier age in the child than in the parent.

These two principles, if their truth be admitted, will, I believe,
explain all the above specified leading facts in embryology. But first
let us look at a few analogous cases in domestic varieties. Some authors
who have written on Dogs, maintain that the greyhound and bulldog,
though appearing so different, are really varieties most closely allied,
and have probably descended from the same wild stock; hence I was
curious to see how far their puppies differed from each other: I was
told by breeders that they differed just as much as their parents, and
this, judging by the eye, seemed almost to be the case; but on actually
measuring the old dogs and their six-days old puppies, I found that
the puppies had not nearly acquired their full amount of proportional
difference. So, again, I was told that the foals of cart and race-horses
differed as much as the full-grown animals; and this surprised me
greatly, as I think it probable that the difference between these two
breeds has been wholly caused by selection under domestication; but
having had careful measurements made of the dam and of a three-days old
colt of a race and heavy cart-horse, I find that the colts have by no
means acquired their full amount of proportional difference.

As the evidence appears to me conclusive, that the several domestic
breeds of Pigeon have descended from one wild species, I compared young
pigeons of various breeds, within twelve hours after being hatched; I
carefully measured the proportions (but will not here give details) of
the beak, width of mouth, length of nostril and of eyelid, size of
feet and length of leg, in the wild stock, in pouters, fantails, runts,
barbs, dragons, carriers, and tumblers. Now some of these birds, when
mature, differ so extraordinarily in length and form of beak, that
they would, I cannot doubt, be ranked in distinct genera, had they been
natural productions. But when the nestling birds of these several breeds
were placed in a row, though most of them could be distinguished from
each other, yet their proportional differences in the above specified
several points were incomparably less than in the full-grown birds. Some
characteristic points of difference--for instance, that of the width
of mouth--could hardly be detected in the young. But there was one
remarkable exception to this rule, for the young of the short-faced
tumbler differed from the young of the wild rock-pigeon and of the other
breeds, in all its proportions, almost exactly as much as in the adult
state.

The two principles above given seem to me to explain these facts in
regard to the later embryonic stages of our domestic varieties. Fanciers
select their horses, dogs, and pigeons, for breeding, when they are
nearly grown up: they are indifferent whether the desired qualities
and structures have been acquired earlier or later in life, if the
full-grown animal possesses them. And the cases just given, more
especially that of pigeons, seem to show that the characteristic
differences which give value to each breed, and which have been
accumulated by man's selection, have not generally first appeared at
an early period of life, and have been inherited by the offspring at a
corresponding not early period. But the case of the short-faced tumbler,
which when twelve hours old had acquired its proper proportions,
proves that this is not the universal rule; for here the characteristic
differences must either have appeared at an earlier period than usual,
or, if not so, the differences must have been inherited, not at the
corresponding, but at an earlier age.

Now let us apply these facts and the above two principles--which latter,
though not proved true, can be shown to be in some degree probable--to
species in a state of nature. Let us take a genus of birds, descended
on my theory from some one parent-species, and of which the several new
species have become modified through natural selection in accordance
with their diverse habits. Then, from the many slight successive steps
of variation having supervened at a rather late age, and having been
inherited at a corresponding age, the young of the new species of our
supposed genus will manifestly tend to resemble each other much more
closely than do the adults, just as we have seen in the case of
pigeons. We may extend this view to whole families or even classes. The
fore-limbs, for instance, which served as legs in the parent-species,
may become, by a long course of modification, adapted in one descendant
to act as hands, in another as paddles, in another as wings; and on the
above two principles--namely of each successive modification supervening
at a rather late age, and being inherited at a corresponding late
age--the fore-limbs in the embryos of the several descendants of the
parent-species will still resemble each other closely, for they will not
have been modified. But in each individual new species, the embryonic
fore-limbs will differ greatly from the fore-limbs in the mature animal;
the limbs in the latter having undergone much modification at a rather
late period of life, and having thus been converted into hands, or
paddles, or wings. Whatever influence long-continued exercise or use on
the one hand, and disuse on the other, may have in modifying an organ,
such influence will mainly affect the mature animal, which has come
to its full powers of activity and has to gain its own living; and the
effects thus produced will be inherited at a corresponding mature age.
Whereas the young will remain unmodified, or be modified in a lesser
degree, by the effects of use and disuse.

In certain cases the successive steps of variation might supervene, from
causes of which we are wholly ignorant, at a very early period of life,
or each step might be inherited at an earlier period than that at which
it first appeared. In either case (as with the short-faced tumbler) the
young or embryo would closely resemble the mature parent-form. We have
seen that this is the rule of development in certain whole groups of
animals, as with cuttle-fish and spiders, and with a few members of the
great class of insects, as with Aphis. With respect to the final cause
of the young in these cases not undergoing any metamorphosis, or closely
resembling their parents from their earliest age, we can see that this
would result from the two following contingencies; firstly, from the
young, during a course of modification carried on for many generations,
having to provide for their own wants at a very early stage of
