fragments of granite and other rocks, which do not occur in the
archipelago. Hence we may safely infer that icebergs formerly landed
their rocky burthens on the shores of these mid-ocean islands, and it
is at least possible that they may have brought thither the seeds of
northern plants.

Considering that the several above means of transport, and that several
other means, which without doubt remain to be discovered, have been in
action year after year, for centuries and tens of thousands of years,
it would I think be a marvellous fact if many plants had not thus
become widely transported. These means of transport are sometimes called
accidental, but this is not strictly correct: the currents of the sea
are not accidental, nor is the direction of prevalent gales of wind.
It should be observed that scarcely any means of transport would carry
seeds for very great distances; for seeds do not retain their vitality
when exposed for a great length of time to the action of seawater; nor
could they be long carried in the crops or intestines of birds. These
means, however, would suffice for occasional transport across tracts of
sea some hundred miles in breadth, or from island to island, or from a
continent to a neighbouring island, but not from one distant continent
to another. The floras of distant continents would not by such means
become mingled in any great degree; but would remain as distinct as we
now see them to be. The currents, from their course, would never bring
seeds from North America to Britain, though they might and do bring
seeds from the West Indies to our western shores, where, if not killed
by so long an immersion in salt-water, they could not endure our
climate. Almost every year, one or two land-birds are blown across
the whole Atlantic Ocean, from North America to the western shores of
Ireland and England; but seeds could be transported by these wanderers
only by one means, namely, in dirt sticking to their feet, which is in
itself a rare accident. Even in this case, how small would the chance
be of a seed falling on favourable soil, and coming to maturity! But it
would be a great error to argue that because a well-stocked island,
like Great Britain, has not, as far as is known (and it would be very
difficult to prove this), received within the last few centuries,
through occasional means of transport, immigrants from Europe or any
other continent, that a poorly-stocked island, though standing more
remote from the mainland, would not receive colonists by similar means.
I do not doubt that out of twenty seeds or animals transported to an
island, even if far less well-stocked than Britain, scarcely more than
one would be so well fitted to its new home, as to become naturalised.
But this, as it seems to me, is no valid argument against what would
be effected by occasional means of transport, during the long lapse of
geological time, whilst an island was being upheaved and formed, and
before it had become fully stocked with inhabitants. On almost bare
land, with few or no destructive insects or birds living there, nearly
every seed, which chanced to arrive, would be sure to germinate and
survive.

DISPERSAL DURING THE GLACIAL PERIOD.

The identity of many plants and animals, on mountain-summits, separated
from each other by hundreds of miles of lowlands, where the Alpine
species could not possibly exist, is one of the most striking cases
known of the same species living at distant points, without the apparent
possibility of their having migrated from one to the other. It is indeed
a remarkable fact to see so many of the same plants living on the snowy
regions of the Alps or Pyrenees, and in the extreme northern parts of
Europe; but it is far more remarkable, that the plants on the White
Mountains, in the United States of America, are all the same with those
of Labrador, and nearly all the same, as we hear from Asa Gray, with
those on the loftiest mountains of Europe. Even as long ago as ,
such facts led Gmelin to conclude that the same species must have been
independently created at several distinct points; and we might have
remained in this same belief, had not Agassiz and others called vivid
attention to the Glacial period, which, as we shall immediately see,
affords a simple explanation of these facts. We have evidence of almost
every conceivable kind, organic and inorganic, that within a very recent
geological period, central Europe and North America suffered under an
Arctic climate. The ruins of a house burnt by fire do not tell their
tale more plainly, than do the mountains of Scotland and Wales, with
their scored flanks, polished surfaces, and perched boulders, of the icy
streams with which their valleys were lately filled. So greatly has the
climate of Europe changed, that in Northern Italy, gigantic moraines,
left by old glaciers, are now clothed by the vine and maize. Throughout
a large part of the United States, erratic boulders, and rocks scored by
drifted icebergs and coast-ice, plainly reveal a former cold period.

The former influence of the glacial climate on the distribution of the
inhabitants of Europe, as explained with remarkable clearness by Edward
Forbes, is substantially as follows. But we shall follow the changes
more readily, by supposing a new glacial period to come slowly on, and
then pass away, as formerly occurred. As the cold came on, and as each
more southern zone became fitted for arctic beings and ill-fitted for
their former more temperate inhabitants, the latter would be supplanted
and arctic productions would take their places. The inhabitants of the
more temperate regions would at the same time travel southward, unless
they were stopped by barriers, in which case they would perish. The
mountains would become covered with snow and ice, and their former
Alpine inhabitants would descend to the plains. By the time that the
cold had reached its maximum, we should have a uniform arctic fauna and
flora, covering the central parts of Europe, as far south as the Alps
and Pyrenees, and even stretching into Spain. The now temperate regions
of the United States would likewise be covered by arctic plants and
animals, and these would be nearly the same with those of Europe; for
the present circumpolar inhabitants, which we suppose to have everywhere
travelled southward, are remarkably uniform round the world. We may
suppose that the Glacial period came on a little earlier or later in
North America than in Europe, so will the southern migration there have
been a little earlier or later; but this will make no difference in the
final result.

As the warmth returned, the arctic forms would retreat northward,
closely followed up in their retreat by the productions of the more
temperate regions. And as the snow melted from the bases of the
mountains, the arctic forms would seize on the cleared and thawed
ground, always ascending higher and higher, as the warmth increased,
whilst their brethren were pursuing their northern journey. Hence, when
the warmth had fully returned, the same arctic species, which had lately
lived in a body together on the lowlands of the Old and New Worlds,
would be left isolated on distant mountain-summits (having been
exterminated on all lesser heights) and in the arctic regions of both
hemispheres.

Thus we can understand the identity of many plants at points so
immensely remote as on the mountains of the United States and of Europe.
We can thus also understand the fact that the Alpine plants of each
mountain-range are more especially related to the arctic forms living
due north or nearly due north of them: for the migration as the cold
came on, and the re-migration on the returning warmth, will generally
have been due south and north. The Alpine plants, for example, of
Scotland, as remarked by Mr. H. C. Watson, and those of the Pyrenees, as
remarked by Ramond, are more especially allied to the plants of northern
Scandinavia; those of the United States to Labrador; those of the
mountains of Siberia to the arctic regions of that country. These views,
grounded as they are on the perfectly well-ascertained occurrence of a
former Glacial period, seem to me to explain in so satisfactory a manner
the present distribution of the Alpine and Arctic productions of Europe
and America, that when in other regions we find the same species on
distant mountain-summits, we may almost conclude without other evidence,
that a colder climate permitted their former migration across the low
intervening tracts, since become too warm for their existence.

If the climate, since the Glacial period, has ever been in any degree
warmer than at present (as some geologists in the United States believe
to have been the case, chiefly from the distribution of the fossil
Gnathodon), then the arctic and temperate productions will at a very
late period have marched a little further north, and subsequently have
retreated to their present homes; but I have met with no satisfactory
evidence with respect to this intercalated slightly warmer period, since
the Glacial period.

The arctic forms, during their long southern migration and re-migration
northward, will have been exposed to nearly the same climate, and, as
is especially to be noticed, they will have kept in a body together;
consequently their mutual relations will not have been much disturbed,
and, in accordance with the principles inculcated in this volume, they
will not have been liable to much modification. But with our Alpine
productions, left isolated from the moment of the returning warmth,
first at the bases and ultimately on the summits of the mountains, the
