The case most frequently insisted on by palaeontologists of the
apparently sudden appearance of a whole group of species, is that of the
teleostean fishes, low down in the Chalk period. This group includes the
large majority of existing species. Lately, Professor Pictet has carried
their existence one sub-stage further back; and some palaeontologists
believe that certain much older fishes, of which the affinities are as
yet imperfectly known, are really teleostean. Assuming, however, that
the whole of them did appear, as Agassiz believes, at the commencement
of the chalk formation, the fact would certainly be highly remarkable;
but I cannot see that it would be an insuperable difficulty on my
theory, unless it could likewise be shown that the species of this group
appeared suddenly and simultaneously throughout the world at this same
period. It is almost superfluous to remark that hardly any fossil-fish
are known from south of the equator; and by running through Pictet's
Palaeontology it will be seen that very few species are known from
several formations in Europe. Some few families of fish now have a
confined range; the teleostean fish might formerly have had a similarly
confined range, and after having been largely developed in some one sea,
might have spread widely. Nor have we any right to suppose that the seas
of the world have always been so freely open from south to north as
they are at present. Even at this day, if the Malay Archipelago were
converted into land, the tropical parts of the Indian Ocean would form
a large and perfectly enclosed basin, in which any great group of marine
animals might be multiplied; and here they would remain confined, until
some of the species became adapted to a cooler climate, and were enabled
to double the southern capes of Africa or Australia, and thus reach
other and distant seas.

From these and similar considerations, but chiefly from our ignorance
of the geology of other countries beyond the confines of Europe and the
United States; and from the revolution in our palaeontological ideas
on many points, which the discoveries of even the last dozen years have
effected, it seems to me to be about as rash in us to dogmatize on the
succession of organic beings throughout the world, as it would be for
a naturalist to land for five minutes on some one barren point in
Australia, and then to discuss the number and range of its productions.

ON THE SUDDEN APPEARANCE OF GROUPS OF ALLIED SPECIES IN THE LOWEST KNOWN
FOSSILIFEROUS STRATA.

There is another and allied difficulty, which is much graver. I allude
to the manner in which numbers of species of the same group, suddenly
appear in the lowest known fossiliferous rocks. Most of the arguments
which have convinced me that all the existing species of the same group
have descended from one progenitor, apply with nearly equal force to
the earliest known species. For instance, I cannot doubt that all the
Silurian trilobites have descended from some one crustacean, which must
have lived long before the Silurian age, and which probably differed
greatly from any known animal. Some of the most ancient Silurian
animals, as the Nautilus, Lingula, etc., do not differ much from living
species; and it cannot on my theory be supposed, that these old species
were the progenitors of all the species of the orders to which they
belong, for they do not present characters in any degree intermediate
between them. If, moreover, they had been the progenitors of these
orders, they would almost certainly have been long ago supplanted and
exterminated by their numerous and improved descendants.

Consequently, if my theory be true, it is indisputable that before the
lowest Silurian stratum was deposited, long periods elapsed, as long as,
or probably far longer than, the whole interval from the Silurian age to
the present day; and that during these vast, yet quite unknown, periods
of time, the world swarmed with living creatures.

To the question why we do not find records of these vast primordial
periods, I can give no satisfactory answer. Several of the most eminent
geologists, with Sir R. Murchison at their head, are convinced that we
see in the organic remains of the lowest Silurian stratum the dawn of
life on this planet. Other highly competent judges, as Lyell and the
late E. Forbes, dispute this conclusion. We should not forget that only
a small portion of the world is known with accuracy. M. Barrande has
lately added another and lower stage to the Silurian system, abounding
with new and peculiar species. Traces of life have been detected in the
Longmynd beds beneath Barrande's so-called primordial zone. The presence
of phosphatic nodules and bituminous matter in some of the lowest azoic
rocks, probably indicates the former existence of life at these periods.
But the difficulty of understanding the absence of vast piles of
fossiliferous strata, which on my theory no doubt were somewhere
accumulated before the Silurian epoch, is very great. If these most
ancient beds had been wholly worn away by denudation, or obliterated
by metamorphic action, we ought to find only small remnants of the
formations next succeeding them in age, and these ought to be very
generally in a metamorphosed condition. But the descriptions which we
now possess of the Silurian deposits over immense territories in
Russia and in North America, do not support the view, that the older a
formation is, the more it has suffered the extremity of denudation and
metamorphism.

The case at present must remain inexplicable; and may be truly urged as
a valid argument against the views here entertained. To show that it
may hereafter receive some explanation, I will give the following
hypothesis. From the nature of the organic remains, which do not appear
to have inhabited profound depths, in the several formations of Europe
and of the United States; and from the amount of sediment, miles in
thickness, of which the formations are composed, we may infer that from
first to last large islands or tracts of land, whence the sediment was
derived, occurred in the neighbourhood of the existing continents of
Europe and North America. But we do not know what was the state of
things in the intervals between the successive formations; whether
Europe and the United States during these intervals existed as dry
land, or as a submarine surface near land, on which sediment was not
deposited, or again as the bed of an open and unfathomable sea.

Looking to the existing oceans, which are thrice as extensive as the
land, we see them studded with many islands; but not one oceanic island
is as yet known to afford even a remnant of any palaeozoic or secondary
formation. Hence we may perhaps infer, that during the palaeozoic and
secondary periods, neither continents nor continental islands existed
where our oceans now extend; for had they existed there, palaeozoic and
secondary formations would in all probability have been accumulated from
sediment derived from their wear and tear; and would have been at least
partially upheaved by the oscillations of level, which we may fairly
conclude must have intervened during these enormously long periods. If
then we may infer anything from these facts, we may infer that where
our oceans now extend, oceans have extended from the remotest period of
which we have any record; and on the other hand, that where continents
now exist, large tracts of land have existed, subjected no doubt to
great oscillations of level, since the earliest silurian period. The
coloured map appended to my volume on Coral Reefs, led me to conclude
that the great oceans are still mainly areas of subsidence, the great
archipelagoes still areas of oscillations of level, and the continents
areas of elevation. But have we any right to assume that things have
thus remained from eternity? Our continents seem to have been formed
by a preponderance, during many oscillations of level, of the force of
elevation; but may not the areas of preponderant movement have changed
in the lapse of ages? At a period immeasurably antecedent to the
silurian epoch, continents may have existed where oceans are now spread
out; and clear and open oceans may have existed where our continents now
stand. Nor should we be justified in assuming that if, for instance, the
bed of the Pacific Ocean were now converted into a continent, we should
there find formations older than the silurian strata, supposing such to
have been formerly deposited; for it might well happen that strata which
had subsided some miles nearer to the centre of the earth, and which
had been pressed on by an enormous weight of superincumbent water, might
have undergone far more metamorphic action than strata which have always
remained nearer to the surface. The immense areas in some parts of the
world, for instance in South America, of bare metamorphic rocks, which
must have been heated under great pressure, have always seemed to me to
require some special explanation; and we may perhaps believe that we see
in these large areas, the many formations long anterior to the silurian
epoch in a completely metamorphosed condition.

The several difficulties here discussed, namely our not finding in the
successive formations infinitely numerous transitional links between the
many species which now exist or have existed; the sudden manner in which
whole groups of species appear in our European formations; the almost
entire absence, as at present known, of fossiliferous formations beneath
the Silurian strata, are all undoubtedly of the gravest nature. We
see this in the plainest manner by the fact that all the most eminent
palaeontologists, namely Cuvier, Owen, Agassiz, Barrande, Falconer,
E. Forbes, etc., and all our greatest geologists, as Lyell, Murchison,
