
All the many forms, extinct and recent, descended from A, make, as
before remarked, one order; and this order, from the continued effects
of extinction and divergence of character, has become divided into
several sub-families and families, some of which are supposed to have
perished at different periods, and some to have endured to the present
day.

By looking at the diagram we can see that if many of the extinct forms,
supposed to be embedded in the successive formations, were discovered
at several points low down in the series, the three existing families on
the uppermost line would be rendered less distinct from each other. If,
for instance, the genera a, a, a, f, m, m, m were disinterred,
these three families would be so closely linked together that they
probably would have to be united into one great family, in nearly the
same manner as has occurred with ruminants and pachyderms. Yet he who
objected to call the extinct genera, which thus linked the living
genera of three families together, intermediate in character, would be
justified, as they are intermediate, not directly, but only by a long
and circuitous course through many widely different forms. If many
extinct forms were to be discovered above one of the middle horizontal
lines or geological formations--for instance, above Number VI.--but
none from beneath this line, then only the two families on the left
hand (namely, a, etc., and b, etc.) would have to be united into
one family; and the two other families (namely, a to f now including
five genera, and o to m) would yet remain distinct. These two
families, however, would be less distinct from each other than they were
before the discovery of the fossils. If, for instance, we suppose the
existing genera of the two families to differ from each other by a dozen
characters, in this case the genera, at the early period marked VI.,
would differ by a lesser number of characters; for at this early
stage of descent they have not diverged in character from the common
progenitor of the order, nearly so much as they subsequently diverged.
Thus it comes that ancient and extinct genera are often in some slight
degree intermediate in character between their modified descendants, or
between their collateral relations.

In nature the case will be far more complicated than is represented in
the diagram; for the groups will have been more numerous, they will
have endured for extremely unequal lengths of time, and will have been
modified in various degrees. As we possess only the last volume of the
geological record, and that in a very broken condition, we have no right
to expect, except in very rare cases, to fill up wide intervals in the
natural system, and thus unite distinct families or orders. All that we
have a right to expect, is that those groups, which have within known
geological periods undergone much modification, should in the older
formations make some slight approach to each other; so that the older
members should differ less from each other in some of their characters
than do the existing members of the same groups; and this by the
concurrent evidence of our best palaeontologists seems frequently to be
the case.

Thus, on the theory of descent with modification, the main facts with
respect to the mutual affinities of the extinct forms of life to each
other and to living forms, seem to me explained in a satisfactory
manner. And they are wholly inexplicable on any other view.

On this same theory, it is evident that the fauna of any great period
in the earth's history will be intermediate in general character between
that which preceded and that which succeeded it. Thus, the species
which lived at the sixth great stage of descent in the diagram are the
modified offspring of those which lived at the fifth stage, and are the
parents of those which became still more modified at the seventh stage;
hence they could hardly fail to be nearly intermediate in character
between the forms of life above and below. We must, however, allow for
the entire extinction of some preceding forms, and for the coming in of
quite new forms by immigration, and for a large amount of modification,
during the long and blank intervals between the successive formations.
Subject to these allowances, the fauna of each geological period
undoubtedly is intermediate in character, between the preceding and
succeeding faunas. I need give only one instance, namely, the manner
in which the fossils of the Devonian system, when this system was first
discovered, were at once recognised by palaeontologists as intermediate
in character between those of the overlying carboniferous, and
underlying Silurian system. But each fauna is not necessarily exactly
intermediate, as unequal intervals of time have elapsed between
consecutive formations.

It is no real objection to the truth of the statement, that the fauna of
each period as a whole is nearly intermediate in character between the
preceding and succeeding faunas, that certain genera offer exceptions
to the rule. For instance, mastodons and elephants, when arranged by Dr.
Falconer in two series, first according to their mutual affinities
and then according to their periods of existence, do not accord in
arrangement. The species extreme in character are not the oldest, or
the most recent; nor are those which are intermediate in character,
intermediate in age. But supposing for an instant, in this and other
such cases, that the record of the first appearance and disappearance
of the species was perfect, we have no reason to believe that forms
successively produced necessarily endure for corresponding lengths of
time: a very ancient form might occasionally last much longer than
a form elsewhere subsequently produced, especially in the case of
terrestrial productions inhabiting separated districts. To compare small
things with great: if the principal living and extinct races of the
domestic pigeon were arranged as well as they could be in serial
affinity, this arrangement would not closely accord with the order
in time of their production, and still less with the order of their
disappearance; for the parent rock-pigeon now lives; and many varieties
between the rock-pigeon and the carrier have become extinct; and
carriers which are extreme in the important character of length of beak
originated earlier than short-beaked tumblers, which are at the opposite
end of the series in this same respect.

Closely connected with the statement, that the organic remains from an
intermediate formation are in some degree intermediate in character,
is the fact, insisted on by all palaeontologists, that fossils from two
consecutive formations are far more closely related to each other, than
are the fossils from two remote formations. Pictet gives as a well-known
instance, the general resemblance of the organic remains from the
several stages of the chalk formation, though the species are distinct
in each stage. This fact alone, from its generality, seems to have
shaken Professor Pictet in his firm belief in the immutability of
species. He who is acquainted with the distribution of existing species
over the globe, will not attempt to account for the close resemblance of
the distinct species in closely consecutive formations, by the physical
conditions of the ancient areas having remained nearly the same. Let it
be remembered that the forms of life, at least those inhabiting the sea,
have changed almost simultaneously throughout the world, and therefore
under the most different climates and conditions. Consider the
prodigious vicissitudes of climate during the pleistocene period, which
includes the whole glacial period, and note how little the specific
forms of the inhabitants of the sea have been affected.

On the theory of descent, the full meaning of the fact of fossil remains
from closely consecutive formations, though ranked as distinct species,
being closely related, is obvious. As the accumulation of each formation
has often been interrupted, and as long blank intervals have intervened
between successive formations, we ought not to expect to find, as I
attempted to show in the last chapter, in any one or two formations all
the intermediate varieties between the species which appeared at the
commencement and close of these periods; but we ought to find after
intervals, very long as measured by years, but only moderately long
as measured geologically, closely allied forms, or, as they have been
called by some authors, representative species; and these we assuredly
do find. We find, in short, such evidence of the slow and scarcely
sensible mutation of specific forms, as we have a just right to expect
to find.

ON THE STATE OF DEVELOPMENT OF ANCIENT FORMS.

There has been much discussion whether recent forms are more highly
developed than ancient. I will not here enter on this subject, for
naturalists have not as yet defined to each other's satisfaction what is
meant by high and low forms. But in one particular sense the more recent
forms must, on my theory, be higher than the more ancient; for each new
species is formed by having had some advantage in the struggle for life
over other and preceding forms. If under a nearly similar climate, the
eocene inhabitants of one quarter of the world were put into competition
with the existing inhabitants of the same or some other quarter, the
eocene fauna or flora would certainly be beaten and exterminated;
