And she exhibited an old remnant of pink silk which she had purchased at
the Temple to make a mediæval doublet for Delmar.

"He came to-day, didn't he?"

"No."

"That's singular."

And, after a minute's silence:

"Where are you going this evening?"

"To Alphonsine's," said Rosanette, this being the third version given by
her as to the way in which she was going to pass the evening.

Mademoiselle Vatnaz went on: "And what news about the old man of the
mountain?"

But, with an abrupt wink, the Maréchale bade her hold her tongue; and
she accompanied Frederick out as far as the anteroom to ascertain from
him whether he would soon see Arnoux.

"Pray ask him to come--not before his wife, mind!"

At the top of the stairs an umbrella was placed against the wall near a
pair of goloshes.

"Vatnaz's goloshes," said Rosanette. "What a foot, eh? My little friend
is rather strongly built!"

And, in a melodramatic tone, making the final letter of the word roll:

"Don't tru-us-st her!"

Frederick, emboldened by a confidence of this sort, tried to kiss her on
the neck.

"Oh, do it! It costs nothing!"

He felt rather light-hearted as he left her, having no doubt that ere
long the Maréchale would be his mistress. This desire awakened another
in him; and, in spite of the species of grudge that he owed her, he felt
a longing to see Madame Arnoux.

Besides, he would have to call at her house in order to execute the
commission with which he had been entrusted by Rosanette.

"But now," thought he (it had just struck six), "Arnoux is probably at
home."

So he put off his visit till the following day.

She was seated in the same attitude as on the former day, and was sewing
a little boy's shirt.

The child, at her feet, was playing with a wooden toy menagerie. Marthe,
a short distance away, was writing.

He began by complimenting her on her children. She replied without any
exaggeration of maternal silliness.

The room had a tranquil aspect. A glow of sunshine stole in through the
window-panes, lighting up the angles of the different articles of
furniture, and, as Madame Arnoux sat close beside the window, a large
ray, falling on the curls over the nape of her neck, penetrated with
liquid gold her skin, which assumed the colour of amber.

Then he said:

"This young lady here has grown very tall during the past three years!
Do you remember, Mademoiselle, when you slept on my knees in the
carriage?"

Marthe did not remember.

"One evening, returning from Saint-Cloud?"

There was a look of peculiar sadness in Madame

Arnoux's face. Was it in order to prevent any allusion on his part to
the memories they possessed in common?

Her beautiful black eyes, whose sclerotics were glistening, moved gently
under their somewhat drooping lids, and her pupils revealed in their
depths an inexpressible kindness of heart. He was seized with a love
stronger than ever, a passion that knew no bounds. It enervated him to
contemplate the object of his attachment; however, he shook off this
feeling. How was he to make the most of himself? by what means? And,
having turned the matter over thoroughly in his mind, Frederick could
think of none that seemed more effectual than money.

He began talking about the weather, which was less cold than it had been
at Havre.

"You have been there?"

"Yes; about a family matter--an inheritance."

"Ah! I am very glad," she said, with an air of such genuine pleasure
that he felt quite touched, just as if she had rendered him a great
service.

She asked him what he intended to do, as it was necessary for a man to
occupy himself with something.

He recalled to mind his false position, and said that he hoped to reach
the Council of State with the help of M. Dambreuse, the secretary.

"You are acquainted with him, perhaps?"

"Merely by name."

Then, in a low tone:

"_He_ brought you to the ball the other night, did he not?"

Frederick remained silent.

"That was what I wanted to know; thanks!"

After that she put two or three discreet questions to him about his
family and the part of the country in which he lived. It was very kind
of him not to have forgotten them after having lived so long away from
Paris.

"But could I do so?" he rejoined. "Have you any doubt about it?"

Madame Arnoux arose: "I believe that you entertain towards us a true and
solid affection. _Au revoir!_"

And she extended her hand towards him in a sincere and virile fashion.

Was this not an engagement, a promise? Frederick felt a sense of delight
at merely living; he had to restrain himself to keep from singing. He
wanted to burst out, to do generous deeds, and to give alms. He looked
around him to see if there were anyone near whom he could relieve. No
wretch happened to be passing by; and his desire for self-devotion
evaporated, for he was not a man to go out of his way to find
opportunities for benevolence.

Then he remembered his friends. The first of whom he thought was
Hussonnet, the second, Pellerin. The lowly position of Dussardier
naturally called for consideration. As for Cisy, he was glad to let that
young aristocrat get a slight glimpse as to the extent of his fortune.
He wrote accordingly to all four to come to a housewarming the following
Sunday at eleven o'clock sharp; and he told Deslauriers to bring
Sénécal.

The tutor had been dismissed from the third boarding-school in which he
