
All this, according to Madame Arnoux, was criminal or factitious. The
young man felt wounded by this negative attitude with regard to his
passion, and, in order to combat it, he cited, by way of proof, the
suicides which they read about every day in the newspapers, extolled the
great literary types, Phèdre, Dido, Romeo, Desgrieux. He talked as if he
meant to do away with himself.

The fire was no longer burning on the hearth; the rain lashed against
the window-panes. Madame Arnoux, without stirring, remained with her
hands resting on the sides of her armchair. The flaps of her cap fell
like the fillets of a sphinx. Her pure profile traced out its clear-cut
outlines in the midst of the shadow.

He was anxious to cast himself at her feet. There was a creaking sound
in the lobby, and he did not venture to carry out his intention.

He was, moreover, restrained by a kind of religious awe. That robe,
mingling with the surrounding shadows, appeared to him boundless,
infinite, incapable of being touched; and for this very reason his
desire became intensified. But the fear of doing too much, and, again,
of not doing enough, deprived him of all judgment.

"If she dislikes me," he thought, "let her drive me away; if she cares
for me, let her encourage me."

He said, with a sigh:

"So, then, you don't admit that a man may love--a woman?"

Madame Arnoux replied:

"Assuming that she is at liberty to marry, he may marry her; when she
belongs to another, he should keep away from her."

"So happiness is impossible?"

"No! But it is never to be found in falsehood, mental anxiety, and
remorse."

"What does it matter, if one is compensated by the enjoyment of supreme
bliss?"

"The experience is too costly."

Then he sought to assail her with irony.

"Would not virtue in that case be merely cowardice?"

"Say rather, clear-sightedness. Even for those women who might forget
duty or religion, simple good sense is sufficient. A solid foundation
for wisdom may be found in self-love."

"Ah, what shop-keeping maxims these are of yours!"

"But I don't boast of being a fine lady."

At that moment the little boy rushed in.

"Mamma, are you coming to dinner?"

"Yes, in a moment."

Frederick arose. At the same instant, Marthe made her appearance.

He could not make up his mind to go away, and, with a look of entreaty:

"These women you speak of are very unfeeling, then?"

"No, but deaf when it is necessary to be so."

And she remained standing on the threshold of her room with her two
children beside her. He bowed without saying a word. She mutely returned
his salutation.

What he first experienced was an unspeakable astonishment. He felt
crushed by this mode of impressing on him the emptiness of his hopes. It
seemed to him as if he were lost, like a man who has fallen to the
bottom of an abyss and knows that no help will come to him, and that he
must die. He walked on, however, but at random, without looking before
him. He knocked against stones; he mistook his way. A clatter of wooden
shoes sounded close to his ear; it was caused by some of the
working-girls who were leaving the foundry. Then he realised where he
was.

The railway lamps traced on the horizon a line of flames. He arrived
just as the train was starting, let himself be pushed into a carriage,
and fell asleep.

An hour later on the boulevards, the gaiety of Paris by night made his
journey all at once recede into an already far-distant past. He resolved
to be strong, and relieved his heart by vilifying Madame Arnoux with
insulting epithets.

"She is an idiot, a goose, a mere brute; let us not bestow another
thought on her!"

When he got home, he found in his study a letter of eight pages on blue
glazed paper, with the initials "R. A."

It began with friendly reproaches.

"What has become of you, my dear? I am getting quite bored."

But the handwriting was so abominable, that Frederick was about to fling
away the entire bundle of sheets, when he noticed in the postscript the
following words:

"I count on you to come to-morrow and drive me to the races."

What was the meaning of this invitation? Was it another trick of the
Maréchale? But a woman does not make a fool of the same man twice
without some object; and, seized with curiosity, he read the letter over
again attentively.

Frederick was able to distinguish "Misunderstanding--to have taken a
wrong path--disillusions--poor children that we are!--like two rivers
that join each other!" etc.

He kept the sheets for a long time between his fingers. They had the
odour of orris; and there was in the form of the characters and the
irregular spaces between the lines something suggestive, as it were, of
a disorderly toilet, that fired his blood.

"Why should I not go?" said he to himself at length. "But if Madame
Arnoux were to know about it? Ah! let her know! So much the better! and
let her feel jealous over it! In that way I shall be avenged!"




CHAPTER X.

At the Races.


The Maréchale was prepared for his visit, and had been awaiting him.

"This is nice of you!" she said, fixing a glance of her fine eyes on his
face, with an expression at the same time tender and mirthful.

When she had fastened her bonnet-strings, she sat down on the divan, and
remained silent.

"Shall we go?" said Frederick. She looked at the clock on the
mantelpiece.

"Oh, no! not before half-past one!" as if she had imposed this limit to
her indecision.

