
"When you have finished, you will order your carriage, will you not?"

She turned round with a start.

"You are sending me away?"

"Exactly."

She fixed on him her large blue eyes, no doubt as a last appeal, then
drew the two ends of her tartan across each other, lingered for a minute
or two, and went away.

"You ought to call her back," said Frederick.

"Come, now!"

And, as he wished to go out, Deslauriers went into the kitchen, which
also served as his dressing-room. On the stone floor, beside a pair of
boots, were to be seen the remains of a meagre breakfast, and a mattress
with a coverlid was rolled up on the floor in a corner.

"This will show you," said he, "that I receive few marchionesses. 'Tis
easy to get enough of them, ay, faith! and some others, too! Those who
cost nothing take up your time--'tis money under another form. Now, I'm
not rich! And then they are all so silly, so silly! Can you chat with a
woman yourself?"

As they parted, at the corner of the Pont Neuf, Deslauriers said: "It's
agreed, then; you'll bring the thing to me to-morrow as soon as you have
it!"

"Agreed!" said Frederick.

When he awoke next morning, he received through the post a cheque on the
bank for fifteen thousand francs.

This scrap of paper represented to him fifteen big bags of money; and he
said to himself that, with such a sum he could, first of all, keep his
carriage for three years instead of selling it, as he would soon be
forced to do, or buy for himself two beautiful damaskeened pieces of
armour, which he had seen on the Quai Voltaire, then a quantity of other
things, pictures, books and what a quantity of bouquets of flowers,
presents for Madame Arnoux! anything, in short, would have been
preferable to risking losing everything in that journal! Deslauriers
seemed to him presumptuous, his insensibility on the night before having
chilled Frederick's affection for him; and the young man was indulging
in these feelings of regret, when he was quite surprised by the sudden
appearance of Arnoux, who sat down heavily on the side of the bed, like
a man overwhelmed with trouble.

"What is the matter now?"

"I am ruined!"

He had to deposit that very day at the office of Maître Beaumont,
notary, in the Rue Saint-Anne, eighteen thousand francs lent him by one
Vanneroy.

"'Tis an unaccountable disaster. I have, however, given him a mortgage,
which ought to keep him quiet. But he threatens me with a writ if it is
not paid this afternoon promptly."

"And what next?"

"Oh! the next step is simple enough; he will take possession of my real
estate. Once the thing is publicly announced, it means ruin to
me--that's all! Ah! if I could find anyone to advance me this cursed
sum, he might take Vanneroy's place, and I should be saved! You don't
chance to have it yourself?"

The cheque had remained on the night-table near a book. Frederick took
up a volume, and placed it on the cheque, while he replied:

"Good heavens, my dear friend, no!"

But it was painful to him to say "no" to Arnoux.

"What, don't you know anyone who would----?"

"Nobody! and to think that in eight days I should be getting in money!
There is owing to me probably fifty thousand francs at the end of the
month!"

"Couldn't you ask some of the persons that owe you money to make you an
advance?"

"Ah! well, so I did!"

"But have you any bills or promissory notes?"

"Not one!"

"What is to be done?" said Frederick.

"That's what I'm asking myself," said Arnoux. "'Tisn't for myself, my
God! but for my children and my poor wife!"

Then, letting each phrase fall from his lips in a broken fashion:

"In fact--I could rough it--I could pack off all I have--and go and seek
my fortune--I don't know where!"

"Impossible!" exclaimed Frederick.

Arnoux replied with an air of calmness:

"How do you think I could live in Paris now?"

There was a long silence. Frederick broke it by saying:

"When could you pay back this money?"

Not that he had it; quite the contrary! But there was nothing to prevent
him from seeing some friends, and making an application to them.

And he rang for his servant to get himself dressed.

Arnoux thanked him.

"The amount you want is eighteen thousand francs--isn't it?"

"Oh! I could manage easily with sixteen thousand! For I could make two
thousand five hundred out of it, or get three thousand on my silver
plate, if Vanneroy meanwhile would give me till to-morrow; and, I repeat
to you, you may inform the lender, give him a solemn undertaking, that
in eight days, perhaps even in five or six, the money will be
reimbursed. Besides, the mortgage will be security for it. So there is
no risk, you understand?"

Frederick assured him that he thoroughly understood the state of
affairs, and added that he was going out immediately.

He would be sure on his return to bestow hearty maledictions on
Deslauriers, for he wished to keep his word, and in the meantime, to
oblige Arnoux.

"Suppose I applied to M. Dambreuse? But on what pretext could I ask for
money? 'Tis I, on the contrary, that should give him some for the shares
I took in his coal-mining company. Ah! let him go hang himself--his
shares! I am really not liable for them!"

And Frederick applauded himself for his own independence, as if he had
refused to do some service for M. Dambreuse.

"Ah, well," said he to himself afterwards, "since I'm going to meet with
a loss in this way--for with fifteen thousand francs I might gain a
hundred thousand! such things sometimes happen on the Bourse--well,
then, since I am breaking my promise to one of them, am I not free?
Besides, when Deslauriers might wait? No, no; that's wrong; let us go
