
On the day after his arrival, as soon as they had finished breakfast,
Madame Moreau brought her son out into the garden.

She said she was happy to see him in a profession, for they were not as
rich as people imagined. The land brought in little; the people who
farmed it paid badly. She had even been compelled to sell her carriage.
Finally, she placed their situation in its true colours before him.

During the first embarrassments which followed the death of her late
husband, M. Roque, a man of great cunning, had made her loans of money
which had been renewed, and left long unpaid, in spite of her desire to
clear them off. He had suddenly made a demand for immediate payment, and
she had gone beyond the strict terms of the agreement by giving up to
him, at a contemptible figure, the farm of Presles. Ten years later, her
capital disappeared through the failure of a banker at Melun. Through a
horror which she had of mortgages, and to keep up appearances, which
might be necessary in view of her son's future, she had, when Père Roque
presented himself again, listened to him once more. But now she was free
from debt. In short, there was left them an income of about ten thousand
francs, of which two thousand three hundred belonged to him--his entire
patrimony.

"It isn't possible!" exclaimed Frederick.

She nodded her head, as if to declare that it was perfectly possible.

But his uncle would leave him something?

That was by no means certain!

And they took a turn around the garden without exchanging a word. At
last she pressed him to her heart, and in a voice choked with rising
tears:

"Ah! my poor boy! I have had to give up my dreams!"

He seated himself on a bench in the shadow of the large acacia.

Her advice was that he should become a clerk to M. Prouharam, solicitor,
who would assign over his office to him; if he increased its value, he
might sell it again and find a good practice.

Frederick was no longer listening to her. He was gazing automatically
across the hedge into the other garden opposite.

A little girl of about twelve with red hair happened to be there all
alone. She had made earrings for herself with the berries of the
service-tree. Her bodice, made of grey linen-cloth, allowed her
shoulders, slightly gilded by the sun, to be seen. Her short white
petticoat was spotted with the stains made by sweets; and there was, so
to speak, the grace of a young wild animal about her entire person, at
the same time, nervous and thin. Apparently, the presence of a stranger
astonished her, for she had stopped abruptly with her watering-pot in
her hand darting glances at him with her large bright eyes, which were
of a limpid greenish-blue colour.

"That is M. Roque's daughter," said Madame Moreau. "He has just married
his servant and legitimised the child that he had by her."




CHAPTER VI.

Blighted Hopes.


Ruined, stripped of everything, undermined!

He remained seated on the bench, as if stunned by a shock. He cursed
Fate; he would have liked to beat somebody; and, to intensify his
despair, he felt a kind of outrage, a sense of disgrace, weighing down
upon him; for Frederick had been under the impression that the fortune
coming to him through his father would mount up one day to an income of
fifteen thousand livres, and he had so informed the Arnoux' in an
indirect sort of way. So then he would be looked upon as a braggart, a
rogue, an obscure blackguard, who had introduced himself to them in the
expectation of making some profit out of it! And as for her--Madame
Arnoux--how could he ever see her again now?

Moreover, that was completely impossible when he had only a yearly
income of three thousand francs, He could not always lodge on the fourth
floor, have the door keeper as a servant, and make his appearance with
wretched black gloves turning blue at the ends, a greasy hat, and the
same frock-coat for a whole year. No, no! never! And yet without her
existence was intolerable. Many people were well able to live without
any fortune, Deslauriers amongst the rest; and he thought himself a
coward to attach so much importance to matters of trifling consequence.
Need would perhaps multiply his faculties a hundredfold. He excited
himself by thinking on the great men who had worked in garrets. A soul
like that of Madame Arnoux ought to be touched at such a spectacle, and
she would be moved by it to sympathetic tenderness. So, after all, this
catastrophe was a piece of good fortune; like those earthquakes which
unveil treasures, it had revealed to him the hidden wealth of his
nature. But there was only one place in the world where this could be
turned to account--Paris; for to his mind, art, science, and love (those
three faces of God, as Pellerin would have said) were associated
exclusively with the capital. That evening, he informed his mother of
his intention to go back there. Madame Moreau was surprised and
indignant. She regarded it as a foolish and absurd course. It would be
better to follow her advice, namely, to remain near her in an office.
Frederick shrugged his shoulders, "Come now"--looking on this proposal
as an insult to himself.

Thereupon, the good lady adopted another plan. In a tender voice broken
by sobs she began to dwell on her solitude, her old age, and the
sacrifices she had made for him. Now that she was more unhappy than
ever, he was abandoning her. Then, alluding to the anticipated close of
her life:

"A little patience--good heavens! you will soon be free!"

These lamentations were renewed twenty times a day for three months; and
at the same time the luxuries of a home made him effeminate. He found it
enjoyable to have a softer bed and napkins that were not torn, so that,
weary, enervated, overcome by the terrible force of comfort, Frederick
allowed himself to be brought to Maître Prouharam's office.

He displayed there neither knowledge nor aptitude. Up to this time, he
had been regarded as a young man of great means who ought to be the
shining light of the Department. The public would now come to the
conclusion that he had imposed upon them.

At first, he said to himself:

"It is necessary to inform Madame Arnoux about it;" and for a whole week
he kept formulating in his own mind dithyrambic letters and short notes
in an eloquent and sublime style. The fear of avowing his actual
position restrained him. Then he thought that it was far better to write
to the husband. Arnoux knew life and could understand the true state of
the case. At length, after a fortnight's hesitation:

"Bah! I ought not to see them any more: let them forget me! At any rate,
I shall be cherished in her memory without having sunk in her
estimation! She will believe that I am dead, and will regret
me--perhaps."

As extravagant resolutions cost him little, he swore in his own mind
that he would never return to Paris, and that he would not even make any
enquiries about Madame Arnoux.

Nevertheless, he regretted the very smell of the gas and the noise of
the omnibuses. He mused on the things that she might have said to him,
on the tone of her voice, on the light of her eyes--and, regarding
himself as a dead man, he no longer did anything at all.

He arose very late, and looked through the window at the passing teams
of wagoners. The first six months especially were hateful.

