mad; for she gave a bounce at the very first word he spoke to her,
threatening, if he went any further, to call the police. Deslauriers
made an effort to laugh; then, coming across a little woman sitting by
herself under a gas-lamp, he asked her to be his partner in a quadrille.

The musicians, perched on the platform in the attitude of apes, kept
scraping and blowing away with desperate energy. The conductor, standing
up, kept beating time automatically. The dancers were much crowded and
enjoyed themselves thoroughly. The bonnet-strings, getting loose,
rubbed against the cravats; the boots sank under the petticoats; and all
this bouncing went on to the accompaniment of the music. Deslauriers
hugged the little woman, and, seized with the delirium of the cancan,
whirled about, like a big marionnette, in the midst of the dancers. Cisy
and Deslauriers were still promenading up and down. The young aristocrat
kept ogling the girls, and, in spite of the clerk's exhortations, did
not venture to talk to them, having an idea in his head that in the
resorts of these women there was always "a man hidden in the cupboard
with a pistol who would come out of it and force you to sign a bill of
exchange."

They came back and joined Frederick. Deslauriers had stopped dancing;
and they were all asking themselves how they were to finish up the
evening, when Hussonnet exclaimed:

"Look! Here's the Marquise d'Amaëgui!"

The person referred to was a pale woman with a _retroussé_ nose, mittens
up to her elbows, and big black earrings hanging down her cheeks, like
two dog's ears. Hussonnet said to her:

"We ought to organise a little fête at your house--a sort of Oriental
rout. Try to collect some of your friends here for these French
cavaliers. Well, what is annoying you? Are you going to wait for your
hidalgo?"

The Andalusian hung down her head: being well aware of the by no means
lavish habits of her friend, she was afraid of having to pay for any
refreshments he ordered. When, at length, she let the word "money" slip
from her, Cisy offered five napoleons--all he had in his purse; and so
it was settled that the thing should come off.

But Frederick was absent. He fancied that he had recognised the voice of
Arnoux, and got a glimpse of a woman's hat; and accordingly he hastened
towards an arbour which was not far off.

Mademoiselle Vatnaz was alone there with Arnoux.

"Excuse me! I am in the way?"

"Not in the least!" returned the picture-merchant.

Frederick, from the closing words of their conversation, understood that
Arnoux had come to the Alhambra to talk over a pressing matter of
business with Mademoiselle Vatnaz; and it was evident that he was not
completely reassured, for he said to her, with some uneasiness in his
manner:

"You are quite sure?"

"Perfectly certain! You are loved. Ah! what a man you are!"

And she assumed a pouting look, putting out her big lips, so red that
they seemed tinged with blood. But she had wonderful eyes, of a tawny
hue, with specks of gold in the pupils, full of vivacity, amorousness,
and sensuality. They illuminated, like lamps, the rather yellow tint of
her thin face. Arnoux seemed to enjoy her exhibition of pique. He
stooped over her, saying:

"You are nice--give me a kiss!"

She caught hold of his two ears, and pressed her lips against his
forehead.

At that moment the dancing stopped; and in the conductor's place
appeared a handsome young man, rather fat, with a waxen complexion. He
had long black hair, which he wore in the same fashion as Christ, and a
blue velvet waistcoat embroidered with large gold palm-branches. He
looked as proud as a peacock, and as stupid as a turkey-cock; and,
having bowed to the audience, he began a ditty. A villager was supposed
to be giving an account of his journey to the capital. The singer used
the dialect of Lower Normandy, and played the part of a drunken man. The
refrain--

    "Ah! I laughed at you there, I laughed at you there,
         In that rascally city of Paris!"[]

was greeted with enthusiastic stampings of feet. Delmas, "a vocalist who
sang with expression," was too shrewd to let the excitement of his
listeners cool. A guitar was quickly handed to him and he moaned forth a
ballad entitled "The Albanian Girl's Brother."

[Footnote : _Ah! j'ai l'y ri, j'ai l'y ri. Dans ce gueusard de Paris!_]

The words recalled to Frederick those which had been sung by the man in
rags between the paddle-boxes of the steamboat. His eyes involuntarily
attached themselves to the hem of the dress spread out before him.

After each couplet there was a long pause, and the blowing of the wind
through the trees resembled the sound of the waves.

Mademoiselle Vatnaz blushed the moment she saw Dussardier. She soon
rose, and stretching out her hand towards him:

"You do not remember me, Monsieur Auguste?"

"How do you know her?" asked Frederick.

"We have been in the same house," he replied.

Cisy pulled him by the sleeve; they went out; and, scarcely had they
disappeared, when Madame Vatnaz began to pronounce a eulogy on his
character. She even went so far as to add that he possessed "the genius
of the heart."

Then they chatted about Delmas, admitting that as a mimic he might be a
success on the stage; and a discussion followed in which Shakespeare,
the Censorship, Style, the People, the receipts of the Porte
Saint-Martin, Alexandre Dumas, Victor Hugo, and Dumersan were all mixed
up together.

Arnoux had known many celebrated actresses; the young men bent forward
their heads to hear what he had to say about these ladies. But his words
were drowned in the noise of the music; and, as soon as the quadrille or
the polka was over, they all squatted round the tables, called the
waiter, and laughed. Bottles of beer and of effervescent lemonade went
off with detonations amid the foliage; women clucked like hens; now and
then, two gentlemen tried to fight; and a thief was arrested. The
dancers, in the rush of a gallop, encroached on the walks. Panting, with
flushed, smiling faces, they filed off in a whirlwind which lifted up
the gowns with the coat-tails. The trombones brayed more loudly; the
rhythmic movement became more rapid. Behind the mediæval cloister could
be heard crackling sounds; squibs went off; artificial suns began
turning round; the gleam of the Bengal fires, like emeralds in colour,
lighted up for the space of a minute the entire garden; and, with the
last rocket, a great sigh escaped from the assembled throng.

It slowly died away. A cloud of gunpowder floated into the air.
Frederick and Deslauriers were walking step by step through the midst of
the crowd, when they happened to see something that made them suddenly
stop: Martinon was in the act of paying some money at the place where
umbrellas were left; and he was accompanying a woman of fifty,
plain-looking, magnificently dressed, and of problematic social rank.

"That sly dog," said Deslauriers, "is not so simple as we imagine. But
where in the world is Cisy?"

Dussardier pointed out to them the smoking-divan, where they perceived
the knightly youth, with a bowl of punch before him, and a pink hat by
his side, to keep him company. Hussonnet, who had been away for the past
few minutes, reappeared at the same moment.
