"Always Sénécal!" thought Frederick.

"But, at all events, tell me the news? Are you still in love with Madame
Arnoux? Is it all over--eh?"

Frederick, not knowing what answer to give him, closed his eyes and hung
down his head.

With regard to Arnoux, Deslauriers told him that the journal was now the
property of Hussonnet, who had transformed it. It was called "_L'Art_, a
literary institution--a company with shares of one hundred francs each;
capital of the firm, forty thousand francs," each shareholder having the
right to put into it his own contributions; for "the company has for its
object to publish the works of beginners, to spare talent, perchance
genius, the sad crises which drench," etc.

"You see the dodge!" There was, however, something to be effected by the
change--the tone of the journal could be raised; then, without any
delay, while retaining the same writers, and promising a continuation of
the feuilleton, to supply the subscribers with a political organ: the
amount to be advanced would not be very great.

"What do you think of it? Come! would you like to have a hand in it?"

Frederick did not reject the proposal; but he pointed out that it was
necessary for him to attend to the regulation of his affairs.

"After that, if you require anything----"

"Thanks, my boy!" said Deslauriers.

Then, they smoked puros, leaning with their elbows on the shelf covered
with velvet beside the window. The sun was shining; the air was balmy.
Flocks of birds, fluttering about, swooped down into the garden. The
statues of bronze and marble, washed by the rain, were glistening.
Nursery-maids wearing aprons, were seated on chairs, chatting together;
and the laughter of children could be heard mingling with the continuous
plash that came from the sheaf-jets of the fountain.

Frederick was troubled by Deslauriers' irritability; but under the
influence of the wine which circulated through his veins, half-asleep,
in a state of torpor, with the sun shining full on his face, he was no
longer conscious of anything save a profound sense of comfort, a kind of
voluptuous feeling that stupefied him, as a plant is saturated with heat
and moisture. Deslauriers, with half-closed eyelids, was staring
vacantly into the distance. His breast swelled, and he broke out in the
following strain:

"Ah! those were better days when Camille Desmoulins, standing below
there on a table, drove the people on to the Bastille. Men really lived
in those times; they could assert themselves, and prove their strength!
Simple advocates commanded generals. Kings were beaten by beggars;
whilst now----"

He stopped, then added all of a sudden:

"Pooh! the future is big with great things!"

And, drumming a battle-march on the window-panes, he declaimed some
verses of Barthélemy, which ran thus:

    "'That dread Assembly shall again appear,
    Which, after forty years, fills you with fear,
    Marching with giant stride and dauntless soul'[]

--I don't know the rest of it! But 'tis late; suppose we go?"

[Footnote :   "Elle reparaîtra, la terrible Assemblée,
               Dont, après quarante ans, votre tête est troublée,
               Colosse qui sans peur marche d'un pas puissant."]

And he went on setting forth his theories in the street.

Frederick, without listening to him, was looking at certain materials
and articles of furniture in the shop-windows which would be suitable
for his new residence in Paris; and it was, perhaps, the thought of
Madame Arnoux that made him stop before a second-hand dealer's window,
where three plates made of fine ware were exposed to view. They were
decorated with yellow arabesques with metallic reflections, and were
worth a hundred crowns apiece. He got them put by.

"For my part, if I were in your place," said Deslauriers, "I would
rather buy silver plate," revealing by this love of substantial things
the man of mean extraction.

As soon as he was alone, Frederick repaired to the establishment of the
celebrated Pomadère, where he ordered three pairs of trousers, two
coats, a pelisse trimmed with fur, and five waistcoats. Then he called
at a bootmaker's, a shirtmaker's, and a hatter's, giving them directions
in each shop to make the greatest possible haste. Three days later, on
the evening of his return from Havre, he found his complete wardrobe
awaiting him in his Parisian abode; and impatient to make use of it, he
resolved to pay an immediate visit to the Dambreuses. But it was too
early yet--scarcely eight o'clock.

"Suppose I went to see the others?" said he to himself.

He came upon Arnoux, all alone, in the act of shaving in front of his
glass. The latter proposed to drive him to a place where they could
amuse themselves, and when M. Dambreuse was referred to, "Ah, that's
just lucky! You'll see some of his friends there. Come on, then! It will
be good fun!"

Frederick asked to be excused. Madame Arnoux recognised his voice, and
wished him good-day, through the partition, for her daughter was
indisposed, and she was also rather unwell herself. The noise of a
soup-ladle against a glass could be heard from within, and all those
quivering sounds made by things being lightly moved about, which are
usual in a sick-room. Then Arnoux left his dressing-room to say good-bye
to his wife. He brought forward a heap of reasons for going out:

"You know well that it is a serious matter! I must go there; 'tis a case
of necessity. They'll be waiting for me!"

"Go, go, my dear! Amuse yourself!"

Arnoux hailed a hackney-coach:

"Palais Royal, No.  Montpensier Gallery." And, as he let himself sink
back in the cushions:

"Ah! how tired I am, my dear fellow! It will be the death of me!
However, I can tell it to you--to you!"

He bent towards Frederick's ear in a mysterious fashion:

"I am trying to discover again the red of Chinese copper!"

And he explained the nature of the glaze and the little fire.

On their arrival at Chevet's shop, a large hamper was brought to him,
which he stowed away in the hackney-coach. Then he bought for his "poor
wife" pine-apples and various dainties, and directed that they should be
sent early next morning.

After this, they called at a costumer's establishment; it was to a ball
they were going.

Arnoux selected blue velvet breeches, a vest of the same material, and a
red wig; Frederick a domino; and they went down the Rue de Laval towards
a house the second floor of which was illuminated by coloured lanterns.

At the foot of the stairs they heard violins playing above.

"Where the deuce are you bringing me to?" said Frederick.

"To see a nice girl! don't be afraid!"

The door was opened for them by a groom; and they entered the anteroom,
where paletots, mantles, and shawls were thrown together in a heap on
