
All this time, Arnoux was comfortably seated in an easy-chair near the
fire, sipping his cup of tea, with the Maréchale on his knees.

Frederick did not go back there; and, in order to distract his attention
from his disastrous passion, he determined to write a "History of the
Renaissance." He piled up confusedly on his table the humanists, the
philosophers, and the poets, and he went to inspect some engravings of
Mark Antony, and tried to understand Machiavelli. Gradually, the
serenity of intellectual work had a soothing effect upon him. While his
mind was steeped in the personality of others, he lost sight of his
own--which is the only way, perhaps, of getting rid of suffering.

One day, while he was quietly taking notes, the door opened, and the
man-servant announced Madame Arnoux.

It was she, indeed! and alone? Why, no! for she was holding little
Eugène by the hand, followed by a nurse in a white apron. She sat down,
and after a preliminary cough:

"It is a long time since you came to see us."

As Frederick could think of no excuse at the moment, she added:

"It was delicacy on your part!"

He asked in return:

"Delicacy about what?"

"About what you have done for Arnoux!" said she.

Frederick made a significant gesture. "What do I care about him, indeed?
It was for your sake I did it!"

She sent off the child to play with his nurse in the drawing-room. Two
or three words passed between them as to their state of health; then the
conversation hung fire.

She wore a brown silk gown, which had the colour of Spanish wine, with a
paletot of black velvet bordered with sable. This fur made him yearn to
pass his hand over it; and her head-bands, so long and so exquisitely
smooth, seemed to draw his lips towards them. But he was agitated by
emotion, and, turning his eyes towards the door:

"'Tis rather warm here!"

Frederick understood what her discreet glance meant.

"Ah! excuse me! the two leaves of the door are merely drawn together."

"Yes, that's true!"

And she smiled, as much as to say:

"I'm not a bit afraid!"

He asked her presently what was the object of her visit.

"My husband," she replied with an effort, "has urged me to call on you,
not venturing to take this step himself!"

"And why?"

"You know M. Dambreuse, don't you?"

"Yes, slightly."

"Ah! slightly."

She relapsed into silence.

"No matter! finish what you were going to say."

Thereupon she told him that, two days before, Arnoux had found himself
unable to meet four bills of a thousand francs, made payable at the
banker's order and with his signature attached to them. She felt sorry
for having compromised her children's fortune. But anything was
preferable to dishonour; and, if M. Dambreuse stopped the proceedings,
they would certainly pay him soon, for she was going to sell a little
house which she had at Chartres.

"Poor woman!" murmured Frederick. "I will go. Rely on me!"

"Thanks!"

And she arose to go.

"Oh! there is nothing to hurry you yet."

She remained standing, examining the trophy of Mongolian arrows
suspended from the ceiling, the bookcase, the bindings, all the utensils
for writing. She lifted up the bronze bowl which held his pens. Her feet
rested on different portions of the carpet. She had visited Frederick
several times before, but always accompanied by Arnoux. They were now
alone together--alone in his own house. It was an extraordinary
event--almost a successful issue of his love.

She wished to see his little garden. He offered her his arm to show her
his property--thirty feet of ground enclosed by some houses, adorned
with shrubs at the corners and flower-borders in the middle. The early
days of April had arrived. The leaves of the lilacs were already showing
their borders of green. A breath of pure air was diffused around, and
the little birds chirped, their song alternating with the distant sound
that came from a coachmaker's forge.

Frederick went to look for a fire-shovel; and, while they walked on side
by side, the child kept making sand-pies in the walk.

Madame Arnoux did not believe that, as he grew older, he would have a
great imagination; but he had a winning disposition. His sister, on the
other hand, possessed a caustic humour that sometimes wounded her.

"That will change," said Frederick. "We must never despair."

She returned:

"We must never despair!"

This automatic repetition of the phrase he had used appeared to him a
sort of encouragement; he plucked a rose, the only one in the garden.

"Do you remember a certain bouquet of roses one evening, in a carriage?"

She coloured a little; and, with an air of bantering pity:

"Ah, I was very young then!"

"And this one," went on Frederick, in a low tone, "will it be the same
way with it?"

She replied, while turning about the stem between her fingers, like the
thread of a spindle:

"No, I will preserve it."

She called over the nurse, who took the child in her arms; then, on the
threshold of the door in the street, Madame Arnoux inhaled the odour of
the flower, leaning her head on her shoulder with a look as sweet as a
kiss.

When he had gone up to his study, he gazed at the armchair in which she
had sat, and every object which she had touched. Some portion of her was
diffused around him. The caress of her presence lingered there still.

"So, then, she came here," said he to himself.

And his soul was bathed in the waves of infinite tenderness.

Next morning, at eleven o'clock, he presented himself at M. Dambreuse's
