child of the house, an insufferable brat of four, played noisily with a
rattle on the bar steps. His mother, a pale-faced little woman, with
decayed teeth, was smiling in a stupid sort of way. What in the world
could Regimbart be doing? Frederick waited for him in an exceedingly
miserable frame of mind.

The rain clattered like hail on the covering of the cab. Through the
opening in the muslin curtain he could see the poor horse in the street
more motionless than a horse made of wood. The stream of water, becoming
enormous, trickled down between two spokes of the wheels, and the
coachman was nodding drowsily with the horsecloth wrapped round him for
protection, but fearing lest his fare might give him the slip, he opened
the door every now and then, with the rain dripping from him as if
falling from a mountain torrent; and, if things could get worn out by
looking at them, the clock ought to have by this time been utterly
dissolved, so frequently did Frederick rivet his eyes on it. However, it
kept going. "Mine host" Alexandre walked up and down repeating, "He'll
come! Cheer up! he'll come!" and, in order to divert his thoughts,
talked politics, holding forth at some length. He even carried civility
so far as to propose a game of dominoes.

At length when it was half-past four, Frederick, who had been there
since about twelve, sprang to his feet, and declared that he would not
wait any longer.

"I can't understand it at all myself," replied the café-keeper, in a
tone of straightforwardness. "This is the first time that M. Ledoux has
failed to come!"

"What! Monsieur Ledoux?"

"Why, yes, Monsieur!"

"I said Regimbart," exclaimed Frederick, exasperated.

"Ah! a thousand pardons! You are making a mistake! Madame Alexandre, did
not Monsieur say M. Ledoux?"

And, questioning the waiter: "You heard him yourself, just as I did?"

No doubt, to pay his master off for old scores, the waiter contented
himself with smiling.

Frederick drove back to the boulevards, indignant at having his time
wasted, raging against the Citizen, but craving for his presence as if
for that of a god, and firmly resolved to drag him forth, if necessary,
from the depths of the most remote cellars. The vehicle in which he was
driving only irritated him the more, and he accordingly got rid of it.
His ideas were in a state of confusion. Then all the names of the cafés
which he had heard pronounced by that idiot burst forth at the same time
from his memory like the thousand pieces of an exhibition of
fireworks--the Café Gascard, the Café Grimbert, the Café Halbout, the
Bordelais smoking-divan, the Havanais, the Havrais, the Boeuf à la
Mode, the Brasserie Allemande, and the Mère Morel; and he made his way
to all of them in succession. But in one he was told that Regimbart had
just gone out; in another, that he might perhaps call at a later hour;
in a third, that they had not seen him for six months; and, in another
place, that he had the day before ordered a leg of mutton for Saturday.
Finally, at Vautier's dining-rooms, Frederick, on opening the door,
knocked against the waiter.

"Do you know M. Regimbart?"

"What, monsieur! do I know him? 'Tis I who have the honour of attending
on him. He's upstairs--he is just finishing his dinner!"

And, with a napkin under his arm, the master of the establishment
himself accosted him:

"You're asking him for M. Regimbart, monsieur? He was here a moment
ago."

Frederick gave vent to an oath, but the proprietor of the dining-rooms
stated that he would find the gentleman as a matter of certainty at
Bouttevilain's.

"I assure you, on my honour, he left a little earlier than usual, for he
had a business appointment with some gentlemen. But you'll find him, I
tell you again, at Bouttevilain's, in the Rue Saint-Martin, No. , the
second row of steps at the left, at the end of the courtyard--first
floor--door to the right!"

At last, he saw Regimbart, in a cloud of tobacco-smoke, by himself, at
the lower end of the refreshment-room, near the billiard-table, with a
glass of beer in front of him, and his chin lowered in a thoughtful
attitude.

"Ah! I have been a long time searching for you!"

Without rising, Regimbart extended towards him only two fingers, and, as
if he had seen Frederick the day before, he gave utterance to a number
of commonplace remarks about the opening of the session.

Frederick interrupted him, saying in the most natural tone he could
assume:

"Is Arnoux going on well?"

The reply was a long time coming, as Regimbart was gargling the liquor
in his throat:

"Yes, not badly."

"Where is he living now?"

"Why, in the Rue Paradis Poissonnière," the Citizen returned with
astonishment.

"What number?"

"Thirty-seven--confound it! what a funny fellow you are!"

Frederick rose.

"What! are you going?"

"Yes, yes! I have to make a call--some business matter I had forgotten!
Good-bye!"

Frederick went from the smoking-divan to the Arnoux's residence, as if
carried along by a tepid wind, with a sensation of extreme ease such as
people experience in dreams.

He found himself soon on the second floor in front of a door, at the
ringing of whose bell a servant appeared. A second door was flung open.
Madame Arnoux was seated near the fire. Arnoux jumped up, and rushed
across to embrace Frederick. She had on her lap a little boy not quite
three years old. Her daughter, now as tall as herself, was standing up
at the opposite side of the mantelpiece.

"Allow me to present this gentleman to you," said Arnoux, taking his son
up in his arms. And he amused himself for some minutes in making the
child jump up in the air very high, and then catching him with both
hands as he came down.

"You'll kill him!--ah! good heavens, have done!" exclaimed Madame
Arnoux.

But Arnoux, declaring that there was not the slightest danger, still
kept tossing up the child, and even addressed him in words of endearment
such as nurses use in the Marseillaise dialect, his natal tongue: "Ah!
my fine picheoun! my ducksy of a little nightingale!"

Then, he asked Frederick why he had been so long without writing to
them, what he had been doing down in the country, and what brought him
back.

"As for me, I am at present, my dear friend, a dealer in faïence. But
let us talk about yourself!"

