orange or a cork would every now and then be flung from a distance.
People would quit their seats to go and talk to some one at another end
of the table. Rosanette turned round towards Delmar, who sat motionless
behind her; Pellerin kept babbling; M. Oudry smiled. Mademoiselle Vatnaz
ate, almost alone, a group of crayfish, and the shells crackled under
her long teeth. The angel, poised on the piano-stool--the only place on
which her wings permitted her to sit down--was placidly masticating
without ever stopping.

"What an appetite!" the choir-boy kept repeating in amazement, "what an
appetite!"

And the Sphinx drank brandy, screamed out with her throat full, and
wriggled like a demon. Suddenly her jaws swelled, and no longer being
able to keep down the blood which rushed to her head and nearly choked
her, she pressed her napkin against her lips, and threw herself under
the table.

Frederick had seen her falling: "'Tis nothing!" And at his entreaties to
be allowed to go and look after her, she replied slowly:

"Pooh! what's the good? That's just as pleasant as anything else. Life
is not so amusing!"

Then, he shivered, a feeling of icy sadness taking possession of him, as
if he had caught a glimpse of whole worlds of wretchedness and
despair--a chafing-dish of charcoal beside a folding-bed, the corpses of
the Morgue in leathern aprons, with the tap of cold water that flows
over their heads.

Meanwhile, Hussonnet, squatted at the feet of the female savage, was
howling in a hoarse voice in imitation of the actor Grassot:

"Be not cruel, O Celuta! this little family fête is charming! Intoxicate
me with delight, my loves! Let us be gay! let us be gay!"

And he began kissing the women on the shoulders. They quivered under the
tickling of his moustaches. Then he conceived the idea of breaking a
plate against his head by rapping it there with a little energy. Others
followed his example. The broken earthenware flew about in bits like
slates in a storm; and the 'longshorewoman exclaimed:

"Don't bother yourselves about it; these cost nothing. We get a present
of them from the merchant who makes them!"

Every eye was riveted on Arnoux. He replied:

"Ha! about the invoice--allow me!" desiring, no doubt, to pass for not
being, or for no longer being, Rosanette's lover.

But two angry voices here made themselves heard:

"Idiot!"

"Rascal!"

"I am at your command!"

"So am I at yours!"

It was the mediæval knight and the Russian postilion who were disputing,
the latter having maintained that armour dispensed with bravery, while
the other regarded this view as an insult. He desired to fight; all
interposed to prevent him, and in the midst of the uproar the captain
tried to make himself heard.

"Listen to me, messieurs! One word! I have some experience, messieurs!"

Rosanette, by tapping with her knife on a glass, succeeded eventually in
restoring silence, and, addressing the knight, who had kept his helmet
on, and then the postilion, whose head was covered with a hairy cap:

"Take off that saucepan of yours! and you, there, your wolf's head! Are
you going to obey me, damn you? Pray show respect to my epaulets! I am
your commanding officer!"

They complied, and everyone present applauded, exclaiming, "Long live
the Maréchale! long live the Maréchale!" Then she took a bottle of
champagne off the stove, and poured out its contents into the cups which
they successively stretched forth to her. As the table was very large,
the guests, especially the women, came over to her side, and stood erect
on tiptoe on the slats of the chairs, so as to form, for the space of a
minute, a pyramidal group of head-dresses, naked shoulders, extended
arms, and stooping bodies; and over all these objects a spray of wine
played for some time, for the merry-andrew and Arnoux, at opposite
corners of the dining-room, each letting fly the cork of a bottle,
splashed the faces of those around them.

The little birds of the aviary, the door of which had been left open,
broke into the apartment, quite scared, flying round the chandelier,
knocking against the window-panes and against the furniture, and some of
them, alighting on the heads of the guests, presented the appearance
there of large flowers.

The musicians had gone. The piano had been drawn out of the anteroom.
The Vatnaz seated herself before it, and, accompanied by the choir-boy,
who thumped his tambourine, she made a wild dash into a quadrille,
striking the keys like a horse pawing the ground, and wriggling her
waist about, the better to mark the time. The Maréchale dragged out
Frederick; Hussonnet took the windmill; the 'longshorewoman put out her
joints like a circus-clown; the merry-andrew exhibited the manoeuvres
of an orang-outang; the female savage, with outspread arms, imitated the
swaying motion of a boat. At last, unable to go on any further, they all
stopped; and a window was flung open.

The broad daylight penetrated the apartment with the cool breath of
morning. There was an exclamation of astonishment, and then came
silence. The yellow flames flickered, making the sockets of the
candlesticks crack from time to time. The floor was strewn with ribbons,
flowers, and pearls. The pier-tables were sticky with the stains of
punch and syrup. The hangings were soiled, the dresses rumpled and
dusty. The plaits of the women's hair hung loose over their shoulders,
and the paint, trickling down with the perspiration, revealed pallid
faces and red, blinking eyelids.

The Maréchale, fresh as if she had come out of a bath, had rosy checks
and sparkling eyes. She flung her wig some distance away, and her hair
fell around her like a fleece, allowing none of her uniform to be seen
except her breeches, the effect thus produced being at the same time
comical and pretty.

The Sphinx, whose teeth chattered as if she had the ague, wanted a
shawl.

Rosanette rushed up to her own room to look for one, and, as the other
came after her, she quickly shut the door in her face.

The Turk remarked, in a loud tone, that M. Oudry had not been seen going
out. Nobody noticed the maliciousness of this observation, so worn out
were they all.

Then, while waiting for vehicles, they managed to get on their
broad-brimmed hats and cloaks. It struck seven. The angel was still in
the dining-room, seated at the table with a plate of sardines and fruit
stewed in melted butter in front of her, and close beside her was the
fishwife, smoking cigarettes, while giving her advice as to the right
way to live.

At last, the cabs having arrived, the guests took their departure.
Hussonnet, who had an engagement as correspondent for the provinces, had
to read through fifty-three newspapers before his breakfast. The female
savage had a rehearsal at the theatre; Pellerin had to see a model; and
the choir-boy had three appointments. But the angel, attacked by the
preliminary symptoms of indigestion, was unable to rise. The mediæval
baron carried her to the cab.

"Take care of her wings!" cried the 'longshorewoman through the window.

At the top of the stairs, Mademoiselle Vatnaz said to Rosanette:

