Frederick, nonplussed, replied in a stupefied fashion:

"I knew it." But the next moment, correcting himself:

"'Tis about a matter that concerns Madame Arnoux. Can she receive me?"

"Ha! I have not seen her for the last three days," said Sénécal.

And he broke into a long string of complaints. When he accepted the post
of manager, he understood that he would have been allowed to reside in
Paris, and not be forced to bury himself in this country district, far
from his friends, deprived of newspapers. No matter! he had overlooked
all that. But Arnoux appeared to pay no heed to his merits. He was,
moreover, shallow and retrograde--no one could be more ignorant. In
place of seeking for artistic improvements, it would have been better to
introduce firewood instead of coal and gas. The shop-keeping spirit
_thrust itself in_--Sénécal laid stress on the last words. In short, he
disliked his present occupation, and he all but appealed to Frederick to
say a word in his behalf in order that he might get an increase of
salary.

"Make your mind easy," said the other.

He met nobody on the staircase. On the first floor, he pushed his way
head-foremost into an empty room. It was the drawing-room. He called out
at the top of his voice. There was no reply. No doubt, the cook had gone
out, and so had the housemaid. At length, having reached the second
floor, he pushed a door open. Madame Arnoux was alone in this room, in
front of a press with a mirror attached. The belt of her dressing-gown
hung down her hips; one entire half of her hair fell in a dark wave over
her right shoulder; and she had raised both arms in order to hold up her
chignon with one hand and to put a pin through it with the other. She
broke into an exclamation and disappeared.

Then, she came back again properly dressed. Her waist, her eyes, the
rustle of her dress, her entire appearance, charmed him. Frederick felt
it hard to keep from covering her with kisses.

"I beg your pardon," said she, "but I could not----"

He had the boldness to interrupt her with these words:

"Nevertheless--you looked very nice--just now."

She probably thought this compliment a little coarse, for her cheeks
reddened. He was afraid that he might have offended her. She went on:

"What lucky chance has brought you here?"

He did not know what reply to make; and, after a slight chuckle, which
gave him time for reflection:

"If I told you, would you believe me?"

"Why not?"

Frederick informed her that he had had a frightful dream a few nights
before.

"I dreamt that you were seriously ill--near dying."

"Oh! my husband and I are never ill."

"I have dreamt only of you," said he.

She gazed at him calmly: "Dreams are not always realised."

Frederick stammered, sought to find appropriate words to express himself
in, and then plunged into a flowing period about the affinity of souls.
There existed a force which could, through the intervening bounds of
space, bring two persons into communication with each other, make known
to each the other's feelings, and enable them to reunite.

She listened to him with downcast face, while she smiled with that
beautiful smile of hers. He watched her out of the corner of his eye
with delight, and poured out his love all the more freely through the
easy channel of a commonplace remark.

She offered to show him the works; and, as she persisted, he made no
objection.

In order to divert his attention with something of an amusing nature,
she showed him the species of museum that decorated the staircase. The
specimens, hung up against the wall or laid on shelves, bore witness to
the efforts and the successive fads of Arnoux. After seeking vainly for
the red of Chinese copper, he had wished to manufacture majolicas,
faiënce, Etruscan and Oriental ware, and had, in fact, attempted all the
improvements which were realised at a later period.

So it was that one could observe in the series big vases covered with
figures of mandarins, porringers of shot reddish-brown, pots adorned
with Arabian inscriptions, drinking-vessels in the style of the
Renaissance, and large plates on which two personages were outlined as
it were on bloodstone, in a delicate, aërial fashion. He now made
letters for signboards and wine-labels; but his intelligence was not
high enough to attain to art, nor commonplace enough to look merely to
profit, so that, without satisfying anyone, he had ruined himself.

They were both taking a view of these things when Mademoiselle Marthe
passed.

"So, then, you did not recognise him?" said her mother to her.

"Yes, indeed," she replied, bowing to him, while her clear and sceptical
glance--the glance of a virgin--seemed to say in a whisper: "What are
you coming here for?" and she rushed up the steps with her head slightly
bent over her shoulder.

Madame Arnoux led Frederick into the yard attached to the works, and
then explained to him in a grave tone how different clays were ground,
cleaned, and sifted.

"The most important thing is the preparation of pastes."

And she introduced him into a hall filled with vats, in which a vertical
axis with horizontal arms kept turning. Frederick felt some regret that
he had not flatly declined her offer a little while before.

"These things are merely the slobberings," said she.

He thought the word grotesque, and, in a measure, unbecoming on her
lips.

Wide straps ran from one end of the ceiling to the other, so as to roll
themselves round the drums, and everything kept moving continuously with
a provoking mathematical regularity.

They left the spot, and passed close to a ruined hut, which had formerly
been used as a repository for gardening implements.

"It is no longer of any use," said Madame Arnoux.

He replied in a tremulous voice:

"Happiness may have been associated with it!"

The clacking of the fire-pump drowned his words, and they entered the
workshop where rough drafts were made.

Some men, seated at a narrow table, placed each in front of himself on a
revolving disc a piece of paste. Then each man with his left hand
scooped out the insides of his own piece while smoothing its surface
with the right; and vases could be seen bursting into shape like
blossoming flowers.

Madame Arnoux had the moulds for more difficult works shown to him.

In another portion of the building, the threads, the necks, and the
projecting lines were being formed. On the floor above, they removed the
seams, and stopped up with plaster the little holes that had been left
