taking out of his escritoire two thousand francs:

"Look here, old boy, put this money in your pocket. 'Tis the balance of
my old debts to you."

"But--what about the journal?" said the advocate. "You are, of course,
aware that I spoke about it to Hussonnet."

And, when Frederick replied that he was "a little short of cash just
now," the other smiled in a sinister fashion.

After the liqueurs they drank beer, and after the beer, grog; and then
they lighted their pipes once more. At last they left, at five o'clock
in the evening, and they were walking along at each others' side without
speaking, when Dussardier broke the silence by saying that Frederick had
entertained them in excellent style. They all agreed with him on that
point.

Then Hussonnet remarked that his luncheon was too heavy. Sénécal found
fault with the trivial character of his household arrangements. Cisy
took the same view. It was absolutely devoid of the "proper stamp."

"For my part, I think," said Pellerin, "he might have had the grace to
give me an order for a picture."

Deslauriers held his tongue, as he had the bank-notes that had been
given to him in his breeches' pocket.

Frederick was left by himself. He was thinking about his friends, and it
seemed to him as if a huge ditch surrounded with shade separated him
from them. He had nevertheless held out his hand to them, and they had
not responded to the sincerity of his heart.

He recalled to mind what Pellerin and Dussardier had said about Arnoux.
Undoubtedly it must be an invention, a calumny? But why? And he had a
vision of Madame Arnoux, ruined, weeping, selling her furniture. This
idea tormented him all night long. Next day he presented himself at her
house.

At a loss to find any way of communicating to her what he had heard, he
asked her, as if in casual conversation, whether Arnoux still held
possession of his building grounds at Belleville.

"Yes, he has them still."

"He is now, I believe, a shareholder in a kaolin company in Brittany."

"That's true."

"His earthenware-works are going on very well, are they not?"

"Well--I suppose so----"

And, as he hesitated:

"What is the matter with you? You frighten me!"

He told her the story about the renewals. She hung down her head, and
said:

"I thought so!"

In fact, Arnoux, in order to make a good speculation, had refused to
sell his grounds, had borrowed money extensively on them, and finding no
purchasers, had thought of rehabilitating himself by establishing the
earthenware manufactory. The expense of this had exceeded his
calculations. She knew nothing more about it. He evaded all her
questions, and declared repeatedly that it was going on very well.

Frederick tried to reassure her. These in all probability were mere
temporary embarrassments. However, if he got any information, he would
impart it to her.

"Oh! yes, will you not?" said she, clasping her two hands with an air of
charming supplication.

So then, he had it in his power to be useful to her. He was now entering
into her existence--finding a place in her heart.

Arnoux appeared.

"Ha! how nice of you to come to take me out to dine!"

Frederick was silent on hearing these words.

Arnoux spoke about general topics, then informed his wife that he would
be returning home very late, as he had an appointment with M. Oudry.

"At his house?"

"Why, certainly, at his house."

As they went down the stairs, he confessed that, as the Maréchale had no
engagement at home, they were going on a secret pleasure-party to the
Moulin Rouge; and, as he always needed somebody to be the recipient of
his outpourings, he got Frederick to drive him to the door.

In place of entering, he walked about on the footpath, looking up at the
windows on the second floor. Suddenly the curtains parted.

"Ha! bravo! Père Oudry is no longer there! Good evening!"

Frederick did not know what to think now.

From this day forth, Arnoux was still more cordial than before; he
invited the young man to dine with his mistress; and ere long Frederick
frequented both houses at the same time.

Rosanette's abode furnished him with amusement. He used to call there of
an evening on his way back from the club or the play. He would take a
cup of tea there, or play a game of loto. On Sundays they played
charades; Rosanette, more noisy than the rest, made herself conspicuous
by funny tricks, such as running on all-fours or muffling her head in a
cotton cap. In order to watch the passers-by through the window, she had
a hat of waxed leather; she smoked chibouks; she sang Tyrolese airs. In
the afternoon, to kill time, she cut out flowers in a piece of chintz
and pasted them against the window-panes, smeared her two little dogs
with varnish, burned pastilles, or drew cards to tell her fortune.
Incapable of resisting a desire, she became infatuated about some
trinket which she happened to see, and could not sleep till she had gone
and bought it, then bartered it for another, sold costly dresses for
little or nothing, lost her jewellery, squandered money, and would have
sold her chemise for a stage-box at the theatre. Often she asked
Frederick to explain to her some word she came across when reading a
book, but did not pay any attention to his answer, for she jumped
quickly to another idea, while heaping questions on top of each other.
After spasms of gaiety came childish outbursts of rage, or else she sat
on the ground dreaming before the fire with her head down and her hands
clasping her knees, more inert than a torpid adder. Without minding it,
she made her toilet in his presence, drew on her silk stockings, then
washed her face with great splashes of water, throwing back her figure
as if she were a shivering naiad; and her laughing white teeth, her
sparkling eyes, her beauty, her gaiety, dazzled Frederick, and made his
nerves tingle under the lash of desire.

Nearly always he found Madame Arnoux teaching her little boy how to
read, or standing behind Marthe's chair while she played her scales on
the piano. When she was doing a piece of sewing, it was a great source
of delight to him to pick up her scissors now and then. In all her
movements there was a tranquil majesty. Her little hands seemed made to
scatter alms and to wipe away tears, and her voice, naturally rather
hollow, had caressing intonations and a sort of breezy lightness.

She did not display much enthusiasm about literature; but her
intelligence exercised a charm by the use of a few simple and
penetrating words. She loved travelling, the sound of the wind in the
woods, and a walk with uncovered head under the rain.

Frederick listened to these confidences with rapture, fancying that he
saw in them the beginning of a certain self-abandonment on her part.
