be unaffected by discouragements, calumnies, and insults, if she would
only say, "Ah, that is beautiful!" while drawing her light hand across
his brow.

These images flashed, like beacon-lights, on the horizon of his life.
His intellect, thereby excited, became more active and more vigorous. He
buried himself in study till the month of August, and was successful at
his final examination.

Deslauriers, who had found it so troublesome to coach him once more for
the second examination at the close of December, and for the third in
February, was astonished at his ardour. Then the great expectations of
former days returned. In ten years it was probable that Frederick would
be deputy; in fifteen a minister. Why not? With his patrimony, which
would soon come into his hands, he might, at first, start a newspaper;
this would be the opening step in his career; after that they would see
what the future would bring. As for himself, he was still ambitious of
obtaining a chair in the Law School; and he sustained his thesis for
the degree of Doctor in such a remarkable fashion that it won for him
the compliments of the professors.

Three days afterwards, Frederick took his own degree. Before leaving for
his holidays, he conceived the idea of getting up a picnic to bring to a
close their Saturday reunions.

He displayed the utmost gaiety on the occasion. Madame Arnoux was now
with her mother at Chartres. But he would soon come across her again,
and would end by being her lover.

Deslauriers, admitted the same day to the young advocates' pleading
rehearsals at Orsay, had made a speech which was greatly applauded.
Although he was sober, he drank a little more wine than was good for
him, and said to Dussardier at dessert:

"You are an honest fellow!--and, when I'm a rich man, I'll make you my
manager."

All were in a state of delight. Cisy was not going to finish his
law-course. Martinon intended to remain during the period before his
admission to the Bar in the provinces, where he would be nominated a
deputy-magistrate. Pellerin was devoting himself to the production of a
large picture representing "The Genius of the Revolution." Hussonnet
was, in the following week, about to read for the Director of Public
Amusements the scheme of a play, and had no doubt as to its success:

"As for the framework of the drama, they may leave that to me! As for
the passions, I have knocked about enough to understand them thoroughly;
and as for witticisms, they're entirely in my line!"

He gave a spring, fell on his two hands, and thus moved for some time
around the table with his legs in the air. This performance, worthy of
a street-urchin, did not get rid of Sénécal's frowns. He had just been
dismissed from the boarding-school, in which he had been a teacher, for
having given a whipping to an aristocrat's son. His straitened
circumstances had got worse in consequence: he laid the blame of this on
the inequalities of society, and cursed the wealthy. He poured out his
grievances into the sympathetic ears of Regimbart, who had become every
day more and more disillusioned, saddened, and disgusted. The Citizen
had now turned his attention towards questions arising out of the
Budget, and blamed the Court party for the loss of millions in Algeria.

As he could not sleep without having paid a visit to the Alexandre
smoking-divan, he disappeared at eleven o'clock. The rest went away some
time afterwards; and Frederick, as he was parting with Hussonnet,
learned that Madame Arnoux was to have come back the night before.

He accordingly went to the coach-office to change his time for starting
to the next day; and, at about six o'clock in the evening, presented
himself at her house. Her return, the door keeper said, had been put off
for a week. Frederick dined alone, and then lounged about the
boulevards.

Rosy clouds, scarf-like in form, stretched beyond the roofs; the
shop-tents were beginning to be taken away; water-carts were letting a
shower of spray fall over the dusty pavement; and an unexpected coolness
was mingled with emanations from cafés, as one got a glimpse through
their open doors, between some silver plate and gilt ware, of flowers in
sheaves, which were reflected in the large sheets of glass. The crowd
moved on at a leisurely pace. Groups of men were chatting in the middle
of the footpath; and women passed along with an indolent expression in
their eyes and that camelia tint in their complexions which intense heat
imparts to feminine flesh. Something immeasurable in its vastness seemed
to pour itself out and enclose the houses. Never had Paris looked so
beautiful. He saw nothing before him in the future but an interminable
series of years all full of love.

He stopped in front of the theatre of the Porte Saint-Martin to look at
the bill; and, for want of something to occupy him, paid for a seat and
went in.

An old-fashioned dramatic version of a fairy-tale was the piece on the
stage. There was a very small audience; and through the skylights of the
top gallery the vault of heaven seemed cut up into little blue squares,
whilst the stage lamps above the orchestra formed a single line of
yellow illuminations. The scene represented a slave-market at Pekin,
with hand-bells, tomtoms, sweeping robes, sharp-pointed caps, and
clownish jokes. Then, as soon as the curtain fell, he wandered into the
foyer all alone and gazed out with admiration at a large green landau
which stood on the boulevard outside, before the front steps of the
theatre, yoked to two white horses, while a coachman with short breeches
held the reins.

He had just got back to his seat when, in the balcony, a lady and a
gentleman entered the first box in front of the stage. The husband had a
pale face with a narrow strip of grey beard round it, the rosette of a
Government official, and that frigid look which is supposed to
characterise diplomatists.

His wife, who was at least twenty years younger, and who was neither
tall nor under-sized, neither ugly nor pretty, wore her fair hair in
corkscrew curls in the English fashion, and displayed a long-bodiced
dress and a large black lace fan. To make people so fashionable as these
come to the theatre at such a season one would imagine either that there
was some accidental cause, or that they had got tired of spending the
evening in one another's society. The lady kept nibbling at her fan,
while the gentleman yawned. Frederick could not recall to mind where he
had seen that face.

In the next interval between the acts, while passing through one of the
lobbies, he came face to face with both of them. As he bowed in an
undecided manner, M. Dambreuse, at once recognising him, came up and
apologised for having treated him with unpardonable neglect. It was an
allusion to the numerous visiting-cards he had sent in accordance with
the clerk's advice. However, he confused the periods, supposing that
Frederick was in the second year of his law-course. Then he said he
envied the young man for the opportunity of going into the country. He
sadly needed a little rest himself, but business kept him in Paris.

Madame Dambreuse, leaning on his arm, nodded her head slightly, and the
agreeable sprightliness of her face contrasted with its gloomy
expression a short time before.

"One finds charming diversions in it, nevertheless," she said, after her
husband's last remark. "What a stupid play that was--was it not,
Monsieur?" And all three of them remained there chatting about theatres
and new pieces.

Frederick, accustomed to the grimaces of provincial dames, had not seen
in any woman such ease of manner combined with that simplicity which is
the essence of refinement, and in which ingenuous souls trace the
expression of instantaneous sympathy.

They would expect to see him as soon as he returned. M. Dambreuse told
him to give his kind remembrances to Père Roque.

Frederick, when he reached his lodgings, did not fail to inform
Deslauriers of their hospitable invitation.

"Grand!" was the clerk's reply; "and don't let your mamma get round you!
Come back without delay!"
