Hussonnet.

"I'm quite tired of that idiot! As for officially professing opinions,
my own notion is that the most equitable and forcible position is to
have no opinions at all."

Frederick appeared astonished.

"Why, the thing is perfectly plain. It is time that politics should be
dealt with scientifically. The old men of the eighteenth century began
it when Rousseau and the men of letters introduced into the political
sphere philanthropy, poetry, and other fudge, to the great delight of
the Catholics--a natural alliance, however, since the modern reformers
(I can prove it) all believe in Revelation. But, if you sing high masses
for Poland, if, in place of the God of the Dominicans, who was an
executioner, you take the God of the Romanticists, who is an
upholsterer, if, in fact, you have not a wider conception of the
Absolute than your ancestors, Monarchy will penetrate underneath your
Republican forms, and your red cap will never be more than the headpiece
of a priest. The only difference will be that the cell system will take
the place of torture, the outrageous treatment of Religion that of
sacrilege, and the European Concert that of the Holy Alliance; and in
this beautiful order which we admire, composed of the wreckage of the
followers of Louis XIV., the last remains of the Voltaireans, with some
Imperial white-wash on top, and some fragments of the British
Constitution, you will see the municipal councils trying to give
annoyance to the Mayor, the general councils to their Prefect, the
Chambers to the King, the Press to Power, and the Administration to
everybody. But simple-minded people get enraptured about the Civil Code,
a work fabricated--let them say what they like--in a mean and tyrannical
spirit, for the legislator, in place of doing his duty to the State,
which simply means to observe customs in a regular fashion, claims to
model society like another Lycurgus. Why does the law impede fathers of
families with regard to the making of wills? Why does it place shackles
on the compulsory sale of real estate? Why does it punish as a
misdemeanour vagrancy, which ought not even to be regarded as a
technical contravention of the Code. And there are other things! I know
all about them! and so I am going to write a little novel, entitled
'The History of the Idea of Justice,' which will be amusing. But I am
infernally thirsty! And you?"

He leaned out through the window, and called to the porter to go and
fetch them two glasses of grog from the public-house over the way.

"To sum up, I see three parties--no! three groups--in none of which do I
take the slightest interest: those who have, those who have nothing, and
those who are trying to have. But all agree in their idiotic worship of
Authority! For example, Mably recommends that the philosophers should be
prevented from publishing their doctrines; M. Wronsky, the geometrician,
describes the censorship as the 'critical expression of speculative
spontaneity'; Père Enfantin gives his blessing to the Hapsburgs for
having passed a hand across the Alps in order to keep Italy down; Pierre
Leroux wishes people to be compelled to listen to an orator; and Louis
Blanc inclines towards a State religion--so much rage for government
have these vassals whom we call the people! Nevertheless, there is not a
single legitimate government, in spite of their sempiternal principles.
But 'principle' signifies 'origin.' It is always necessary to go back to
a revolution, to an act of violence, to a transitory fact. Thus, our
principle is the national sovereignty embodied in the Parliamentary
form, though the Parliament does not assent to this! But in what way
could the sovereignty of the people be more sacred than the Divine
Right? They are both fictions. Enough of metaphysics; no more phantoms!
There is no need of dogmas in order to get the streets swept! It will be
said that I am turning society upside down. Well, after all, where would
be the harm of that? It is, indeed, a nice thing--this society of
yours."

Frederick could have given many answers. But, seeing that his theories
were far less advanced than those of Sénécal, he was full of indulgence
towards Deslauriers. He contented himself with arguing that such a
system would make them generally hated.

"On the contrary, as we should have given to each party a pledge of
hatred against his neighbour, all will reckon on us. You are about to
enter into it yourself, and to furnish us with some transcendent
criticism!"

It was necessary to attack accepted ideas--the Academy, the Normal
School, the Consérvatoire, the Comédie Française, everything that
resembled an institution. It was in that way that they would give
uniformity to the doctrines taught in their review. Then, as soon as it
had been thoroughly well-established, the journal would suddenly be
converted into a daily publication. Thereupon they could find fault with
individuals.

"And they will respect us, you may be sure!"

Deslauriers touched upon that old dream of his--the position of
editor-in-chief, so that he might have the unutterable happiness of
directing others, of entirely cutting down their articles, of ordering
them to be written or declining them. His eyes twinkled under his
goggles; he got into a state of excitement, and drank a few glasses of
brandy, one after the other, in an automatic fashion.

"You'll have to stand me a dinner once a week. That's indispensable,
even though you should have to squander half your income on it. People
would feel pleasure in going to it; it would be a centre for the
others, a lever for yourself; and by manipulating public opinion at its
two ends--literature and politics--you will see how, before six months
have passed, we shall occupy the first rank in Paris."

Frederick, as he listened to Deslauriers, experienced a sensation of
rejuvenescence, like a man who, after having been confined in a room for
a long time, is suddenly transported into the open air. The enthusiasm
of his friend had a contagious effect upon him.

"Yes, I have been an idler, an imbecile--you are right!"

"All in good time," said Deslauriers. "I have found my Frederick again!"

And, holding up his jaw with closed fingers:

"Ah! you have made me suffer! Never mind, I am fond of you all the
same."

They stood there gazing into each other's faces, both deeply affected,
and were on the point of embracing each other.

A woman's cap appeared on the threshold of the anteroom.

"What brings you here?" said Deslauriers.

It was Mademoiselle Clémence, his mistress.

She replied that, as she happened to be passing, she could not resist
the desire to go in to see him, and in order that they might have a
little repast together, she had brought some cakes, which she laid on
the table.

"Take care of my papers!" said the advocate, sharply. "Besides,
this is the third time that I have forbidden you to come at my
consultation-hours."

She wished to embrace him.

"All right! Go away! Cut your stick!"

He repelled her; she heaved a great sigh.

"Ah! you are plaguing me again!"

"'Tis because I love you!"

"I don't ask you to love me, but to oblige me!"

This harsh remark stopped Clémence's tears. She took up her station
before the window, and remained there motionless, with her forehead
against the pane.

Her attitude and her silence had an irritating effect on Deslauriers.
