Hussonnet, at the lower end of the river's bank, went making ducks and
drakes over the water.

Arnoux presently returned, followed by a weather-beaten long boat, into
which, in spite of the most prudent remonstrances, he packed his
guests. The boat got upset, and they had to go ashore again.

By this time wax-tapers were burning in the drawing-room, all hung with
chintz, and with branched candlesticks of crystal fixed close to the
walls. Mère Oudry was sleeping comfortably in an armchair, and the
others were listening to M. Lefaucheux expatiating on the glories of the
Bar. Madame Arnoux was sitting by herself near the window. Frederick
came over to her.

They chatted about the remarks which were being made in their vicinity.
She admired oratory; he preferred the renown gained by authors. But, she
ventured to suggest, it must give a man greater pleasure to move crowds
directly by addressing them in person, face to face, than it does to
infuse into their souls by his pen all the sentiments that animate his
own. Such triumphs as these did not tempt Frederick much, as he had no
ambition.

Then he broached the subject of sentimental adventures. She spoke
pityingly of the havoc wrought by passion, but expressed indignation at
hypocritical vileness, and this rectitude of spirit harmonised so well
with the regular beauty of her face that it seemed indeed as if her
physical attractions were the outcome of her moral nature.

She smiled, every now and then, letting her eyes rest on him for a
minute. Then he felt her glances penetrating his soul like those great
rays of sunlight which descend into the depths of the water. He loved
her without mental reservation, without any hope of his love being
returned, unconditionally; and in those silent transports, which were
like outbursts of gratitude, he would fain have covered her forehead
with a rain of kisses. However, an inspiration from within carried him
beyond himself--he felt moved by a longing for self-sacrifice, an
imperative impulse towards immediate self-devotion, and all the stronger
from the fact that he could not gratify it.

He did not leave along with the rest. Neither did Hussonnet. They were
to go back in the carriage; and the vehicle was waiting just in front of
the steps when Arnoux rushed down and hurried into the garden to gather
some flowers there. Then the bouquet having been tied round with a
thread, as the stems fell down unevenly, he searched in his pocket,
which was full of papers, took out a piece at random, wrapped them up,
completed his handiwork with the aid of a strong pin, and then offered
it to his wife with a certain amount of tenderness.

"Look here, my darling! Excuse me for having forgotten you!"

But she uttered a little scream: the pin, having been awkwardly fixed,
had cut her, and she hastened up to her room. They waited nearly a
quarter of an hour for her. At last, she reappeared, carried off Marthe,
and threw herself into the carriage.

"And your bouquet?" said Arnoux.

"No! no--it is not worth while!" Frederick was running off to fetch it
for her; she called out to him:

"I don't want it!"

But he speedily brought it to her, saying that he had just put it into
an envelope again, as he had found the flowers lying on the floor. She
thrust them behind the leathern apron of the carriage close to the seat,
and off they started.

Frederick, seated by her side, noticed that she was trembling
frightfully. Then, when they had passed the bridge, as Arnoux was
turning to the left:

"Why, no! you are making a mistake!--that way, to the right!"

She seemed irritated; everything annoyed her. At length, Marthe having
closed her eyes, Madame Arnoux drew forth the bouquet, and flung it out
through the carriage-door, then caught Frederick's arm, making a sign to
him with the other hand to say nothing about it.

After this, she pressed her handkerchief against her lips, and sat quite
motionless.

The two others, on the dickey, kept talking about printing and about
subscribers. Arnoux, who was driving recklessly, lost his way in the
middle of the Bois de Boulogne. Then they plunged into narrow paths. The
horse proceeded along at a walking pace; the branches of the trees
grazed the hood. Frederick could see nothing of Madame Arnoux save her
two eyes in the shade. Marthe lay stretched across her lap while he
supported the child's head.

"She is tiring you!" said her mother.

He replied:

"No! Oh, no!"

Whirlwinds of dust rose up slowly. They passed through Auteuil. All the
houses were closed up; a gas-lamp here and there lighted up the angle of
a wall; then once more they were surrounded by darkness. At one time he
noticed that she was shedding tears.

Was this remorse or passion? What in the world was it? This grief, of
whose exact nature he was ignorant, interested him like a personal
matter. There was now a new bond between them, as if, in a sense, they
were accomplices; and he said to her in the most caressing voice he
could assume:

"You are ill?"

"Yes, a little," she returned.

The carriage rolled on, and the honeysuckles and the syringas trailed
over the garden fences, sending forth puffs of enervating odour into the
night air. Her gown fell around her feet in numerous folds. It seemed to
him as if he were in communication with her entire person through the
medium of this child's body which lay stretched between them. He stooped
over the little girl, and spreading out her pretty brown tresses, kissed
her softly on the forehead.

"You are good!" said Madame Arnoux.

"Why?"

"Because you are fond of children."

"Not all!"

He said no more, but he let his left hand hang down her side wide open,
fancying that she would follow his example perhaps, and that he would
find her palm touching his. Then he felt ashamed and withdrew it. They
soon reached the paved street. The carriage went on more quickly; the
number of gas-lights vastly increased--it was Paris. Hussonnet, in front
of the lumber-room, jumped down from his seat. Frederick waited till
they were in the courtyard before alighting; then he lay in ambush at
the corner of the Rue de Choiseul, and saw Arnoux slowly making his way
back to the boulevards.

Next morning he began working as hard as ever he could.

He saw himself in an Assize Court, on a winter's evening, at the close
of the advocates' speeches, when the jurymen are looking pale, and when
the panting audience make the partitions of the prætorium creak; and
after having being four hours speaking, he was recapitulating all his
proofs, feeling with every phrase, with every word, with every gesture,
the chopper of the guillotine, which was suspended behind him, rising
up; then in the tribune of the Chamber, an orator who bears on his lips
the safety of an entire people, drowning his opponents under his figures
of rhetoric, crushing them under a repartee, with thunders and musical
intonations in his voice, ironical, pathetic, fiery, sublime. She would
be there somewhere in the midst of the others, hiding beneath her veil
her enthusiastic tears. After that they would meet again, and he would
