
His association with these two women made, as it were, two different
strains of music in his life, the one playful, passionate, diverting,
the other grave and almost religious, and vibrating both at the same
time, they always increased in volume and gradually blended with one
another; for if Madame Arnoux happened merely to touch him with her
finger, the image of the other immediately presented itself to him as an
object of desire, because from that quarter a better opportunity was
thrown in his way, and, when his heart happened to be touched while in
Rosanette's company, he was immediately reminded of the woman for whom
he felt such a consuming passion.

This confusion was, in some measure, due to a similarity which existed
between the interiors of the two houses. One of the trunks which was
formerly to be seen in the Boulevard Montmartre now adorned Rosanette's
dining-room. The same courses were served up for dinner in both places,
and even the same velvet cap was to be found trailing over the
easy-chairs; then, a heap of little presents--screens, boxes, fans--went
to the mistress's house from the wife's and returned again, for Arnoux,
without the slightest embarrassment, often took back from the one what
he had given to her in order to make a present of it to the other.

The Maréchale laughed with Frederick at the utter disregard for
propriety which his habits exhibited. One Sunday, after dinner, she led
him behind the door, and showed him in the pocket of Arnoux's overcoat a
bag of cakes which he had just pilfered from the table, in order, no
doubt, to regale his little family with it at home. M. Arnoux gave
himself up to some rogueries which bordered on vileness. It seemed to
him a duty to practise fraud with regard to the city dues; he never paid
when he went to the theatre, or if he took a ticket for the second seats
always tried to make his way into the first; and he used to relate as
an excellent joke that it was a custom of his at the cold baths to put
into the waiters' collection-box a breeches' button instead of a
ten-sous piece--and this did not prevent the Maréchale from loving him.

One day, however, she said, while talking about him:

"Ah! he's making himself a nuisance to me, at last! I've had enough of
him! Faith, so much the better--I'll find another instead!"

Frederick believed that the other had already been found, and that his
name was M. Oudry.

"Well," said Rosanette, "what does that signify?"

Then, in a voice choked with rising tears:

"I ask very little from him, however, and he won't give me that."

He had even promised a fourth of his profits in the famous kaolin mines.
No profit made its appearance any more than the cashmere with which he
had been luring her on for the last six months.

Frederick immediately thought of making her a present. Arnoux might
regard it as a lesson for himself, and be annoyed at it.

For all that, he was good-natured, his wife herself said so, but so
foolish! Instead of bringing people to dine every day at his house, he
now entertained his acquaintances at a restaurant. He bought things that
were utterly useless, such as gold chains, timepieces, and household
articles. Madame Arnoux even pointed out to Frederick in the lobby an
enormous supply of tea-kettles, foot-warmers, and samovars. Finally, she
one day confessed that a certain matter caused her much anxiety. Arnoux
had made her sign a promissory note payable to M. Dambreuse.

Meanwhile Frederick still cherished his literary projects as if it were
a point of honour with himself to do so. He wished to write a history of
æsthetics, a result of his conversations with Pellerin; next, to write
dramas dealing with different epochs of the French Revolution, and to
compose a great comedy, an idea traceable to the indirect influence of
Deslauriers and Hussonnet. In the midst of his work her face or that of
the other passed before his mental vision. He struggled against the
longing to see her, but was not long ere he yielded to it; and he felt
sadder as he came back from Madame Arnoux's house.

One morning, while he was brooding over his melancholy thoughts by the
fireside, Deslauriers came in. The incendiary speeches of Sénécal had
filled his master with uneasiness, and once more he found himself
without resources.

"What do you want me to do?" said Frederick.

"Nothing! I know you have no money. But it will not be much trouble for
you to get him a post either through M. Dambreuse or else through
Arnoux. The latter ought to have need of engineers in his
establishment."

Frederick had an inspiration. Sénécal would be able to let him know when
the husband was away, carry letters for him and assist him on a thousand
occasions when opportunities presented themselves. Services of this sort
are always rendered between man and man. Besides, he would find means of
employing him without arousing any suspicion on his part. Chance offered
him an auxiliary; it was a circumstance that omened well for the future,
and he hastened to take advantage of it; and, with an affectation of
indifference, he replied that the thing was feasible perhaps, and that
he would devote attention to it.

And he did so at once. Arnoux took a great deal of pains with his
earthenware works. He was endeavouring to discover the copper-red of the
Chinese, but his colours evaporated in the process of baking. In order
to avoid cracks in his ware, he mixed lime with his potter's clay; but
the articles got broken for the most part; the enamel of his paintings
on the raw material boiled away; his large plates became bulged; and,
attributing these mischances to the inferior plant of his manufactory,
he was anxious to start other grinding-mills and other drying-rooms.
Frederick recalled some of these things to mind, and, when he met
Arnoux, said that he had discovered a very able man, who would be
capable of finding his famous red. Arnoux gave a jump; then, having
listened to what the young man had to tell him, replied that he wanted
assistance from nobody.

Frederick spoke in a very laudatory style about Sénécal's prodigious
attainments, pointing out that he was at the same time an engineer, a
chemist, and an accountant, being a mathematician of the first rank.

The earthenware-dealer consented to see him.

But they squabbled over the emoluments. Frederick interposed, and, at
the end of a week, succeeded in getting them to come to an agreement.

But as the works were situated at Creil, Sénécal could not assist him in
any way. This thought alone was enough to make his courage flag, as if
he had met with some misfortune. His notion was that the more Arnoux
would be kept apart from his wife the better would be his own chance
with her. Then he proceeded to make repeated apologies for Rosanette.
He referred to all the wrongs she had sustained at the other's hands,
referred to the vague threats which she had uttered a few days before,
and even spoke about the cashmere without concealing the fact that she
had accused Arnoux of avarice.

Arnoux, nettled at the word (and, furthermore, feeling some uneasiness),
brought Rosanette the cashmere, but scolded her for having made any
complaint to Frederick. When she told him that she had reminded him a
hundred times of his promise, he pretended that, owing to pressure of
business, he had forgotten all about it.

The next day Frederick presented himself at her abode, and found the
Maréchale still in bed, though it was two o'clock, with Delmar beside
her finishing a _pâté de foie gras_ at a little round table. Before he
had advanced many paces, she broke out into a cry of delight, saying: "I
have him! I have him!" Then she seized him by the ears, kissed him on
the forehead, thanked him effusively, "thee'd" and "thou'd" him, and
even wanted to make him sit down on the bed. Her fine eyes, full of
tender emotion, were sparkling with pleasure. There was a smile on her
humid mouth. Her two round arms emerged through the sleeveless opening
of her night-dress, and, from time to time, he could feel through the
cambric the well-rounded outlines of her form.

[Illustration: Then she seized him by the ears and kissed him.]

