
Then the conversation came down to contemporary events: the Spanish
marriages, the dilapidations of Rochefort, the new chapter-house of
Saint-Denis, which had led to the taxes being doubled. Nevertheless,
according to Sénécal, they were not high enough!

"And why are they paid? My God! to erect the palace for apes at the
Museum, to make showy staff-officers parade along our squares, or to
maintain a Gothic etiquette amongst the flunkeys of the Château!"

"I have read in the _Mode_," said Cisy, "that at the Tuileries ball on
the feast of Saint-Ferdinand, everyone was disguised as a miser."

"How pitiable!" said the Socialist, with a shrug of his shoulders, as if
to indicate his disgust.

"And the Museum of Versailles!" exclaimed Pellerin. "Let us talk about
it! These idiots have foreshortened a Delacroix and lengthened a Gros!
At the Louvre they have so well restored, scratched, and made a jumble
of all the canvases, that in ten years probably not one will be left. As
for the errors in the catalogue, a German has written a whole volume on
the subject. Upon my word, the foreigners are laughing at us."

"Yes, we are the laughing-stock of Europe," said Sénécal.

"'Tis because Art is conveyed in fee-simple to the Crown."

"As long as you haven't universal suffrage----"

"Allow me!"--for the artist, having been rejected at every _salon_ for
the last twenty years, was filled with rage against Power.

"Ah! let them not bother us! As for me, I ask for nothing. Only the
Chambers ought to pass enactments in the interests of Art. A chair of
æsthetics should be established with a professor who, being a practical
man as well as a philosopher, would succeed, I hope, in grouping the
multitude. You would do well, Hussonnet, to touch on this matter with a
word or two in your newspaper?"

"Are the newspapers free? are we ourselves free?" said Deslauriers in an
angry tone. "When one reflects that there might be as many as
twenty-eight different formalities to set up a boat on the river, it
makes me feel a longing to go and live amongst the cannibals! The
Government is eating us up. Everything belongs to it--philosophy, law,
the arts, the very air of heaven; and France, bereft of all energy, lies
under the boot of the gendarme and the cassock of the devil-dodger with
the death-rattle in her throat!"

The future Mirabeau thus poured out his bile in abundance. Finally he
took his glass in his right hand, raised it, and with his other arm
akimbo, and his eyes flashing:

"I drink to the utter destruction of the existing order of things--that
is to say, of everything included in the words Privilege, Monopoly,
Regulation, Hierarchy, Authority, State!"--and in a louder voice--"which
I would like to smash as I do this!" dashing on the table the beautiful
wine-glass, which broke into a thousand pieces.

They all applauded, and especially Dussardier.

The spectacle of injustices made his heart leap up with indignation.
Everything that wore a beard claimed his sympathy. He was one of those
persons who fling themselves under vehicles to relieve the horses who
have fallen. His erudition was limited to two works, one entitled
_Crimes of Kings_, and the other _Mysteries of the Vatican_. He had
listened to the advocate with open-mouthed delight. At length, unable to
stand it any longer:

"For my part, the thing I blame Louis Philippe for is abandoning the
Poles!"

"One moment!" said Hussonnet. "In the first place, Poland has no
existence; 'tis an invention of Lafayette! The Poles, as a general rule,
all belong to the Faubourg Saint-Marceau, the real ones having been
drowned with Poniatowski." In short, "he no longer gave into it;" he had
"got over all that sort of thing; it was just like the sea-serpent, the
revocation of the Edict of Nantes, and that antiquated hum-bug about the
Saint-Bartholomew massacre!"

Sénécal, while he did not defend the Poles, extolled the latest remarks
made by the men of letters. The Popes had been calumniated, inasmuch as
they, at any rate, defended the people, and he called the League "the
aurora of Democracy, a great movement in the direction of equality as
opposed to the individualism of Protestants."

Frederick was a little surprised at these views. They probably bored
Cisy, for he changed the conversation to the _tableaux vivants_ at the
Gymnase, which at that time attracted a great number of people.

Sénécal regarded them with disfavour. Such exhibitions corrupted the
daughters of the proletariat. Then, it was noticeable that they went in
for a display of shameless luxury. Therefore, he approved of the conduct
of the Bavarian students who insulted Lola Montès. In imitation of
Rousseau, he showed more esteem for the wife of a coal-porter than for
the mistress of a king.

"You don't appreciate dainties," retorted Hussonnet in a majestic tone.
And he took up the championship of ladies of this class in order to
praise Rosanette. Then, as he happened to make an allusion to the ball
at her house and to Arnoux's costume, Pellerin remarked:

"People maintain that he is becoming shaky?"

The picture-dealer had just been engaged in a lawsuit with reference to
his grounds at Belleville, and he was actually in a kaolin company in
Lower Brittany with other rogues of the same sort.

Dussardier knew more about him, for his own master, M. Moussinot, having
made enquiries about Arnoux from the banker, Oscar Lefébvre, the latter
had said in reply that he considered him by no means solvent, as he knew
about bills of his that had been renewed.

The dessert was over; they passed into the drawing-room, which was hung,
like that of the Maréchale, in yellow damask in the style of Louis XVI.

Pellerin found fault with Frederick for not having chosen in preference
the Neo-Greek style; Sénécal rubbed matches against the hangings;
Deslauriers did not make any remark.

There was a bookcase set up there, which he called "a little girl's
library." The principal contemporary writers were to be found there. It
was impossible to speak about their works, for Hussonnet immediately
began relating anecdotes with reference to their personal
characteristics, criticising their faces, their habits, their dress,
glorifying fifth-rate intellects and disparaging those of the first; and
all the while making it clear that he deplored modern decadence.

He instanced some village ditty as containing in itself alone more
poetry than all the lyrics of the nineteenth century. He went on to say
that Balzac was overrated, that Byron was effaced, and that Hugo knew
nothing about the stage.

"Why, then," said Sénécal, "have you not got the volumes of the
working-men poets?"

And M. de Cisy, who devoted his attention to literature, was astonished
at not seeing on Frederick's table some of those new physiological
studies--the physiology of the smoker, of the angler, of the man
employed at the barrier.

They went on irritating him to such an extent that he felt a longing to
shove them out by the shoulders.

"But they are making me quite stupid!" And then he drew Dussardier
aside, and wished to know whether he could do him any service.

The honest fellow was moved. He answered that his post of cashier
entirely sufficed for his wants.

After that, Frederick led Deslauriers into his own apartment, and,
