de Ville, Saint-Gervais, Saint-Louis, and Saint-Paul, rose up in front
of him amid a confused mass of roofs; and the genius of the July Column
glittered at the eastern side like a large gold star, whilst at the
other end the dome of the Tuileries showed its outlines against the sky
in one great round mass of blue. Madame Arnoux's house must be on this
side in the rear!

He went back to his bedchamber; then, throwing himself on the sofa, he
abandoned himself to a confused succession of thoughts--plans of work,
schemes for the guidance of his conduct, attempts to divine the future.
At last, in order to shake off broodings all about himself, he went out
into the open air.

He plunged at random into the Latin Quarter, usually so noisy, but
deserted at this particular time, for the students had gone back to join
their families. The huge walls of the colleges, which the silence seemed
to lengthen, wore a still more melancholy aspect. All sorts of peaceful
sounds could be heard--the flapping of wings in cages, the noise made by
the turning of a lathe, or the strokes of a cobbler's hammer; and the
old-clothes men, standing in the middle of the street, looked up at each
house fruitlessly. In the interior of a solitary café the barmaid was
yawning between her two full decanters. The newspapers were left
undisturbed on the tables of reading-rooms. In the ironing
establishments linen quivered under the puffs of tepid wind. From time
to time he stopped to look at the window of a second-hand book-shop; an
omnibus which grazed the footpath as it came rumbling along made him
turn round; and, when he found himself before the Luxembourg, he went no
further.

Occasionally he was attracted towards the boulevards by the hope of
finding there something that might amuse him. After he had passed
through dark alleys, from which his nostrils were greeted by fresh moist
odours, he reached vast, desolate, open spaces, dazzling with light, in
which monuments cast at the side of the pavement notches of black
shadow. But once more the wagons and the shops appeared, and the crowd
had the effect of stunning him, especially on Sunday, when, from the
Bastille to the Madeleine, it kept swaying in one immense flood over the
asphalt, in the midst of a cloud of dust, in an incessant clamour. He
felt disgusted at the meanness of the faces, the silliness of the talk,
and the idiotic self-satisfaction that oozed through these sweating
foreheads. However, the consciousness of being superior to these
individuals mitigated the weariness which he experienced in gazing at
them.

Every day he went to the office of _L'Art Industriel_; and in order to
ascertain when Madame Arnoux would be back, he made elaborate enquiries
about her mother. Arnoux's answer never varied--"the change for the
better was continuing"--his wife, with his little daughter, would be
returning the following week. The longer she delayed in coming back, the
more uneasiness Frederick exhibited, so that Arnoux, touched by so much
affection, brought him five or six times a week to dine at a restaurant.

In the long talks which they had together on these occasions Frederick
discovered that the picture-dealer was not a very intellectual type of
man. Arnoux might, however, take notice of his chilling manner; and now
Frederick deemed it advisable to pay back, in a small measure, his
polite attentions.

So, being anxious to do things on a good scale, the young man sold all
his new clothes to a second-hand clothes-dealer for the sum of eighty
francs, and having increased it with a hundred more francs which he had
left, he called at Arnoux's house to bring him out to dine. Regimbart
happened to be there, and all three of them set forth for Les Trois
Frères Provençaux.

The Citizen began by taking off his surtout, and, knowing that the two
others would defer to his gastronomic tastes, drew up the _menu_. But in
vain did he make his way to the kitchen to speak himself to the _chef_,
go down to the cellar, with every corner of which he was familiar, and
send for the master of the establishment, to whom he gave "a blowing
up." He was not satisfied with the dishes, the wines, or the attendance.
At each new dish, at each fresh bottle, as soon as he had swallowed the
first mouthful, the first draught, he threw down his fork or pushed his
glass some distance away from him; then, leaning on his elbows on the
tablecloth, and stretching out his arms, he declared in a loud tone that
he could no longer dine in Paris! Finally, not knowing what to put into
his mouth, Regimbart ordered kidney-beans dressed with oil, "quite
plain," which, though only a partial success, slightly appeased him.
Then he had a talk with the waiter all about the latter's predecessors
at the "Provençaux":--"What had become of Antoine? And a fellow named
Eugène? And Théodore, the little fellow who always used to attend down
stairs? There was much finer fare in those days, and Burgundy vintages
the like of which they would never see again."

Then there was a discussion as to the value of ground in the suburbs,
Arnoux having speculated in that way, and looked on it as a safe thing.
In the meantime, however, he would lie out of the interest on his money.
As he did not want to sell out at any price, Regimbart would find out
some one to whom he could let the ground; and so these two gentlemen
proceeded at the close of the dessert to make calculations with a lead
pencil.

They went out to get coffee in the smoking-divan on the ground-floor in
the Passage du Saumon. Frederick had to remain on his legs while
interminable games of billiards were being played, drenched in
innumerable glasses of beer; and he lingered on there till midnight
without knowing why, through want of energy, through sheer
senselessness, in the vague expectation that something might happen
which would give a favourable turn to his love.

When, then, would he next see her? Frederick was in a state of despair
about it. But, one evening, towards the close of November, Arnoux said
to him:

"My wife, you know, came back yesterday!"

Next day, at five o'clock, he made his way to her house. He began by
congratulating her on her mother's recovery from such a serious illness.

"Why, no! Who told you that?"

"Arnoux!"

She gave vent to a slight "Ah!" then added that she had grave fears at
first, which, however, had now been dispelled. She was seated close
beside the fire in an upholstered easy-chair. He was on the sofa, with
his hat between his knees; and the conversation was difficult to carry
on, as it was broken off nearly every minute, so he got no chance
of giving utterance to his sentiments. But, when he began to
complain of having to study legal quibbles, she answered, "Oh! I
understand--business!" and she let her face fall, buried suddenly in her
own reflections.

He was eager to know what they were, and even did not bestow a thought
on anything else. The twilight shadows gathered around them.

She rose, having to go out about some shopping; then she reappeared in a
bonnet trimmed with velvet, and a black mantle edged with minever. He
plucked up courage and offered to accompany her.

It was now so dark that one could scarcely see anything. The air was
cold, and had an unpleasant odour, owing to a heavy fog, which partially
blotted out the fronts of the houses. Frederick inhaled it with delight;
for he could feel through the wadding of his coat the form of her arm;
and her hand, cased in a chamois glove with two buttons, her little hand
which he would have liked to cover with kisses, leaned on his sleeve.
Owing to the slipperiness of the pavement, they lost their balance a
little; it seemed to him as if they were both rocked by the wind in the
midst of a cloud.

The glitter of the lamps on the boulevard brought him back to the
realities of existence. The opportunity was a good one, there was no
time to lose. He gave himself as far as the Rue de Richeliéu to declare
his love. But almost at that very moment, in front of a china-shop, she
stopped abruptly and said to him:

"We are at the place. Thanks. On Thursday--is it not?--as usual."

The dinners were now renewed; and the more visits he paid at Madame
Arnoux's, the more his love-sickness increased. The contemplation of
