house. He was received in the dining-room. The banker was seated
opposite his wife at breakfast. Beside her sat his niece, and at the
other side of the table appeared the governess, an English woman,
strongly pitted with small-pox.

M. Dambreuse invited his young friend to take his place among them, and
when he declined:

"What can I do for you? I am listening to whatever you have to say to
me."

Frederick confessed, while affecting indifference, that he had come to
make a request in behalf of one Arnoux.

"Ha! ha! the ex-picture-dealer," said the banker, with a noiseless laugh
which exposed his gums. "Oudry formerly gave security for him; he has
given a lot of trouble."

And he proceeded to read the letters and newspapers which lay close
beside him on the table.

Two servants attended without making the least noise on the floor; and
the loftiness of the apartment, which had three portières of richest
tapestry, and two white marble fountains, the polish of the
chafing-dish, the arrangement of the side-dishes, and even the rigid
folds of the napkins, all this sumptuous comfort impressed Frederick's
mind with the contrast between it and another breakfast at the Arnouxs'
house. He did not take the liberty of interrupting M. Dambreuse.

Madame noticed his embarrassment.

"Do you occasionally see our friend Martinon?"

"He will be here this evening," said the young girl in a lively tone.

"Ha! so you know him?" said her aunt, fixing on her a freezing look.

At that moment one of the men-servants, bending forward, whispered in
her ear.

"Your dressmaker, Mademoiselle--Miss John!"

And the governess, in obedience to this summons, left the room along
with her pupil.

M. Dambreuse, annoyed at the disarrangement of the chairs by this
movement, asked what was the matter.

"'Tis Madame Regimbart."

"Wait a moment! Regimbart! I know that name. I have come across his
signature."

Frederick at length broached the question. Arnoux deserved some
consideration; he was even going, for the sole purpose of fulfilling his
engagements, to sell a house belonging to his wife.

"She is considered very pretty," said Madame Dambreuse.

The banker added, with a display of good-nature:

"Are you on friendly terms with them--on intimate terms?"

Frederick, without giving an explicit reply, said that he would be very
much obliged to him if he considered the matter.

"Well, since it pleases you, be it so; we will wait. I have some time to
spare yet; suppose we go down to my office. Would you mind?"

They had finished breakfast. Madame Dambreuse bowed slightly towards
Frederick, smiling in a singular fashion, with a mixture of politeness
and irony. Frederick had no time to reflect about it, for M. Dambreuse,
as soon as they were alone:

"You did not come to get your shares?"

And, without permitting him to make any excuses:

"Well! well! 'tis right that you should know a little more about the
business."

He offered Frederick a cigarette, and began his statement.

The General Union of French Coal Mines had been constituted. All that
they were waiting for was the order for its incorporation. The mere fact
of the amalgamation had diminished the cost of superintendence, and of
manual labour, and increased the profits. Besides, the company had
conceived a new idea, which was to interest the workmen in its
undertaking. It would erect houses for them, healthful dwellings;
finally, it would constitute itself the purveyor of its _employés_, and
would have everything supplied to them at net prices.

"And they will be the gainers by it, Monsieur: there's true progress!
that's the way to reply effectively to certain Republican brawlings. We
have on our Board"--he showed the prospectus--"a peer of France, a
scholar who is a member of the Institute, a retired field-officer of
genius. Such elements reassure the timid capitalists, and appeal to
intelligent capitalists!"

The company would have in its favour the sanction of the State, then the
railways, the steam service, the metallurgical establishments, the gas
companies, and ordinary households.

"Thus we heat, we light, we penetrate to the very hearth of the humblest
home. But how, you will say to me, can we be sure of selling? By the aid
of protective laws, dear Monsieur, and we shall get them!--that is a
matter that concerns us! For my part, however, I am a downright
prohibitionist! The country before anything!"

He had been appointed a director; but he had no time to occupy himself
with certain details, amongst other things with the editing of their
publications.

"I find myself rather muddled with my authors. I have forgotten my
Greek. I should want some one who could put my ideas into shape."

And suddenly: "Will you be the man to perform those duties, with the
title of general secretary?"

Frederick did not know what reply to make.

"Well, what is there to prevent you?"

His functions would be confined to writing a report every year for the
shareholders. He would find himself day after day in communication with
the most notable men in Paris. Representing the company with the
workmen, he would ere long be worshipped by them as a natural
consequence, and by this means he would be able, later, to push him into
the General Council, and into the position of a deputy.

Frederick's ears tingled. Whence came this goodwill? He got confused in
returning thanks. But it was not necessary, the banker said, that he
should be dependent on anyone. The best course was to take some shares,
"a splendid investment besides, for your capital guarantees your
position, as your position does your capital."

"About how much should it amount to?" said Frederick.

"Oh, well! whatever you please--from forty to sixty thousand francs, I
suppose."

This sum was so trifling in M. Dambreuse's eyes, and his authority was
so great, that the young man resolved immediately to sell a farm.

He accepted the offer. M. Dambreuse was to select one of his disengaged
days for an appointment in order to finish their arrangements.

"So I can say to Jacques Arnoux----?"

"Anything you like--the poor chap--anything you like!"
