immense kiss.

But, close to him, on the other side of the door, was
Pellerin--Pellerin, in full dress, his left arm over his breast and with
his hat and a torn white glove in his right.

"Halloa! 'Tis a long time since we saw you! Where the deuce have you
been? Gone to travel in Italy? 'Tis a commonplace country enough--Italy,
eh? not so unique as people say it is? No matter! Will you bring me your
sketches one of these days?"

And, without giving him time to answer, the artist began talking about
himself. He had made considerable progress, having definitely satisfied
himself as to the stupidity of the line. We ought not to look so much
for beauty and unity in a work as for character and diversity of
subject.

"For everything exists in nature; therefore, everything is legitimate;
everything is plastic. It is only a question of catching the note, mind
you! I have discovered the secret." And giving him a nudge, he repeated
several times, "I have discovered the secret, you see! just look at that
little woman with the head-dress of a sphinx who is dancing with a
Russian postilion--that's neat, dry, fixed, all in flats and in stiff
tones--indigo under the eyes, a patch of vermilion on the cheek, and
bistre on the temples--pif! paf!" And with his thumb he drew, as it
were, pencil-strokes in the air. "Whilst the big one over there," he
went on, pointing towards a fishwife in a cherry gown with a gold cross
hanging from her neck, and a lawn fichu fastened round her shoulders,
"is nothing but curves. The nostrils are spread out just like the
borders of her cap; the corners of the mouth are rising up; the chin
sinks: all is fleshy, melting, abundant, tranquil, and sunshiny--a true
Rubens! Nevertheless, they are both perfect! Where, then, is the type?"
He grew warm with the subject. "What is this but a beautiful woman? What
is it but the beautiful? Ah! the beautiful--tell me what that is----"

Frederick interrupted him to enquire who was the merry-andrew with the
face of a he-goat, who was in the very act of blessing all the dancers
in the middle of a pastourelle.

"Oh! he's not much!--a widower, the father of three boys. He leaves them
without breeches, spends his whole day at the club, and lives with the
servant!"

"And who is that dressed like a bailiff talking in the recess of the
window to a Marquise de Pompadour?"

"The Marquise is Mademoiselle Vandael, formerly an actress at the
Gymnase, the mistress of the Doge, the Comte de Palazot. They have now
been twenty years living together--nobody can tell why. Had she fine
eyes at one time, this woman? As for the citizen by her side, his name
is Captain d'Herbigny, an old man of the hurdy-gurdy sort that you can
play on, with nothing in the world except his Cross of the Legion of
Honour and his pension. He passes for the uncle of the grisettes at
festival times, arranges duels, and dines in the city."

"A rascal?" said Frederick.

"No! an honest man!"

"Ha!"

The artist was going on to mention the names of many others, when,
perceiving a gentleman who, like Molière's physician, wore a big black
serge gown opening very wide as it descended in order to display all his
trinkets:

"The person who presents himself there before you is Dr. Des Rogis, who,
full of rage at not having made a name for himself, has written a book
of medical pornography, and willingly blacks people's boots in society,
while he is at the same time discreet. These ladies adore him. He and
his wife (that lean châtelaine in the grey dress) trip about together at
every public place--aye, and at other places too. In spite of domestic
embarrassments, they have a _day_--artistic teas, at which verses are
recited. Attention!"

In fact, the doctor came up to them at that moment; and soon they formed
all three, at the entrance to the drawing-room, a group of talkers,
which was presently augmented by Hussonnet, then by the lover of the
female savage, a young poet who displayed, under a court cloak of
Francis I.'s reign, the most pitiful of anatomies, and finally a
sprightly youth disguised as a Turk of the barrier. But his vest with
its yellow galloon had taken so many voyages on the backs of strolling
dentists, his wide trousers full of creases, were of so faded a red, his
turban, rolled about like an eel in the Tartar fashion, was so poor in
appearance--in short, his entire costume was so wretched and made-up,
that the women did not attempt to hide their disgust. The doctor
consoled him by pronouncing eulogies on his mistress, the lady in the
dress of a 'longshorewoman. This Turk was a banker's son.

Between two quadrilles, Rosanette advanced towards the mantelpiece,
where an obese little old man, in a maroon coat with gold buttons, had
seated himself in an armchair. In spite of his withered cheeks, which
fell over his white cravat, his hair, still fair, and curling naturally
like that of a poodle, gave him a certain frivolity of aspect.

She was listening to him with her face bent close to his. Presently, she
accommodated him with a little glass of syrup; and nothing could be more
dainty than her hands under their laced sleeves, which passed over the
facings of her green coat. When the old man had swallowed it, he kissed
them.

"Why, that's M. Oudry, a neighbor of Arnoux!"

"He has lost her!" said Pellerin, smiling.

A Longjumeau postilion caught her by the waist. A waltz was beginning.
Then all the women, seated round the drawing-room on benches, rose up
quickly at the same time; and their petticoats, their scarfs, and their
head-dresses went whirling round.

They whirled so close to him that Frederick could notice the beads of
perspiration on their foreheads; and this gyral movement, more and more
lively, regular, provocative of dizzy sensations, communicated to his
mind a sort of intoxication, which made other images surge up within it,
while every woman passed with the same dazzling effect, and each of them
with a special kind of exciting influence, according to her style of
beauty.

The Polish lady, surrendering herself in a languorous fashion, inspired
him with a longing to clasp her to his heart while they were both
spinning forward on a sledge along a plain covered with snow. Horizons
of tranquil voluptuousness in a châlet at the side of a lake opened out
under the footsteps of the Swiss girl, who waltzed with her bust erect
and her eyelashes drooping. Then, suddenly, the Bacchante, bending back
her head with its dark locks, made him dream of devouring caresses in a
wood of oleanders, in the midst of a storm, to the confused
accompaniment of tabours. The fishwife, who was panting from the
rapidity of the music, which was far too great for her, gave vent to
bursts of laughter; and he would have liked, while drinking with her in
some tavern in the "Porcherons,"[] to rumple her fichu with both
hands, as in the good old times. But the 'longshorewoman, whose light
toes barely skimmed the floor, seemed to conceal under the suppleness of
her limbs and the seriousness of her face all the refinements of modern
love, which possesses the exactitude of a science and the mobility of a
bird. Rosanette was whirling with arms akimbo; her wig, in an awkward
position, bobbing over her collar, flung iris-powder around her; and, at
every turn, she was near catching hold of Frederick with the ends of her
gold spurs.

[Footnote : The "Porcherons" was the name given to an old quarter of
Paris famous for its taverns, situated between the Rue du Faubourg
Montmartre and the Rue de Saint-Lazare.--Translator.]

During the closing bar of the waltz, Mademoiselle Vatnaz made her
appearance. She had an Algerian handkerchief on her head, a number of
piastres on her forehead, antimony at the edges of her eyes, with a kind
of paletot made of black cashmere falling over a petticoat of sparkling
colour, with stripes of silver; and in her hand she held a tambourine.

Behind her back came a tall fellow in the classical costume of Dante,
