
Martinon, at the foot of the stairs, was lighting a cigar, and, as he
puffed it, he presented such a heavy profile that his companion allowed
this remark to escape from him:

"Upon my word, you have a fine head!"

"It has turned a few other heads," replied the young magistrate, with an
air of mingled self-complacency and annoyance.

As soon as Frederick was in bed, he summed up the main features of the
evening party. In the first place, his own toilet (he had looked at
himself several times in the mirrors), from the cut of his coat to the
knot of his pumps left nothing to find fault with. He had spoken to
influential men, and seen wealthy ladies at close quarters. M. Dambreuse
had shown himself to be an admirable type of man, and Madame Dambreuse
an almost bewitching type of woman. He weighed one by one her slightest
words, her looks, a thousand things incapable of being analysed. It
would be a right good thing to have such a mistress. And, after all, why
should he not? He would have as good a chance with her as any other man.
Perhaps she was not so hard to win? Then Martinon came back to his
recollection; and, as he fell asleep, he smiled with pity for this
worthy fellow.

He woke up with the thought of the Maréchale in his mind. Those words of
her note, "After to-morrow evening," were in fact an appointment for the
very same day.

He waited until nine o'clock, and then hurried to her house.

Some one who had been going up the stairs before him shut the door. He
rang the bell; Delphine came out and told him that "Madame" was not
there.

Frederick persisted, begging of her to admit him. He had something of a
very serious nature to communicate to her; only a word would suffice. At
length, the hundred-sous-piece argument proved successful, and the maid
let him into the anteroom.

Rosanette appeared. She was in a negligée, with her hair loose, and,
shaking her head, she waved her arms when she was some paces away from
him to indicate that she could not receive him now.

Frederick descended the stairs slowly. This caprice was worse than any
of the others she had indulged in. He could not understand it at all.

In front of the porter's lodge Mademoiselle Vatnaz stopped him.

"Has she received you?"

"No."

"You've been put out?"

"How do you know that?"

"'Tis quite plain. But come on; let us go away. I am suffocating!"

She made him accompany her along the street; she panted for breath; he
could feel her thin arm trembling on his own. Suddenly, she broke out:

"Ah! the wretch!"

"Who, pray?"

"Why, he--he--Delmar!"

This revelation humiliated Frederick. He next asked:

"Are you quite sure of it?"

"Why, when I tell you I followed him!" exclaimed the Vatnaz. "I saw him
going in! Now do you understand? I ought to have expected it for that
matter--'twas I, in my stupidity, that introduced him to her. And if you
only knew all; my God! Why, I picked him up, supported him, clothed him!
And then all the paragraphs I got into the newspapers about him! I loved
him like a mother!"

Then, with a sneer:

"Ha! Monsieur wants velvet robes! You may be sure 'tis a speculation on
his part. And as for her!--to think that I knew her to earn her living
as a seamstress! If it were not for me, she would have fallen into the
mire twenty times over! But I will plunge her into it yet! I'll see her
dying in a hospital--and everything about her will be known!"

And, like a torrent of dirty water from a vessel full of refuse, her
rage poured out in a tumultuous fashion into Frederick's ear the recital
of her rival's disgraceful acts.

"She lived with Jumillac, with Flacourt, with little Allard, with
Bertinaux, with Saint-Valéry, the pock-marked fellow! No, 'twas the
other! They are two brothers--it makes no difference. And when she was
in difficulties, I settled everything. She is so avaricious! And then,
you will agree with me, 'twas nice and kind of me to go to see her, for
we are not persons of the same grade! Am I a fast woman--I? Do I sell
myself? Without taking into account that she is as stupid as a head of
cabbage. She writes 'category' with a 'th.' After all, they are well
met. They make a precious couple, though he styles himself an artist and
thinks himself a man of genius. But, my God! if he had only
intelligence, he would not have done such an infamous thing! Men don't,
as a rule, leave a superior woman for a hussy! What do I care about him
after all? He is becoming ugly. I hate him! If I met him, mind you, I'd
spit in his face." She spat out as she uttered the words.

"Yes, this is what I think about him now. And Arnoux, eh? Isn't it
abominable? He has forgiven her so often! You can't conceive the
sacrifices he has made for her. She ought to kiss his feet! He is so
generous, so good!"

Frederick was delighted at hearing Delmar disparaged. He had taken sides
with Arnoux. This perfidy on Rosanette's part seemed to him an abnormal
and inexcusable thing; and, infected with this elderly spinster's
emotion, he felt a sort of tenderness towards her. Suddenly he found
himself in front of Arnoux's door. Mademoiselle Vatnaz, without his
attention having been drawn to it, had led him down towards the Rue
Poissonnière.

"Here we are!" said she. "As for me, I can't go up; but you, surely
there is nothing to prevent you?"

"From doing what?"

"From telling him everything, faith!"

Frederick, as if waking up with a start, saw the baseness towards which
she was urging him.

"Well?" she said after a pause.

He raised his eyes towards the second floor. Madame Arnoux's lamp was
burning. In fact there was nothing to prevent him from going up.

"I am going to wait for you here. Go on, then!"

This direction had the effect of chilling him, and he said:

"I shall be a long time up there; you would do better to return home. I
will call on you to-morrow."

"No, no!" replied the Vatnaz, stamping with her foot. "Take him with
you! Bring him there! Let him catch them together!"

"But Delmar will no longer be there."

She hung down her head.

"Yes; that's true, perhaps."

And she remained without speaking in the middle of the street, with
