
Frederick wrote to the Arnouxs' to make their minds easy, and he
despatched the letter by a man-servant, who brought back the letter:
"All right!" His action in the matter deserved better recognition. He
expected a visit, or, at least, a letter. He did not receive a visit,
and no letter arrived.

Was it forgetfulness on their part, or was it intentional? Since Madame
Arnoux had come once, what was to prevent her from coming again? The
species of confidence, of avowal, of which she had made him the
recipient on the occasion, was nothing better, then, than a manoeuvre
which she had executed through interested motives.

"Are they playing on me? and is she an accomplice of her husband?" A
sort of shame, in spite of his desire, prevented him from returning to
their house.

One morning (three weeks after their interview), M. Dambreuse wrote to
him, saying that he expected him the same day in an hour's time.

On the way, the thought of Arnoux oppressed him once more, and, not
having been able to discover any reason for his conduct, he was seized
with a feeling of wretchedness, a melancholy presentiment. In order to
shake it off, he hailed a cab, and drove to the Rue de Paradis.

Arnoux was away travelling.

"And Madame?"

"In the country, at the works."

"When is Monsieur coming back?"

"To-morrow, without fail."

He would find her alone; this was the opportune moment. Something
imperious seemed to cry out in the depths of his consciousness: "Go,
then, and meet her!"

But M. Dambreuse? "Ah! well, so much the worse. I'll say that I was
ill."

He rushed to the railway-station, and, as soon as he was in the
carriage:

"Perhaps I have done wrong. Pshaw! what does it matter?"

Green plains stretched out to the right and to the left. The train
rolled on. The little station-houses glistened like stage-scenery, and
the smoke of the locomotive kept constantly sending forth on the same
side its big fleecy masses, which danced for a little while on the
grass, and were then dispersed.

Frederick, who sat alone in his compartment, gazed at these objects
through sheer weariness, lost in that languor which is produced by the
very excess of impatience. But cranes and warehouses presently appeared.
They had reached Creil.

The town, built on the slopes of two low-lying hills (the first of which
was bare, and the second crowned by a wood), with its church-tower, its
houses of unequal size, and its stone bridge, seemed to him to present
an aspect of mingled gaiety, reserve, and propriety. A long flat barge
descended to the edge of the water, which leaped up under the lash of
the wind.

Fowl perched on the straw at the foot of the crucifix erected on the
spot; a woman passed with some wet linen on her head.

After crossing the bridge, he found himself in an isle, where he beheld
on his right the ruins of an abbey. A mill with its wheels revolving
barred up the entire width of the second arm of the Oise, over which the
manufactory projected. Frederick was greatly surprised by the imposing
character of this structure. He felt more respect for Arnoux on account
of it. Three paces further on, he turned up an alley, which had a
grating at its lower end.

He went in. The door-keeper called him back, exclaiming:

"Have you a permit?"

"For what purpose?"

"For the purpose of visiting the establishment."

Frederick said in a rather curt tone that he had come to see M. Arnoux.

"Who is M. Arnoux?"

"Why, the chief, the master, the proprietor, in fact!"

"No, monsieur! These are MM. Leboeuf and Milliet's works!"

The good woman was surely joking! Some workmen arrived; he came up and
spoke to two or three of them. They gave the same response.

Frederick left the premises, staggering like a drunken man; and he had
such a look of perplexity, that on the Pont de la Boucherie an
inhabitant of the town, who was smoking his pipe, asked whether he
wanted to find out anything. This man knew where Arnoux's manufactory
was. It was situated at Montataire.

Frederick asked whether a vehicle was to be got. He was told that the
only place where he could find one was at the station. He went back
there. A shaky-looking calash, to which was yoked an old horse, with
torn harness hanging over the shafts, stood all alone in front of the
luggage office. An urchin who was looking on offered to go and find Père
Pilon. In ten minutes' time he came back, and announced that Père Pilon
was at his breakfast. Frederick, unable to stand this any longer, walked
away. But the gates of the thoroughfare across the line were closed. He
would have to wait till two trains had passed. At last, he made a dash
into the open country.

The monotonous greenery made it look like the cover of an immense
billiard-table. The scoriæ of iron were ranged on both sides of the
track, like heaps of stones. A little further on, some factory chimneys
were smoking close beside each other. In front of him, on a round
hillock, stood a little turreted château, with the quadrangular belfry
of a church. At a lower level, long walls formed irregular lines past
the trees; and, further down again, the houses of the village spread
out.

They had only a single story, with staircases consisting of three steps
made of uncemented blocks. Every now and then the bell in front of a
grocery-shop could be heard tinkling. Heavy steps sank into the black
mire, and a light shower was falling, which cut the pale sky with a
thousand hatchings.

Frederick pursued his way along the middle of the street. Then, he saw
on his left, at the opening of a pathway, a large wooden arch, whereon
was traced, in letters of gold, the word "Faïences."

It was not without an object that Jacques Arnoux had selected the
vicinity of Creil. By placing his works as close as possible to the
other works (which had long enjoyed a high reputation), he had created a
certain confusion in the public mind, with a favourable result so far as
his own interests were concerned.

The main body of the building rested on the same bank of a river which
flows through the meadowlands. The master's house, surrounded by a
garden, could be distinguished by the steps in front of it, adorned with
four vases, in which cactuses were bristling.

Heaps of white clay were drying under sheds. There were others in the
open air; and in the midst of the yard stood Sénécal with his
everlasting blue paletot lined with red.

The ex-tutor extended towards Frederick his cold hand.

"You've come to see the master? He's not there."

