vehicles all around her; then, fixing on him her wild-cat's eyes:

"I may rely on you, may I not? There is now a sacred bond between us. Do
what you say, then; we'll talk about it to-morrow."

Frederick, in passing through the lobby, heard two voices responding to
one another.

Madame Arnoux's voice was saying:

"Don't lie! don't lie, pray!"

He went in. The voices suddenly ceased.

Arnoux was walking from one end of the apartment to the other, and
Madame was seated on the little chair near the fire, extremely pale and
staring straight before her. Frederick stepped back, and was about to
retire, when Arnoux grasped his hand, glad that some one had come to his
rescue.

"But I am afraid----" said Frederick.

"Stay here, I beg of you!" he whispered in his ear.

Madame remarked:

"You must make some allowance for this scene, Monsieur Moreau. Such
things sometimes unfortunately occur in households."

"They do when we introduce them there ourselves," said Arnoux in a jolly
tone. "Women have crotchets, I assure you. This, for instance, is not a
bad one--see! No; quite the contrary. Well, she has been amusing
herself for the last hour by teasing me with a heap of idle stories."

"They are true," retorted Madame Arnoux, losing patience; "for, in fact,
you bought it yourself."

"I?"

"Yes, you yourself, at the Persian House."

"The cashmere," thought Frederick.

He was filled with a consciousness of guilt, and got quite alarmed.

She quickly added:

"It was on Saturday, the fourteenth."

"The fourteenth," said Arnoux, looking up, as if he were searching in
his mind for a date.

"And, furthermore, the clerk who sold it to you was a fair-haired young
man."

"How could I remember what sort of man the clerk was?"

"And yet it was at your dictation he wrote the address,  Rue de
Laval."

"How do you know?" said Arnoux in amazement.

She shrugged her shoulders.

"Oh! 'tis very simple: I went to get my cashmere altered, and the
superintendent of the millinery department told me that they had just
sent another of the same sort to Madame Arnoux."

"Is it my fault if there is a Madame Arnoux in the same street?"

"Yes; but not Jacques Arnoux," she returned.

Thereupon, he began to talk in an incoherent fashion, protesting that he
was innocent. It was some misapprehension, some accident, one of those
things that happen in some way that is utterly unaccountable. Men should
not be condemned on mere suspicion, vague probabilities; and he
referred to the case of the unfortunate Lesurques.

"In short, I say you are mistaken. Do you want me to take my oath on
it?"

"'Tis not worth while."

"Why?"

She looked him straight in the face without saying a word, then
stretched out her hand, took down the little silver chest from the
mantelpiece, and handed him a bill which was spread open.

Arnoux coloured up to his ears, and his swollen and distorted features
betrayed his confusion.

"But," he said in faltering tones, "what does this prove?"

"Ah!" she said, with a peculiar ring in her voice, in which sorrow and
irony were blended. "Ah!"

Arnoux held the bill in his hands, and turned it round without removing
his eyes from it, as if he were going to find in it the solution of a
great problem.

"Ah! yes, yes; I remember," said he at length. "'Twas a commission. You
ought to know about that matter, Frederick." Frederick remained silent.
"A commission that Père Oudry entrusted to me."

"And for whom?"

"For his mistress."

"For your own!" exclaimed Madame Arnoux, springing to her feet and
standing erect before him.

"I swear to you!"

"Don't begin over again. I know everything."

"Ha! quite right. So you're spying on me!"

She returned coldly:

"Perhaps that wounds your delicacy?"

"Since you are in a passion," said Arnoux, looking for his hat, "and
can't be reasoned with----"

Then, with a big sigh:

"Don't marry, my poor friend, don't, if you take my advice!"

And he took himself off, finding it absolutely necessary to get into the
open air.

Then there was a deep silence, and it seemed as if everything in the
room had become more motionless than before. A luminous circle above the
lamp whitened the ceiling, while at the corners stretched out bits of
shade resembling pieces of black gauze placed on top of one another. The
ticking of the clock and the crackling of the fire were the only sounds
that disturbed the stillness.

Madame Arnoux had just seated herself in the armchair at the opposite
side of the chimney-piece. She bit her lip and shivered. She drew her
hands up to her face; a sob broke from her, and she began to weep.

He sat down on the little couch, and in the soothing tone in which one
addresses a sick person:

"You don't suspect me of having anything to do with----?"

She made no reply. But, continuing presently to give utterance to her
own thoughts:
