terrified glances on her right hand, she kept rubbing it, saying:

"Always a spot!"

At last a doctor was brought, who directed that she should be kept free
from violent emotions.

The townsfolk saw in this only an unfavourable prognostic for her
morals. It was said that "young Moreau" wished to make an actress of her
later.

Soon another event became the subject of discussion--namely, the arrival
of uncle Barthélemy. Madame Moreau gave up her sleeping-apartment to
him, and was so gracious as to serve up meat to him on fast-days.

The old man was not very agreeable. He was perpetually making
comparisons between Havre and Nogent, the air of which he considered
heavy, the bread bad, the streets ill-paved, the food indifferent, and
the inhabitants very lazy. "How wretched trade is with you in this
place!" He blamed his deceased brother for his extravagance, pointing
out by way of contrast that he had himself accumulated an income of
twenty-seven thousand livres a year. At last, he left at the end of the
week, and on the footboard of the carriage gave utterance to these by no
means reassuring words:

"I am always very glad to know that you are in a good position."

"You will get nothing," said Madame Moreau as they re-entered the
dining-room.

He had come only at her urgent request, and for eight days she had been
seeking, on her part, for an opening--only too clearly perhaps. She
repented now of having done so, and remained seated in her armchair with
her head bent down and her lips tightly pressed together. Frederick sat
opposite, staring at her; and they were both silent, as they had been
five years before on his return home by the Montereau steamboat. This
coincidence, which presented itself even to her mind, recalled Madame
Arnoux to his recollection.

At that moment the crack of a whip outside the window reached their
ears, while a voice was heard calling out to him.

It was Père Roque, who was alone in his tilted cart. He was going to
spend the whole day at La Fortelle with M. Dambreuse, and cordially
offered to drive Frederick there.

"You have no need of an invitation as long as you are with me. Don't be
afraid!"

Frederick felt inclined to accept this offer. But how would he explain
his fixed sojourn at Nogent? He had not a proper summer suit. Finally,
what would his mother say? He accordingly decided not to go.

From that time, their neighbour exhibited less friendliness. Louise was
growing tall; Madame Éléonore fell dangerously ill; and the intimacy
broke off, to the great delight of Madame Moreau, who feared lest her
son's prospects of being settled in life might be affected by
association with such people.

She was thinking of purchasing for him the registrarship of the Court of
Justice. Frederick raised no particular objection to this scheme. He now
accompanied her to mass; in the evening he took a hand in a game of "all
fours." He became accustomed to provincial habits of life, and allowed
himself to slide into them; and even his love had assumed a character of
mournful sweetness, a kind of soporific charm. By dint of having poured
out his grief in his letters, mixed it up with everything he read, given
full vent to it during his walks through the country, he had almost
exhausted it, so that Madame Arnoux was for him, as it were, a dead
woman whose tomb he wondered that he did not know, so tranquil and
resigned had his affection for her now become.

One day, the th of December, , about nine o'clock in the morning,
the cook brought up a letter to his room. The address, which was in big
characters, was written in a hand he was not acquainted with; and
Frederick, feeling sleepy, was in no great hurry to break the seal. At
length, when he did so, he read:

    "Justice of the Peace at Havre,
     rd Arrondissement.

"MONSIEUR,--Monsieur Moreau, your uncle, having died intestate----"

He had fallen in for the inheritance! As if a conflagration had burst
out behind the wall, he jumped out of bed in his shirt, with his feet
bare. He passed his hand over his face, doubting the evidence of his own
eyes, believing that he was still dreaming, and in order to make his
mind more clearly conscious of the reality of the event, he flung the
window wide open.

There had been a fall of snow; the roofs were white, and he even
recognised in the yard outside a washtub which had caused him to stumble
after dark the evening before.

He read the letter over three times in succession. Could there be
anything more certain? His uncle's entire fortune! A yearly income of
twenty-seven thousand livres![] And he was overwhelmed with frantic joy
at the idea of seeing Madame Arnoux once more. With the vividness of a
hallucination he saw himself beside her, at her house, bringing her some
present in silver paper, while at the door stood a tilbury--no, a
brougham rather!--a black brougham, with a servant in brown livery. He
could hear his horse pawing the ground and the noise of the curb-chain
mingling with the rippling sound of their kisses. And every day this was
renewed indefinitely. He would receive them in his own house: the
dining-room would be furnished in red leather; the boudoir in yellow
silk; sofas everywhere! and such a variety of whatnots, china vases, and
carpets! These images came in so tumultuous a fashion into his mind that
he felt his head turning round. Then he thought of his mother; and he
descended the stairs with the letter in his hand.

[Footnote : About £,.--Translator.]

Madame Moreau made an effort to control her emotion, but could not keep
herself from swooning. Frederick caught her in his arms and kissed her
on the forehead.

"Dear mother, you can now buy back your carriage--laugh then! shed no
more tears! be happy!"

[Illustration: Laugh then! shed no more tears! be happy!]

Ten minutes later the news had travelled as far as the faubourgs. Then
M. Benoist, M. Gamblin, M. Chambion, and other friends hurried towards
the house. Frederick got away for a minute in order to write to
Deslauriers. Then other visitors turned up. The afternoon passed in
congratulations. They had forgotten all about "Roque's wife," who,
however, was declared to be "very low."

When they were alone, the same evening, Madame Moreau said to her son
that she would advise him to set up as an advocate at Troyes. As he was
better known in his own part of the country than in any other, he might
more easily find there a profitable connection.

"Ah, it is too hard!" exclaimed Frederick. He had scarcely grasped his
good fortune in his hands when he longed to carry it to Madame Arnoux.
He announced his express determination to live in Paris.

"And what are you going to do there?"

"Nothing!"

Madame Moreau, astonished at his manner, asked what he intended to
become.

"A minister," was Frederick's reply. And he declared that he was not at
all joking, that he meant to plunge at once into diplomacy, and that his
studies and his instincts impelled him in that direction. He would first
enter the Council of State under M. Dambreuse's patronage.

"So then, you know him?"

