Frederick declared that his own life in the same way was a failure.

He was still a young man, however. Why should he despair? And she gave
him good advice: "Work! and marry!" He answered her with bitter smiles;
for in place of giving utterance to the real cause of his grief, he
pretended that it was of a different character, a sublime feeling, and
he assumed the part of an Antony to some extent, the man accursed by
fate--language which did not, however, change very materially the
complexion of his thoughts.

For certain men action becomes more difficult as desire becomes
stronger. They are embarrassed by self-distrust, and terrified by the
fear of making themselves disliked. Besides, deep attachments resemble
virtuous women: they are afraid of being discovered, and pass through
life with downcast eyes.

Though he was now better acquainted with Madame Arnoux (for that very
reason perhaps), he was still more faint-hearted than before. Each
morning he swore in his own mind that he would take a bold course. He
was prevented from doing so by an unconquerable feeling of bashfulness;
and he had no example to guide him, inasmuch as she was different from
other women. From the force of his dreams, he had placed her outside the
ordinary pale of humanity. At her side he felt himself of less
importance in the world than the sprigs of silk that escaped from her
scissors.

Then he thought of some monstrous and absurd devices, such as surprises
at night, with narcotics and false keys--anything appearing easier to
him than to face her disdain.

Besides, the children, the two servant-maids, and the relative position
of the rooms caused insurmountable obstacles. So then he made up his
mind to possess her himself alone, and to bring her to live with him
far away in the depths of some solitude. He even asked himself what lake
would be blue enough, what seashore would be delightful enough for her,
whether it would be in Spain, Switzerland, or the East; and expressly
fixing on days when she seemed more irritated than usual, he told her
that it would be necessary for her to leave the house, to find out some
ground to justify such a step, and that he saw no way out of it but a
separation. However, for the sake of the children whom she loved, she
would never resort to such an extreme course. So much virtue served to
increase his respect for her.

He spent each afternoon in recalling the visit he had paid the night
before, and in longing for the evening to come in order that he might
call again. When he did not dine with them, he posted himself about nine
o'clock at the corner of the street, and, as soon as Arnoux had slammed
the hall-door behind him, Frederick quickly ascended the two flights of
stairs, and asked the servant-girl in an ingenuous fashion:

"Is Monsieur in?"

Then he would exhibit surprise at finding that Arnoux was gone out.

The latter frequently came back unexpectedly. Then Frederick had to
accompany him to the little café in the Rue Sainte-Anne, which Regimbart
now frequented.

The Citizen began by giving vent to some fresh grievance which he had
against the Crown. Then they would chat, pouring out friendly abuse on
one another, for the earthenware manufacturer took Regimbart for a
thinker of a high order, and, vexed at seeing him neglecting so many
chances of winning distinction, teased the Citizen about his laziness.
It seemed to Regimbart that Arnoux was a man full of heart and
imagination, but decidedly of lax morals, and therefore he was quite
unceremonious towards a personage he respected so little, refusing even
to dine at his house on the ground that "such formality was a bore."

Sometimes, at the moment of parting, Arnoux would be seized with hunger.
He found it necessary to order an omelet or some roasted apples; and, as
there was never anything to eat in the establishment, he sent out for
something. They waited. Regimbart did not leave, and ended by consenting
in a grumbling fashion to have something himself. He was nevertheless
gloomy, for he remained for hours seated before a half-filled glass. As
Providence did not regulate things in harmony with his ideas, he was
becoming a hypochondriac, no longer cared even to read the newspapers,
and at the mere mention of England's name began to bellow with rage. On
one occasion, referring to a waiter who attended on him carelessly, he
exclaimed:

"Have we not enough of insults from the foreigner?"

Except at these critical periods he remained taciturn, contemplating "an
infallible stroke of business that would burst up the whole shop."

Whilst he was lost in these reflections, Arnoux in a monotonous voice
and with a slight look of intoxication, related incredible anecdotes in
which he always shone himself, owing to his assurance; and Frederick
(this was, no doubt, due to some deep-rooted resemblances) felt more or
less attracted towards him. He reproached himself for this weakness,
believing that on the contrary he ought to hate this man.

Arnoux, in Frederick's presence, complained of his wife's ill-temper,
her obstinacy, her unjust accusations. She had not been like this in
former days.

"If I were you," said Frederick, "I would make her an allowance and live
alone."

Arnoux made no reply; and the next moment he began to sound her praises.
She was good, devoted, intelligent, and virtuous; and, passing to her
personal beauty, he made some revelations on the subject with the
thoughtlessness of people who display their treasures at taverns.

His equilibrium was disturbed by a catastrophe.

He had been appointed one of the Board of Superintendence in a kaolin
company. But placing reliance on everything that he was told, he had
signed inaccurate reports and approved, without verification, of the
annual inventories fraudulently prepared by the manager. The company had
now failed, and Arnoux, being legally responsible, was, along with the
others who were liable under the guaranty, condemned to pay damages,
which meant a loss to him of thirty thousand francs, not to speak of the
costs of the judgment.

Frederick read the report of the case in a newspaper, and at once
hurried off to the Rue de Paradis.

He was ushered into Madame's apartment. It was breakfast-time. A round
table close to the fire was covered with bowls of _café au lait_.
Slippers trailed over the carpet, and clothes over the armchairs. Arnoux
was attired in trousers and a knitted vest, with his eyes bloodshot and
his hair in disorder. Little Eugène was crying at the pain caused by an
attack of mumps, while nibbling at a slice of bread and butter. His
sister was eating quietly. Madame Arnoux, a little paler than usual, was
attending on all three of them.

"Well," said Arnoux, heaving a deep sigh, "you know all about it?"

And, as Frederick gave him a pitying look: "There, you see, I have been
the victim of my own trustfulness!"

Then he relapsed into silence, and so great was his prostration, that he
pushed his breakfast away from him. Madame Arnoux raised her eyes with a
shrug of the shoulders. He passed his hand across his forehead.

"After all, I am not guilty. I have nothing to reproach myself with.
'Tis a misfortune. It will be got over--ay, and so much the worse,
faith!"

He took a bite of a cake, however, in obedience to his wife's
entreaties.

That evening, he wished that she should go and dine with him alone in a
private room at the Maison d'Or. Madame Arnoux did not at all understand
this emotional impulse, taking offence, in fact, at being treated as if
she were a light woman. Arnoux, on the contrary, meant it as a proof of
affection. Then, as he was beginning to feel dull, he went to pay the
Maréchale a visit in order to amuse himself.

