She complained of his coming to visit them so rarely, and seized the
opportunity to exchange a few confidential words with him.

The guests began to arrive. In their mode of bowing they twisted their
bodies on one side or bent in two, or merely lowered their heads a
little. Then, a married pair, a family passed in, and all scattered
themselves about the drawing-room, which was already filled. Under the
chandelier in the centre, an enormous ottoman-seat supported a stand,
the flowers of which, bending forward, like plumes of feathers, hung
over the heads of the ladies seated all around in a ring, while others
occupied the easy-chairs, which formed two straight lines symmetrically
interrupted by the large velvet curtains of the windows and the lofty
bays of the doors with their gilded lintels.

The crowd of men who remained standing on the floor with their hats in
their hands seemed, at some distance, like one black mass, into which
the ribbons in the button-holes introduced red points here and there,
and rendered all the more dull the monotonous whiteness of their
cravats. With the exception of the very young men with the down on their
faces, all appeared to be bored. Some dandies, with an expression of
sullenness on their countenances, were swinging on their heels. There
were numbers of men with grey hair or wigs. Here and there glistened a
bald pate; and the visages of many of these men, either purple or
exceedingly pale, showed in their worn aspect the traces of immense
fatigues: for they were persons who devoted themselves either to
political or commercial pursuits. M. Dambreuse had also invited a number
of scholars and magistrates, two or three celebrated doctors, and he
deprecated with an air of humility the eulogies which they pronounced on
his entertainment and the allusions to his wealth.

An immense number of men-servants, with fine gold-laced livery, kept
moving about on every side. The large branched candlesticks, like
bouquets of flame, threw a glow over the hangings. They were reflected
in the mirrors; and at the bottom of the dining-room, which was adorned
with a jessamine treillage, the side-board resembled the high altar of a
cathedral or an exhibition of jewellery, there were so many dishes,
bells, knives and forks, silver and silver-gilt spoons in the midst of
crystal ware glittering with iridescence.

The three other reception-rooms overflowed with artistic
objects--landscapes by great masters on the walls, ivory and porcelain
at the sides of the tables, and Chinese ornaments on the brackets.
Lacquered screens were displayed in front of the windows, clusters of
camelias rose above the mantel-shelves, and a light music vibrated in
the distance, like the humming of bees.

The quadrilles were not numerous, and the dancers, judged by the
indifferent fashion in which they dragged their pumps after them, seemed
to be going through the performance of a duty.

Frederick heard some phrases, such as the following:

"Were you at the last charity fête at the Hôtel Lambert, Mademoiselle?"
"No, Monsieur." "It will soon be intolerably warm here." "Oh! yes,
indeed; quite suffocating!" "Whose polka, pray, is this?" "Good heavens,
Madame, I don't know!"

And, behind him, three greybeards, who had posted themselves in the
recess of a window, were whispering some _risqué_ remarks. A sportsman
told a hunting story, while a Legitimist carried on an argument with an
Orléanist. And, wandering about from one group to another, he reached
the card-room, where, in the midst of grave-looking men gathered in a
circle, he recognised Martinon, now attached to the Bar of the capital.

His big face, with its waxen complexion, filled up the space encircled
by his collar-like beard, which was a marvel with its even surface of
black hair; and, observing the golden mean between the elegance which
his age might yearn for and the dignity which his profession exacted
from him, he kept his thumbs stuck under his armpits, according to the
custom of beaux, and then put his hands into his waistcoat pockets after
the manner of learned personages. Though his boots were polished to
excess, he kept his temples shaved in order to have the forehead of a
thinker.

After he had addressed a few chilling words to Frederick, he turned once
more towards those who were chatting around him. A land-owner was
saying: "This is a class of men that dreams of upsetting society."

"They are calling for the organisation of labour," said another: "Can
this be conceived?"

"What could you expect," said a third, "when we see M. de Genoude giving
his assistance to the _Siècle_?"

"And even Conservatives style themselves Progressives. To lead us to
what? To the Republic! as if such a thing were possible in France!"

Everyone declared that the Republic was impossible in France.

"No matter!" remarked one gentleman in a loud tone. "People take too
much interest in the Revolution. A heap of histories, of different kinds
of works, are published concerning it!"

"Without taking into account," said Martinon, "that there are probably
subjects of far more importance which might be studied."

A gentleman occupying a ministerial office laid the blame on the
scandals associated with the stage:

"Thus, for instance, this new drama of _La Reine Margot_ really goes
beyond the proper limits. What need was there for telling us about the
Valois? All this exhibits loyalty in an unfavourable light. 'Tis just
like your press! There is no use in talking, the September laws are
altogether too mild. For my part, I would like to have court-martials,
to gag the journalists! At the slightest display of insolence, drag them
before a council of war, and then make an end of the business!"

"Oh, take care, Monsieur! take care!" said a professor. "Don't attack
the precious boons we gained in ! Respect our liberties!" It would
be better, he contended, to adopt a policy of decentralisation, and to
distribute the surplus populations of the towns through the country
districts.

"But they are gangrened!" exclaimed a Catholic. "Let religion be more
firmly established!"

Martinon hastened to observe:

"As a matter of fact, it is a restraining force."

All the evil lay in this modern longing to rise above one's class and to
possess luxuries.

"However," urged a manufacturer, "luxury aids commerce. Therefore, I
approve of the Duc de Nemours' action in insisting on having short
breeches at his evening parties."

"M. Thiers came to one of them in a pair of trousers. You know his joke
on the subject?"

"Yes; charming! But he turned round to the demagogues, and his speech on
the question of incompatibilities was not without its influence in
bringing about the attempt of the twelfth of May."

"Oh, pooh!"

"Ay, ay!"

The circle had to make a little opening to give a passage to a
man-servant carrying a tray, who was trying to make his way into the
card-room.

Under the green shades of the wax-lights the tables were covered with
two rows of cards and gold coins. Frederick stopped beside one corner of
the table, lost the fifteen napoleons which he had in his pocket,
whirled lightly about, and found himself on the threshold of the boudoir
in which Madame Dambreuse happened to be at that moment.

It was filled with women sitting close to one another in little groups
on seats without backs. Their long skirts, swelling round them, seemed
