in order to take Dittmer's; and Frederick gave vent to his humiliation:

"Ah! how stupid!"

Or else she had called him her "dear friend."

"Then go after her gaily!"

"But I dare not do that," said Frederick.

"Well, then, think no more about her! Good night!"

Deslauriers thereupon turned on his side, and fell asleep. He felt
utterly unable to comprehend this love, which seemed to him the last
weakness of adolescence; and, as his own society was apparently not
enough to content Frederick, he conceived the idea of bringing together,
once a week, those whom they both recognised as friends.

They came on Saturday about nine o'clock. The three Algerine curtains
were carefully drawn. The lamp and four wax-lights were burning. In the
middle of the table the tobacco-pot, filled with pipes, displayed itself
between the beer-bottles, the tea-pot, a flagon of rum, and some fancy
biscuits.

They discussed the immortality of the soul, and drew comparisons between
the different professors.

One evening Hussonnet introduced a tall young man, attired in a
frock-coat, too short in the wrists, and with a look of embarrassment in
his face. It was the young fellow whom they had gone to release from
the guard-house the year before.

As he had not been able to restore the box of lace which he had lost in
the scuffle, his employer had accused him of theft, and threatened to
prosecute him. He was now a clerk in a wagon-office. Hussonnet had come
across him that morning at the corner of the street, and brought him
along, for Dussardier, in a spirit of gratitude, had expressed a wish to
see "the other."

He stretched out towards Frederick the cigar-holder, still full, which
he had religiously preserved, in the hope of being able to give it back.
The young men invited him to pay them a second visit; and he was not
slow in doing so.

They all had sympathies in common. At first, their hatred of the
Government reached the height of an unquestionable dogma. Martinon alone
attempted to defend Louis Philippe. They overwhelmed him with the
commonplaces scattered through the newspapers--the "Bastillization" of
Paris, the September laws, Pritchard, Lord Guizot--so that Martinon held
his tongue for fear of giving offence to somebody. During his seven
years at college he had never incurred the penalty of an imposition, and
at the Law School he knew how to make himself agreeable to the
professors. He usually wore a big frock-coat of the colour of putty,
with india-rubber goloshes; but one evening he presented himself arrayed
like a bridegroom, in a velvet roll-collar waistcoat, a white tie, and a
gold chain.

The astonishment of the other young men was greatly increased when they
learned that he had just come away from M. Dambreuse's house. In fact,
the banker Dambreuse had just bought a portion of an extensive wood
from Martinon senior; and, when the worthy man introduced his son, the
other had invited them both to dinner.

"Was there a good supply of truffles there?" asked Deslauriers. "And did
you take his wife by the waist between the two doors, _sicut decet_?"

Hereupon the conversation turned on women. Pellerin would not admit that
there were beautiful women (he preferred tigers); besides the human
female was an inferior creature in the æsthetic hierarchy.

"What fascinates you is just the very thing that degrades her as an
idea; I mean her breasts, her hair----"

"Nevertheless," urged Frederick, "long black hair and large dark
eyes----"

"Oh! we know all about that," cried Hussonnet. "Enough of Andalusian
beauties on the lawn. Those things are out of date; no thank you! For
the fact is, honour bright! a fast woman is more amusing than the Venus
of Milo. Let us be Gallic, in Heaven's name, and after the Regency
style, if we can!

    'Flow, generous wines; ladies, deign to smile!'[]

[Footnote : _Coules, bons vins; femmes, deignez sourire._]

We must pass from the dark to the fair. Is that your opinion, Father
Dussardier?"

Dussardier did not reply. They all pressed him to ascertain what his
tastes were.

"Well," said he, colouring, "for my part, I would like to love the same
one always!"

This was said in such a way that there was a moment of silence, some of
them being surprised at this candour, and others finding in his words,
perhaps, the secret yearning of their souls.

Sénécal placed his glass of beer on the mantelpiece, and declared
dogmatically that, as prostitution was tyrannical and marriage immoral,
it was better to practice abstinence. Deslauriers regarded women as a
source of amusement--nothing more. M. de Cisy looked upon them with the
utmost dread.

Brought up under the eyes of a grandmother who was a devotee, he found
the society of those young fellows as alluring as a place of ill-repute
and as instructive as the Sorbonne. They gave him lessons without stint;
and so much zeal did he exhibit that he even wanted to smoke in spite of
the qualms that upset him every time he made the experiment. Frederick
paid him the greatest attention. He admired the shade of this young
gentleman's cravat, the fur on his overcoat, and especially his boots,
as thin as gloves, and so very neat and fine that they had a look of
insolent superiority. His carriage used to wait for him below in the
street.

One evening, after his departure, when there was a fall of snow, Sénécal
began to complain about his having a coachman. He declaimed against
kid-gloved exquisites and against the Jockey Club. He had more respect
for a workman than for these fine gentlemen.

"For my part, anyhow, I work for my livelihood! I am a poor man!"

"That's quite evident," said Frederick, at length, losing patience.

The tutor conceived a grudge against him for this remark.

But, as Regimbart said he knew Sénécal pretty well, Frederick, wishing
to be civil to a friend of the Arnoux, asked him to come to the
Saturday meetings; and the two patriots were glad to be brought together
in this way.

However, they took opposite views of things.

Sénécal--who had a skull of the angular type--fixed his attention merely
on systems, whereas Regimbart, on the contrary, saw in facts nothing but
facts. The thing that chiefly troubled him was the Rhine frontier. He
claimed to be an authority on the subject of artillery, and got his
clothes made by a tailor of the Polytechnic School.

The first day, when they asked him to take some cakes, he disdainfully
shrugged his shoulders, saying that these might suit women; and on the
next few occasions his manner was not much more gracious. Whenever
speculative ideas had reached a certain elevation, he would mutter: "Oh!
no Utopias, no dreams!" On the subject of Art (though he used to visit
the studios, where he occasionally out of complaisance gave a lesson in
fencing) his opinions were not remarkable for their excellence. He
compared the style of M. Marast to that of Voltaire, and Mademoiselle
Vatnaz to Madame de Staël, on account of an Ode on Poland in which
"there was some spirit." In short, Regimbart bored everyone, and
