Frederick gave as reasons for his absence a protracted lawsuit and the
state of his mother's health.

He laid special stress on the latter subject in order to make himself
interesting. He ended by saying that this time he was going to settle in
Paris for good; and he said nothing about the inheritance, lest it might
be prejudicial to his past.

The curtains, like the upholstering of the furniture, were of maroon
damask wool. Two pillows were close beside one another on the bolster.
On the coal-fire a kettle was boiling; and the shade of the lamp, which
stood near the edge of the chest of drawers, darkened the apartment.
Madame Arnoux wore a large blue merino dressing-gown. With her face
turned towards the fire and one hand on the shoulder of the little boy,
she unfastened with the other the child's bodice. The youngster in his
shirt began to cry, while scratching his head, like the son of M.
Alexandre.

Frederick expected that he would have felt spasms of joy; but the
passions grow pale when we find ourselves in an altered situation; and,
as he no longer saw Madame Arnoux in the environment wherein he had
known her, she seemed to him to have lost some of her fascination; to
have degenerated in some way that he could not comprehend--in fact, not
to be the same. He was astonished at the serenity of his own heart. He
made enquiries about some old friends, about Pellerin, amongst others.

"I don't see him often," said Arnoux. She added:

"We no longer entertain as we used to do formerly!"

Was the object of this to let him know that he would get no invitation
from them? But Arnoux, continuing to exhibit the same cordiality,
reproached him for not having come to dine with them uninvited; and he
explained why he had changed his business.

"What are you to do in an age of decadence like ours? Great painting is
gone out of fashion! Besides, we may import art into everything. You
know that, for my part, I am a lover of the beautiful. I must bring you
one of these days to see my earthenware works."

And he wanted to show Frederick immediately some of his productions in
the store which he had between the ground-floor and the first floor.

Dishes, soup-tureens, and washhand-basins encumbered the floor. Against
the walls were laid out large squares of pavement for bathrooms and
dressing-rooms, with mythological subjects in the Renaissance style;
whilst in the centre, a pair of whatnots, rising up to the ceiling,
supported ice-urns, flower-pots, candelabra, little flower-stands, and
large statuettes of many colours, representing a negro or a shepherdess
in the Pompadour fashion. Frederick, who was cold and hungry, was bored
with Arnoux's display of his wares. He hurried off to the Café Anglais,
where he ordered a sumptuous supper, and while eating, said to himself:

"I was well off enough below there with all my troubles! She scarcely
took any notice of me! How like a shopkeeper's wife!"

And in an abrupt expansion of healthfulness, he formed egoistic
resolutions. He felt his heart as hard as the table on which his elbows
rested. So then he could by this time plunge fearlessly into the vortex
of society. The thought of the Dambreuses recurred to his mind. He would
make use of them. Then he recalled Deslauriers to mind. "Ah! faith, so
much the worse!" Nevertheless, he sent him a note by a messenger, making
an appointment with him for the following day, in order that they might
breakfast together.

Fortune had not been so kind to the other.

He had presented himself at the examination for a fellowship with a
thesis on the law of wills, in which he maintained that the powers of
testators ought to be restricted as much as possible; and, as his
adversary provoked him in such a way as to make him say foolish things,
he gave utterance to many of these absurdities without in any way
inducing the examiners to falter in deciding that he was wrong. Then
chance so willed it that he should choose by lot, as a subject for a
lecture, Prescription. Thereupon, Deslauriers gave vent to some
lamentable theories: the questions in dispute in former times ought to
be brought forward as well as those which had recently arisen; why
should the proprietor be deprived of his estate because he could furnish
his title-deeds only after the lapse of thirty-one years? This was
giving the security of the honest man to the inheritor of the enriched
thief. Every injustice was consecrated by extending this law, which was
a form of tyranny, the abuse of force! He had even exclaimed: "Abolish
it; and the Franks will no longer oppress the Gauls, the English oppress
the Irish, the Yankee oppress the Redskins, the Turks oppress the Arabs,
the whites oppress the blacks, Poland----"

The President interrupted him: "Well! well! Monsieur, we have nothing to
do with your political opinions--you will have them represented in your
behalf by-and-by!"

Deslauriers did not wish to have his opinions represented; but this
unfortunate Title XX. of the Third Book of the Civil Code had become a
sort of mountain over which he stumbled. He was elaborating a great work
on "Prescription considered as the Basis of the Civil Law and of the Law
of Nature amongst Peoples"; and he got lost in Dunod, Rogerius, Balbus,
Merlin, Vazeille, Savigny, Traplong, and other weighty authorities on
the subject. In order to have more leisure for the purpose of devoting
himself to this task, he had resigned his post of head-clerk. He lived
by giving private tuitions and preparing theses; and at the meetings of
newly-fledged barristers to rehearse legal arguments he frightened by
his display of virulence those who held conservative views, all the
young doctrinaires who acknowledged M. Guizot as their master--so that
in a certain set he had gained a sort of celebrity, mingled, in a slight
degree, with lack of confidence in him as an individual.

He came to keep the appointment in a big paletot, lined with red
flannel, like the one Sénécal used to wear in former days.

Human respect on account of the passers-by prevented them from straining
one another long in an embrace of friendship; and they made their way to
Véfour's arm-in-arm, laughing pleasantly, though with tear-drops
lingering in the depths of their eyes. Then, as soon as they were free
from observation, Deslauriers exclaimed:

"Ah! damn it! we'll have a jolly time of it now!"

Frederick was not quite pleased to find Deslauriers all at once
associating himself in this way with his own newly-acquired
inheritance. His friend exhibited too much pleasure on account of them
both, and not enough on his account alone.

After this, Deslauriers gave details about the reverse he had met with,
and gradually told Frederick all about his occupations and his daily
existence, speaking of himself in a stoical fashion, and of others in
tones of intense bitterness. He found fault with everything; there was
not a man in office who was not an idiot or a rascal. He flew into a
passion against the waiter for having a glass badly rinsed, and, when
Frederick uttered a reproach with a view to mitigating his wrath: "As if
I were going to annoy myself with such numbskulls, who, you must know,
can earn as much as six and even eight thousand francs a year, who are
electors, perhaps eligible as candidates. Ah! no, no!"

Then, with a sprightly air, "But I've forgotten that I'm talking to a
capitalist, to a Mondor,[] for you are a Mondor now!"

[Footnote : Mondor was a celebrated Italian charlatan, who,
in the seventeenth century, settled in Paris and made a large
fortune.--Translator.]

And, coming back to the question of the inheritance, he gave expression
to this view--that collateral successorship (a thing unjust in itself,
though in the present case he was glad it was possible) would be
abolished one of these days at the approaching revolution.

"Do you believe in that?" said Frederick.

"Be sure of it!" he replied. "This sort of thing cannot last. There is
too much suffering. When I see into the wretchedness of men like
Sénécal----"

