some chairs. A young woman in the costume of a dragoon of Louis XIV.'s
reign was passing at that moment. It was Mademoiselle Rosanette Bron,
the mistress of the place.

"Well?" said Arnoux.

"'Tis done!" she replied.

"Ah! thanks, my angel!"

And he wanted to kiss her.

"Take care, now, you foolish man! You'll spoil the paint on my face!"

Arnoux introduced Frederick.

"Step in there, Monsieur; you are quite welcome!"

She drew aside a door-curtain, and cried out with a certain emphasis:

"Here's my lord Arnoux, girl, and a princely friend of his!"

Frederick was at first dazzled by the lights. He could see nothing save
some silk and velvet dresses, naked shoulders, a mass of colours swaying
to and fro to the accompaniment of an orchestra hidden behind green
foliage, between walls hung with yellow silk, with pastel portraits here
and there and crystal chandeliers in the style of Louis XVI.'s period.
High lamps, whose globes of roughened glass resembled snowballs, looked
down on baskets of flowers placed on brackets in the corners; and at the
opposite side, at the rear of a second room, smaller in size, one could
distinguish, in a third, a bed with twisted posts, and at its head a
Venetian mirror.

The dancing stopped, and there were bursts of applause, a hubbub of
delight, as Arnoux was seen advancing with his hamper on his head; the
eatables contained in it made a lump in the centre.

"Make way for the lustre!"

Frederick raised his eyes: it was the lustre of old Saxe that had
adorned the shop attached to the office of _L'Art Industriel_. The
memory of former days was brought back to his mind. But a foot-soldier
of the line in undress, with that silly expression of countenance
ascribed by tradition to conscripts, planted himself right in front of
him, spreading out his two arms in order to emphasise his astonishment,
and, in spite of the hideous black moustaches, unusually pointed, which
disfigured his face, Frederick recognised his old friend Hussonnet. In a
half-Alsatian, half-negro kind of gibberish, the Bohemian loaded him
with congratulations, calling him his colonel. Frederick, put out of
countenance by the crowd of personages assembled around him, was at a
loss for an answer. At a tap on the desk from a fiddlestick, the
partners in the dance fell into their places.

They were about sixty in number, the women being for the most part
dressed either as village-girls or marchionesses, and the men, who were
nearly all of mature age, being got up as wagoners, 'longshoremen, or
sailors.

Frederick having taken up his position close to the wall, stared at
those who were going through the quadrille in front of him.

An old beau, dressed like a Venetian Doge in a long gown or purple silk,
was dancing with Mademoiselle Rosanette, who wore a green coat, laced
breeches, and boots of soft leather with gold spurs. The pair in front
of them consisted of an Albanian laden with yataghans and a Swiss girl
with blue eyes and skin white as milk, who looked as plump as a quail
with her chemise-sleeves and red corset exposed to view. In order to
turn to account her hair, which fell down to her hips, a tall blonde, a
walking lady in the opera, had assumed the part of a female savage; and
over her brown swaddling-cloth she displayed nothing save leathern
breeches, glass bracelets, and a tinsel diadem, from which rose a large
sheaf of peacock's feathers. In front of her, a gentleman who had
intended to represent Pritchard,[] muffled up in a grotesquely big
black coat, was beating time with his elbows on his snuff-box. A little
Watteau shepherd in blue-and-silver, like moonlight, dashed his crook
against the thyrsus of a Bacchante crowned with grapes, who wore a
leopard's skin over her left side, and buskins with gold ribbons. On the
other side, a Polish lady, in a spencer of nacarat-coloured velvet, made
her gauze petticoat flutter over her pearl-gray stockings, which rose
above her fashionable pink boots bordered with white fur. She was
smiling on a big-paunched man of forty, disguised as a choir-boy, who
was skipping very high, lifting up his surplice with one hand, and with
the other his red clerical cap. But the queen, the star, was
Mademoiselle Loulou, a celebrated dancer at public halls. As she had now
become wealthy, she wore a large lace collar over her vest of smooth
black velvet; and her wide trousers of poppy-coloured silk, clinging
closely to her figure, and drawn tight round her waist by a cashmere
scarf, had all over their seams little natural white camellias. Her pale
face, a little puffed, and with the nose somewhat _retroussé_, looked
all the more pert from the disordered appearance of her wig, over which
she had with a touch of her hand clapped a man's grey felt hat, so that
it covered her right ear; and, with every bounce she made, her pumps,
adorned with diamond buckles, nearly reached the nose of her neighbour,
a big mediæval baron, who was quite entangled in his steel armour. There
was also an angel, with a gold sword in her hand, and two swan's wings
over her back, who kept rushing up and down, every minute losing her
partner who appeared as Louis XIV., displaying an utter ignorance of the
figures and confusing the quadrille.

[Footnote : This probably refers to the English astronomer of that
name.--Translator.]

Frederick, as he gazed at these people, experienced a sense of
forlornness, a feeling of uneasiness. He was still thinking of Madame
Arnoux and it seemed to him as if he were taking part in some plot that
was being hatched against her.

When the quadrille was over, Mademoiselle Rosanette accosted him. She
was slightly out of breath, and her gorget, polished like a mirror,
swelled up softly under her chin.

"And you, Monsieur," said she, "don't you dance?"

Frederick excused himself; he did not know how to dance.

"Really! but with me? Are you quite sure?" And, poising herself on one
hip, with her other knee a little drawn back, while she stroked with her
left hand the mother-of-pearl pommel of her sword, she kept staring at
him for a minute with a half-beseeching, half-teasing air. At last she
said "Good night! then," made a pirouette, and disappeared.

Frederick, dissatisfied with himself, and not well knowing what to do,
began to wander through the ball-room.

He entered the boudoir padded with pale blue silk, with bouquets of
flowers from the fields, whilst on the ceiling, in a circle of gilt
wood, Cupids, emerging out of an azure sky, played over the clouds,
resembling down in appearance. This display of luxuries, which would
to-day be only trifles to persons like Rosanette, dazzled him, and he
admired everything--the artificial convolvuli which adorned the surface
of the mirror, the curtains on the mantelpiece, the Turkish divan, and a
sort of tent in a recess in the wall, with pink silk hangings and a
covering of white muslin overhead. Furniture made of dark wood with
inlaid work of copper filled the sleeping apartment, where, on a
platform covered with swan's-down, stood the large canopied bedstead
trimmed with ostrich-feathers. Pins, with heads made of precious stones,
stuck into pincushions, rings trailing over trays, lockets with hoops of
gold, and little silver chests, could be distinguished in the shade
under the light shed by a Bohemian urn suspended from three chainlets.
Through a little door, which was slightly ajar, could be seen a
hot-house occupying the entire breadth of a terrace, with an aviary at
the other end.

Here were surroundings specially calculated to charm him. In a sudden
revolt of his youthful blood he swore that he would enjoy such things;
he grew bold; then, coming back to the place opening into the
drawing-room, where there was now a larger gathering--it kept moving
about in a kind of luminous pulverulence--he stood to watch the
quadrilles, blinking his eyes to see better, and inhaling the soft
perfumes of the women, which floated through the atmosphere like an
