had been employed for not having given his consent to the distribution
of prizes--a custom which he looked upon as dangerous to equality. He
was now with an engine-builder, and for the past six months had been no
longer living with Deslauriers. There had been nothing painful about
their parting.

Sénécal had been visited by men in blouses--all patriots, all workmen,
all honest fellows, but at the same time men whose society seemed
distasteful to the advocate. Besides, he disliked certain ideas of his
friend, excellent though they might be as weapons of warfare. He held
his tongue on the subject through motives of ambition, deeming it
prudent to pay deference to him in order to exercise control over him,
for he looked forward impatiently to a revolutionary movement, in which
he calculated on making an opening for himself and occupying a prominent
position.

Sénécal's convictions were more disinterested. Every evening, when his
work was finished, he returned to his garret and sought in books for
something that might justify his dreams. He had annotated the _Contrat
Social_; he had crammed himself with the _Revue Indépendante_; he was
acquainted with Mably, Morelly, Fourier, Saint-Simon, Comte, Cabet,
Louis Blanc--the heavy cartload of Socialistic writers--those who claim
for humanity the dead level of barracks, those who would like to amuse
it in a brothel or to bend it over a counter; and from a medley of all
these things he constructed an ideal of virtuous democracy, with the
double aspect of a farm in which the landlord was to receive a share of
the produce, and a spinning-mill, a sort of American Lacedæmon, in which
the individual would only exist for the benefit of society, which was to
be more omnipotent, absolute, infallible, and divine than the Grand
Lamas and the Nebuchadnezzars. He had no doubt as to the approaching
realisation of this ideal; and Sénécal raged against everything that he
considered hostile to it with the reasoning of a geometrician and the
zeal of an Inquisitor. Titles of nobility, crosses, plumes, liveries
above all, and even reputations that were too loud-sounding scandalised
him, his studies as well as his sufferings intensifying every day his
essential hatred of every kind of distinction and every form of social
superiority.

"What do I owe to this gentleman that I should be polite to him? If he
wants me, he can come to me."

Deslauriers, however, forced him to go to Frederick's reunion.

They found their friend in his bedroom. Spring-roller blinds and double
curtains, Venetian mirrors--nothing was wanting there. Frederick, in a
velvet vest, was lying back on an easy-chair, smoking cigarettes of
Turkish tobacco.

Sénécal wore the gloomy look of a bigot arriving in the midst of a
pleasure-party.

Deslauriers gave him a single comprehensive glance; then, with a very
low bow:

"Monseigneur, allow me to pay my respects to you!"

Dussardier leaped on his neck. "So you are a rich man now. Ah! upon my
soul, so much the better!"

Cisy made his appearance with crape on his hat. Since the death of his
grandmother, he was in the enjoyment of a considerable fortune, and was
less bent on amusing himself than on being distinguished from
others--not being the same as everyone else--in short, on "having the
proper stamp." This was his favourite phrase.

However, it was now midday, and they were all yawning.

Frederick was waiting for some one.

At the mention of Arnoux's name, Pellerin made a wry face. He looked on
him as a renegade since he had abandoned the fine arts.

"Suppose we pass over him--what do you say to that?"

They all approved of this suggestion.

The door was opened by a man-servant in long gaiters; and the
dining-room could be seen with its lofty oak plinths relieved with gold,
and its two sideboards laden with plate.

The bottles of wine were heating on the stove; the blades of new knives
were glittering beside oysters. In the milky tint of the enamelled
glasses there was a kind of alluring sweetness; and the table
disappeared from view under its load of game, fruit, and meats of the
rarest quality.

These attentions were lost on Sénécal. He began by asking for household
bread (the hardest that could be got), and in connection with this
subject, spoke of the murders of Buzançais and the crisis arising from
lack of the means of subsistence.

Nothing of this sort could have happened if agriculture had been better
protected, if everything had not been given up to competition, to
anarchy, and to the deplorable maxim of "Let things alone! let things go
their own way!" It was in this way that the feudalism of money was
established--the worst form of feudalism. But let them take care! The
people in the end will get tired of it, and may make the capitalist pay
for their sufferings either by bloody proscriptions or by the plunder of
their houses.

Frederick saw, as if by a lightning-flash, a flood of men with bare arms
invading Madame Dambreuse's drawing-room, and smashing the mirrors with
blows of pikes.

Sénécal went on to say that the workman, owing to the insufficiency of
wages, was more unfortunate than the helot, the negro, and the pariah,
especially if he has children.

"Ought he to get rid of them by asphyxia, as some English doctor, whose
name I don't remember--a disciple of Malthus--advises him?"

And, turning towards Cisy: "Are we to be obliged to follow the advice of
the infamous Malthus?"

Cisy, who was ignorant of the infamy and even of the existence of
Malthus, said by way of reply, that after all, much human misery was
relieved, and that the higher classes----

"Ha! the higher classes!" said the Socialist, with a sneer. "In the
first place, there are no higher classes. 'Tis the heart alone that
makes anyone higher than another. We want no alms, understand! but
equality, the fair division of products."

What he required was that the workman might become a capitalist, just as
the soldier might become a colonel. The trade-wardenships, at least, in
limiting the number of apprentices, prevented workmen from growing
inconveniently numerous, and the sentiment of fraternity was kept up by
means of the fêtes and the banners.

Hussonnet, as a poet, regretted the banners; so did Pellerin, too--a
predilection which had taken possession of him at the Café Dagneaux,
while listening to the Phalansterians talking. He expressed the opinion
that Fourier was a great man.

"Come now!" said Deslauriers. "An old fool who sees in the overthrow of
governments the effects of Divine vengeance. He is just like my lord
Saint-Simon and his church, with his hatred of the French Revolution--a
set of buffoons who would fain re-establish Catholicism."

M. de Cisy, no doubt in order to get information or to make a good
impression, broke in with this remark, which he uttered in a mild tone:

"These two men of science are not, then, of the same way of thinking as
Voltaire?"

"That fellow! I make you a present of him!"

"How is that? Why, I thought----"

"Oh! no, he did not love the people!"
