
"I leave him perfectly free! There was no necessity for lying on his
part!"

"That is quite true," said Frederick. "No doubt," he added, "it was the
result of Arnoux's habits; he had acted thoughtlessly, but perhaps in
matters of a graver character----"

"What do you see, then, that can be graver?"

"Oh, nothing!"

Frederick bent his head with a smile of acquiescence. Nevertheless, he
urged, Arnoux possessed certain good qualities; he was fond of his
children.

"Ay, and he does all he can to ruin them!"

Frederick urged that this was due to an excessively easy-going
disposition, for indeed he was a good fellow.

She exclaimed:

"But what is the meaning of that--a good fellow?"

And he proceeded to defend Arnoux in the vaguest kind of language he
could think of, and, while expressing his sympathy with her, he
rejoiced, he was delighted, at the bottom of his heart. Through
retaliation or need of affection she would fly to him for refuge. His
love was intensified by the hope which had now grown immeasurably
stronger in his breast.

Never had she appeared to him so captivating, so perfectly beautiful.
From time to time a deep breath made her bosom swell. Her two eyes,
gazing fixedly into space, seemed dilated by a vision in the depths of
her consciousness, and her lips were slightly parted, as if to let her
soul escape through them. Sometimes she pressed her handkerchief over
them tightly. He would have liked to be this dainty little piece of
cambric moistened with her tears. In spite of himself, he cast a look at
the bed at the end of the alcove, picturing to himself her head lying on
the pillow, and so vividly did this present itself to his imagination
that he had to restrain himself to keep from clasping her in his arms.
She closed her eyelids, and now she appeared quiescent and languid. Then
he drew closer to her, and, bending over her, he eagerly scanned her
face. At that moment, he heard the noise of boots in the lobby
outside--it was the other. They heard him shutting the door of his own
room. Frederick made a sign to Madame Arnoux to ascertain from her
whether he ought to go there.

She replied "Yes," in the same voiceless fashion; and this mute exchange
of thoughts between them was, as it were, an assent--the preliminary
step in adultery.

Arnoux was just taking off his coat to go to bed.

"Well, how is she going on?"

"Oh! better," said Frederick; "this will pass off."

But Arnoux was in an anxious state of mind.

"You don't know her; she has got hysterical now! Idiot of a clerk! This
is what comes of being too good. If I had not given that cursed shawl to
Rosanette!"

"Don't regret having done so a bit. Nobody could be more grateful to you
than she is."

"Do you really think so?"

Frederick had not a doubt of it. The best proof of it was her dismissal
of Père Oudry.

"Ah! poor little thing!"

And in the excess of his emotion, Arnoux wanted to rush off to her
forthwith.

"'Tisn't worth while. I am calling to see her. She is unwell."

"All the more reason for my going."

He quickly put on his coat again, and took up his candlestick. Frederick
cursed his own stupidity, and pointed out to him that for decency's sake
he ought to remain this night with his wife. He could not leave her; it
would be very nasty.

"I tell you candidly you would be doing wrong. There is no hurry over
there. You will go to-morrow. Come; do this for my sake."

Arnoux put down his candlestick, and, embracing him, said:

"You are a right good fellow!"




CHAPTER IX.

The Friend of the Family.


Then began for Frederick an existence of misery. He became the parasite
of the house.

If anyone were indisposed, he called three times a day to know how the
patient was, went to the piano-tuner's, contrived to do a thousand acts
of kindness; and he endured with an air of contentment Mademoiselle
Marthe's poutings and the caresses of little Eugène, who was always
drawing his dirty hands over the young man's face. He was present at
dinners at which Monsieur and Madame, facing each other, did not
exchange a word, unless it happened that Arnoux provoked his wife with
the absurd remarks he made. When the meal was over, he would play about
the room with his son, conceal himself behind the furniture, or carry
the little boy on his back, walking about on all fours, like the
Bearnais.[] At last, he would go out, and she would at once plunge
into the eternal subject of complaint--Arnoux.

[Footnote : Henry IV.--Translator.]

It was not his misconduct that excited her indignation, but her pride
appeared to be wounded, and she did not hide her repugnance towards this
man, who showed an absence of delicacy, dignity, and honour.

"Or rather, he is mad!" she said.

Frederick artfully appealed to her to confide in him. Ere long he knew
all the details of her life. Her parents were people in a humble rank in
life at Chartres. One day, Arnoux, while sketching on the bank of the
river (at this period he believed himself to be a painter), saw her
leaving the church, and made her an offer of marriage. On account of his
wealth, he was unhesitatingly accepted. Besides, he was desperately in
love with her. She added:

"Good heavens! he loves me still, after his fashion!"

They spent the few months immediately after their marriage in travelling
through Italy.

Arnoux, in spite of his enthusiasm at the sight of the scenery and the
masterpieces, did nothing but groan over the wine, and, to find some
kind of amusement, organised picnics along with some English people. The
profit which he had made by reselling some pictures tempted him to take
up the fine arts as a commercial speculation. Then, he became infatuated
about pottery. Just now other branches of commerce attracted him; and,
as he had become more and more vulgarised, he contracted coarse and
extravagant habits. It was not so much for his vices she had to reproach
him as for his entire conduct. No change could be expected in him, and
her unhappiness was irreparable.

