On certain days, however, he was possessed by a feeling of indignation
even against her. Then he would go forth and wander through the meadows,
half covered in winter time by the inundations of the Seine. They were
cut up by rows of poplar-trees. Here and there arose a little bridge. He
tramped about till evening, rolling the yellow leaves under his feet,
inhaling the fog, and jumping over the ditches. As his arteries began to
throb more vigorously, he felt himself carried away by a desire to do
something wild; he longed to become a trapper in America, to attend on a
pasha in the East, to take ship as a sailor; and he gave vent to his
melancholy in long letters to Deslauriers.

The latter was struggling to get on. The slothful conduct of his friend
and his eternal jeremiads appeared to him simply stupid. Their
correspondence soon became a mere form. Frederick had given up all his
furniture to Deslauriers, who stayed on in the same lodgings. From time
to time his mother spoke to him. At length he one day told her about the
present he had made, and she was giving him a rating for it, when a
letter was placed in his hands.

"What is the matter now?" she said, "you are trembling?"

"There is nothing the matter with me," replied Frederick.

Deslauriers informed him that he had taken Sénécal under his protection,
and that for the past fortnight they had been living together. So now
Sénécal was exhibiting himself in the midst of things that had come
from the Arnoux's shop. He might sell them, criticise, make jokes about
them. Frederick felt wounded in the depths of his soul. He went up to
his own apartment. He felt a yearning for death.

His mother called him to consult him about a plantation in the garden.

This garden was, after the fashion of an English park, cut in the middle
by a stick fence; and the half of it belonged to Père Roque, who had
another for vegetables on the bank of the river. The two neighbours,
having fallen out, abstained from making their appearance there at the
same hour. But since Frederick's return, the old gentleman used to walk
about there more frequently, and was not stinted in his courtesies
towards Madame Moreau's son. He pitied the young man for having to live
in a country town. One day he told him that Madame Dambreuse had been
anxious to hear from him. On another occasion he expatiated on the
custom of Champagne, where the stomach conferred nobility.

"At that time you would have been a lord, since your mother's name was
De Fouvens. And 'tis all very well to talk--never mind! there's
something in a name. After all," he added, with a sly glance at
Frederick, "that depends on the Keeper of the Seals."

This pretension to aristocracy contrasted strangely with his personal
appearance. As he was small, his big chestnut-coloured frock-coat
exaggerated the length of his bust. When he took off his hat, a face
almost like that of a woman with an extremely sharp nose could be seen;
his hair, which was of a yellow colour, resembled a wig. He saluted
people with a very low bow, brushing against the wall.

Up to his fiftieth year, he had been content with the services of
Catherine, a native of Lorraine, of the same age as himself, who was
strongly marked with small-pox. But in the year , he brought back
with him from Paris a handsome blonde with a sheep-like type of
countenance and a "queenly carriage." Ere long, she was observed
strutting about with large earrings; and everything was explained by the
birth of a daughter who was introduced to the world under the name of
Elisabeth Olympe Louise Roque.

Catherine, in her first ebullition of jealousy, expected that she would
curse this child. On the contrary, she became fond of the little girl,
and treated her with the utmost care, consideration, and tenderness, in
order to supplant her mother and render her odious--an easy task,
inasmuch as Madame Éléonore entirely neglected the little one,
preferring to gossip at the tradesmen's shops. On the day after her
marriage, she went to pay a visit at the Sub-prefecture, no longer
"thee'd" and "thou'd" the servants, and took it into her head that, as a
matter of good form, she ought to exhibit a certain severity towards the
child. She was present while the little one was at her lessons. The
teacher, an old clerk who had been employed at the Mayor's office, did
not know how to go about the work of instructing the girl. The pupil
rebelled, got her ears boxed, and rushed away to shed tears on the lap
of Catherine, who always took her part. After this the two women
wrangled, and M. Roque ordered them to hold their tongues. He had
married only out of tender regard for his daughter, and did not wish to
be annoyed by them.

She often wore a white dress with ribbons, and pantalettes trimmed with
lace; and on great festival-days she would leave the house attired like
a princess, in order to mortify a little the matrons of the town, who
forbade their brats to associate with her on account of her illegitimate
birth.

She passed her life nearly always by herself in the garden, went
see-sawing on the swing, chased butterflies, then suddenly stopped to
watch the floral beetles swooping down on the rose-trees. It was, no
doubt, these habits which imparted to her face an expression at the same
time of audacity and dreaminess. She had, moreover, a figure like
Marthe, so that Frederick said to her, at their second interview:

"Will you permit me to kiss you, mademoiselle?"

The little girl lifted up her head and replied:

"I will!"

But the stick-hedge separated them from one another.

"We must climb over," said Frederick.

"No, lift me up!"

He stooped over the hedge, and raising her off the ground with his
hands, kissed her on both cheeks; then he put her back on her own side
by a similar process; and this performance was repeated on the next
occasions when they found themselves together.

Without more reserve than a child of four, as soon as she heard her
friend coming, she sprang forward to meet him, or else, hiding behind a
tree, she began yelping like a dog to frighten him.

One day, when Madame Moreau had gone out, he brought her up to his own
room. She opened all the scent-bottles, and pomaded her hair
plentifully; then, without the slightest embarrassment, she lay down on
the bed, where she remained stretched out at full length, wide awake.

"I fancy myself your wife," she said to him.

Next day he found her all in tears. She confessed that she had been
"weeping for her sins;" and, when he wished to know what they were, she
hung down her head, and answered:

"Ask me no more!"

The time for first communion was at hand. She had been brought to
confession in the morning. The sacrament scarcely made her wiser.
Occasionally, she got into a real passion; and Frederick was sent for to
appease her.

He often brought her with him in his walks. While he indulged in
day-dreams as he walked along, she would gather wild poppies at the
edges of the corn-fields; and, when she saw him more melancholy than
usual, she tried to console him with her pretty childish prattle. His
heart, bereft of love, fell back on this friendship inspired by a little
girl. He gave her sketches of old fogies, told her stories, and devoted
himself to reading books for her.

He began with the _Annales Romantiques_, a collection of prose and verse
celebrated at the period. Then, forgetting her age, so much was he
charmed by her intelligence, he read for her in succession, _Atala_,
_Cinq-Mars_, and _Les Feuilles d'Automne_. But one night (she had that
very evening heard _Macbeth_ in Letourneur's simple translation) she
woke up, exclaiming:

"The spot! the spot!" Her teeth chattered, she shivered, and, fixing
