especially Deslauriers, for the Citizen was a friend of the Arnoux
family. Now the clerk was most anxious to visit those people in the hope
that he might there make the acquaintance of some persons who would be
an advantage to him.

"When are you going to take me there with you?" he would say. Arnoux was
either overburdened with business, or else starting on a journey. Then
it was not worth while, as the dinners were coming to an end.

If he had been called on to risk his life for his friend, Frederick
would have done so. But, as he was desirous of making as good a figure
as possible, and with this view was most careful about his language and
manners, and so attentive to his costume that he always presented
himself at the office of _L'Art Industriel_ irreproachably gloved, he
was afraid that Deslauriers, with his shabby black coat, his
attorney-like exterior, and his swaggering kind of talk, might make
himself disagreeable to Madame Arnoux, and thus compromise him and lower
him in her estimation. The other results would have been bad enough, but
the last one would have annoyed him a thousand times more.

The clerk saw that his friend did not wish to keep his promise, and
Frederick's silence seemed to him an aggravation of the insult. He would
have liked to exercise absolute control over him, to see him developing
in accordance with the ideal of their youth; and his inactivity excited
the clerk's indignation as a breach of duty and a want of loyalty
towards himself. Moreover, Frederick, with his thoughts full of Madame
Arnoux, frequently talked about her husband; and Deslauriers now began
an intolerable course of boredom by repeating the name a hundred times a
day, at the end of each remark, like the parrot-cry of an idiot.

When there was a knock at the door, he would answer, "Come in, Arnoux!"
At the restaurant he asked for a Brie cheese "in imitation of Arnoux,"
and at night, pretending to wake up from a bad dream, he would rouse his
comrade by howling out, "Arnoux! Arnoux!" At last Frederick, worn out,
said to him one day, in a piteous voice:

"Oh! don't bother me about Arnoux!"

"Never!" replied the clerk:

    "He always, everywhere, burning or icy cold,
    The pictured form of Arnoux----"[]

[Footnote : _Toujours lui! lui partout! ou brulante ou glacée, L'image
de l'Arnoux._]

"Hold your tongue, I tell you!" exclaimed Frederick, raising his fist.

Then less angrily he added:

"You know well this is a painful subject to me."

"Oh! forgive me, old fellow," returned Deslauriers with a very low bow.
"From this time forth we will be considerate towards Mademoiselle's
nerves. Again, I say, forgive me. A thousand pardons!"

And so this little joke came to an end.

But, three weeks later, one evening, Deslauriers said to him:

"Well, I have just seen Madame Arnoux."

"Where, pray?"

"At the Palais, with Balandard, the solicitor. A dark woman, is she not,
of the middle height?"

Frederick made a gesture of assent. He waited for Deslauriers to speak.
At the least expression of admiration he would have been most effusive,
and would have fairly hugged the other. However, Deslauriers remained
silent. At last, unable to contain himself any longer, Frederick, with
assumed indifference, asked him what he thought of her.

Deslauriers considered that "she was not so bad, but still nothing
extraordinary."

"Ha! you think so," said Frederick.

They soon reached the month of August, the time when he was to present
himself for his second examination. According to the prevailing opinion,
the subjects could be made up in a fortnight. Frederick, having full
confidence in his own powers, swallowed up in a trice the first four
books of the Code of Procedure, the first three of the Penal Code, many
bits of the system of criminal investigation, and a part of the Civil
Code, with the annotations of M. Poncelet. The night before, Deslauriers
made him run through the whole course, a process which did not finish
till morning, and, in order to take advantage of even the last quarter
of an hour, continued questioning him while they walked along the
footpath together.

As several examinations were taking place at the same time, there were
many persons in the precincts, and amongst others Hussonnet and Cisy:
young men never failed to come and watch these ordeals when the fortunes
of their comrades were at stake.

Frederick put on the traditional black gown; then, followed by the
throng, with three other students, he entered a spacious apartment, into
which the light penetrated through uncurtained windows, and which was
garnished with benches ranged along the walls. In the centre, leather
chairs were drawn round a table adorned with a green cover. This
separated the candidates from the examiners in their red gowns and
ermine shoulder-knots, the head examiners wearing gold-laced flat caps.

Frederick found himself the last but one in the series--an unfortunate
place. In answer to the first question, as to the difference between a
convention and a contract, he defined the one as if it were the other;
and the professor, who was a fair sort of man, said to him, "Don't be
agitated, Monsieur! Compose yourself!" Then, having asked two easy
questions, which were answered in a doubtful fashion, he passed on at
last to the fourth. This wretched beginning made Frederick lose his
head. Deslauriers, who was facing him amongst the spectators, made a
sign to him to indicate that it was not a hopeless case yet; and at the
second batch of questions, dealing with the criminal law, he came out
tolerably well. But, after the third, with reference to the "mystic
will," the examiner having remained impassive the whole time, his mental
distress redoubled; for Hussonnet brought his hands together as if to
applaud, whilst Deslauriers liberally indulged in shrugs of the
shoulders. Finally, the moment was reached when it was necessary to be
examined on Procedure. The professor, displeased at listening to
theories opposed to his own, asked him in a churlish tone:

"And so this is your view, monsieur? How do you reconcile the principle
of article  of the Civil Code with this application by a third party
to set aside a judgment by default?"

Frederick had a great headache from not having slept the night before. A
ray of sunlight, penetrating through one of the slits in a Venetian
blind, fell on his face. Standing behind the seat, he kept wriggling
about and tugging at his moustache.

"I am still awaiting your answer," the man with the gold-edged cap
observed.

And as Frederick's movements, no doubt, irritated him:

"You won't find it in that moustache of yours!"

This sarcasm made the spectators laugh. The professor, feeling
flattered, adopted a wheedling tone. He put two more questions with
reference to adjournment and summary jurisdiction, then nodded his head
by way of approval. The examination was over. Frederick retired into the
vestibule.

While an usher was taking off his gown, to draw it over some other
person immediately afterwards, his friends gathered around him, and
succeeded in fairly bothering him with their conflicting opinions as to
the result of his examination. Presently the announcement was made in a
sonorous voice at the entrance of the hall: "The third was--put off!"

"Sent packing!" said Hussonnet. "Let us go away!"
