representative of a world which he considered fatal to democracy. An
austere Republican, he suspected that there was something corrupt in
every form of elegance, and the more so as he wanted nothing and was
inflexible in his integrity.

They found some difficulty in resuming the conversation. The painter
soon recalled to mind his appointment, the tutor his pupils; and, when
they had gone, after a long silence, Deslauriers asked a number of
questions about Arnoux.

"You will introduce me there later, will you not, old fellow?"

"Certainly," said Frederick. Then they thought about settling
themselves. Deslauriers had without much trouble obtained the post of
second clerk in a solicitor's office; he had also entered his name for
the terms at the Law School, and bought the indispensable books; and the
life of which they had dreamed now began.

It was delightful, owing to their youth, which made everything assume a
beautiful aspect. As Deslauriers had said nothing as to any pecuniary
arrangement, Frederick did not refer to the subject. He helped to defray
all the expenses, kept the cupboard well stocked, and looked after all
the household requirements; but if it happened to be desirable to give
the door-keeper a rating, the clerk took that on his own shoulders,
still playing the part, which he had assumed in their college days, of
protector and senior.

Separated all day long, they met again in the evening. Each took his
place at the fireside and set about his work. But ere long it would be
interrupted. Then would follow endless outpourings, unaccountable bursts
of merriment, and occasional disputes about the lamp flaring too much or
a book being mislaid, momentary ebullitions of anger which subsided in
hearty laughter.

While in bed they left open the door of the little room where
Deslauriers slept, and kept chattering to each other from a distance.

In the morning they walked in their shirt-sleeves on the terrace. The
sun rose; light vapours passed over the river. From the flower-market
close beside them the noise of screaming reached their ears; and the
smoke from their pipes whirled round in the clear air, which was
refreshing to their eyes still puffed from sleep. While they inhaled it,
their hearts swelled with great expectations.

When it was not raining on Sunday they went out together, and, arm in
arm, they sauntered through the streets. The same reflection nearly
always occurred to them at the same time, or else they would go on
chatting without noticing anything around them. Deslauriers longed for
riches, as a means for gaining power over men. He was anxious to possess
an influence over a vast number of people, to make a great noise, to
have three secretaries under his command, and to give a big political
dinner once a month.

Frederick would have furnished for himself a palace in the Moorish
fashion, to spend his life reclining on cashmere divans, to the murmur
of a jet of water, attended by negro pages. And these things, of which
he had only dreamed, became in the end so definite that they made him
feel as dejected as if he had lost them.

"What is the use of talking about all these things," said he, "when
we'll never have them?"

"Who knows?" returned Deslauriers.

In spite of his democratic views, he urged Frederick to get an
introduction into the Dambreuses' house.

The other, by way of objection, pointed to the failure of his previous
attempts.

"Bah! go back there. They'll give you an invitation!"

Towards the close of the month of March, they received amongst other
bills of a rather awkward description that of the restaurant-keeper who
supplied them with dinners. Frederick, not having the entire amount,
borrowed a hundred crowns from Deslauriers. A fortnight afterwards, he
renewed the same request, and the clerk administered a lecture to him on
the extravagant habits to which he gave himself up in the Arnoux's
society.

As a matter of fact, he put no restraint upon himself in this respect. A
view of Venice, a view of Naples, and another of Constantinople
occupying the centre of three walls respectively, equestrian subjects by
Alfred de Dreux here and there, a group by Pradier over the mantelpiece,
numbers of _L'Art Industriel_ lying on the piano, and works in boards on
the floor in the corners, encumbered the apartment which he occupied to
such an extent that it was hard to find a place to lay a book on, or to
move one's elbows about freely. Frederick maintained that he needed all
this for his painting.

He pursued his art-studies under Pellerin. But when he called on the
artist, the latter was often out, being accustomed to attend at every
funeral and public occurrence of which an account was given in the
newspapers, and so it was that Frederick spent entire hours alone in the
studio. The quietude of this spacious room, which nothing disturbed save
the scampering of the mice, the light falling from the ceiling, or the
hissing noise of the stove, made him sink into a kind of intellectual
ease. Then his eyes, wandering away from the task at which he was
engaged, roamed over the shell-work on the wall, around the objects of
virtù on the whatnot, along the torsos on which the dust that had
collected made, as it were, shreds of velvet; and, like a traveller who
has lost his way in the middle of a wood, and whom every path brings
back to the same spot, continually, he found underlying every idea in
his mind the recollection of Madame Arnoux.

He selected days for calling on her. When he had reached the second
floor, he would pause on the threshold, hesitating as to whether he
ought to ring or not. Steps drew nigh, the door opened, and the
announcement "Madame is gone out," a sense of relief would come upon
him, as if a weight had been lifted from his heart. He met her, however.
On the first occasion there were three other ladies with her; the next
time it was in the afternoon, and Mademoiselle Marthe's writing-master
came on the scene. Besides, the men whom Madame Arnoux received were
not very punctilious about paying visits. For the sake of prudence he
deemed it better not to call again.

But he did not fail to present himself regularly at the office of _L'Art
Industriel_ every Wednesday in order to get an invitation to the
Thursday dinners, and he remained there after all the others, even
longer than Regimbart, up to the last moment, pretending to be looking
at an engraving or to be running his eye through a newspaper. At last
Arnoux would say to him, "Shall you be disengaged to-morrow evening?"
and, before the sentence was finished, he would give an affirmative
answer. Arnoux appeared to have taken a fancy to him. He showed him how
to become a good judge of wines, how to make hot punch, and how to
prepare a woodcock ragoût. Frederick followed his advice with docility,
feeling an attachment to everything connected with Madame Arnoux--her
furniture, her servants, her house, her street.

During these dinners he scarcely uttered a word; he kept gazing at her.
She had a little mole close to her temple. Her head-bands were darker
than the rest of her hair, and were always a little moist at the edges;
from time to time she stroked them with only two fingers. He knew the
shape of each of her nails. He took delight in listening to the rustle
of her silk skirt as she swept past doors; he stealthily inhaled the
perfume that came from her handkerchief; her comb, her gloves, her rings
were for him things of special interest, important as works of art,
almost endowed with life like individuals; all took possession of his
heart and strengthened his passion.

He had not been sufficiently self-contained to conceal it from
Deslauriers. When he came home from Madame Arnoux's, he would wake up
his friend, as if inadvertently, in order to have an opportunity of
talking about her.

Deslauriers, who slept in the little off-room, close to where they had
their water-supply, would give a great yawn. Frederick seated himself on
the side of the bed. At first, he spoke about the dinner; then he
referred to a thousand petty details, in which he saw marks of contempt
or of affection. On one occasion, for instance, she had refused his arm,
