Up to the present, he had been pardoned for many things owing to his
reputation for good-fellowship. His lawsuit placed him amongst men of
bad character. No one visited his house.

Frederick, however, considered that he was bound in honour to go there
more frequently than ever. He hired a box at the Italian opera, and
brought them there with him every week. Meanwhile, the pair had reached
that period in unsuitable unions when an invincible lassitude springs
from concessions which people get into the habit of making, and which
render existence intolerable. Madame Arnoux restrained her pent-up
feelings from breaking out; Arnoux became gloomy; and Frederick grew sad
at witnessing the unhappiness of these two ill-fated beings.

She had imposed on him the obligation, since she had given him her
confidence, of making enquiries as to the state of her husband's
affairs. But shame prevented him from doing so. It was painful to him to
reflect that he coveted the wife of this man, at whose dinner-table he
constantly sat. Nevertheless, he continued his visits, excusing himself
on the ground that he was bound to protect her, and that an occasion
might present itself for being of service to her.

Eight days after the ball, he had paid a visit to M. Dambreuse. The
financier had offered him twenty shares in a coal-mining speculation;
Frederick did not go back there again. Deslauriers had written letters
to him, which he left unanswered. Pellerin had invited him to go and see
the portrait; he always put it off. He gave way, however, to Cisy's
persistent appeals to be introduced to Rosanette.

She received him very nicely, but without springing on his neck as she
used to do formerly. His comrade was delighted at being received by a
woman of easy virtue, and above all at having a chat with an actor.
Delmar was there when he called. A drama in which he appeared as a
peasant lecturing Louis XIV. and prophesying the events of ' had made
him so conspicuous, that the same part was continually assigned to him;
and now his function consisted of attacks on the monarchs of all
nations. As an English brewer, he inveighed against Charles I.; as a
student at Salamanca, he cursed Philip II.; or, as a sensitive father,
he expressed indignation against the Pompadour--this was the most
beautiful bit of acting! The brats of the street used to wait at the
door leading to the side-scenes in order to see him; and his biography,
sold between the acts, described him as taking care of his aged mother,
reading the Bible, assisting the poor, in fact, under the aspect of a
Saint Vincent de Paul together with a dash of Brutus and Mirabeau.
People spoke of him as "Our Delmar." He had a mission; he became another
Christ.

All this had fascinated Rosanette; and she had got rid of Père Oudry,
without caring one jot about consequences, as she was not of a covetous
disposition.

Arnoux, who knew her, had taken advantage of the state of affairs for
some time past to spend very little money on her. M. Roque had appeared
on the scene, and all three of them carefully avoided anything like a
candid explanation. Then, fancying that she had got rid of the other
solely on his account, Arnoux increased her allowance, for she was
living at a very expensive rate. She had even sold her cashmere in her
anxiety to pay off her old debts, as she said; and he was continually
giving her money, while she bewitched him and imposed upon him
pitilessly. Therefore, bills and stamped paper rained all over the
house. Frederick felt that a crisis was approaching.

One day he called to see Madame Arnoux. She had gone out. Monsieur was
at work below stairs in the shop. In fact, Arnoux, in the midst of his
Japanese vases, was trying to take in a newly-married pair who happened
to be well-to-do people from the provinces. He talked about
wheel-moulding and fine-moulding, about spotted porcelain and glazed
porcelain; the others, not wishing to appear utterly ignorant of the
subject, listened with nods of approbation, and made purchases.

When the customers had gone out, he told Frederick that he had that very
morning been engaged in a little altercation with his wife. In order to
obviate any remarks about expense, he had declared that the Maréchale
was no longer his mistress. "I even told her that she was yours."

Frederick was annoyed at this; but to utter reproaches might only betray
him. He faltered: "Ah! you were in the wrong--greatly in the wrong!"

"What does that signify?" said Arnoux. "Where is the disgrace of passing
for her lover? I am really so myself. Would you not be flattered at
being in that position?"

Had she spoken? Was this a hint? Frederick hastened to reply:

"No! not at all! on the contrary!"

"Well, what then?"

"Yes, 'tis true; it makes no difference so far as that's concerned."

Arnoux next asked: "And why don't you call there oftener?"

Frederick promised that he would make it his business to go there again.

"Ah! I forgot! you ought, when talking about Rosanette, to let out in
some way to my wife that you are her lover. I can't suggest how you can
best do it, but you'll find out that. I ask this of you as a special
favour--eh?"

The young man's only answer was an equivocal grimace. This calumny had
undone him. He even called on her that evening, and swore that Arnoux's
accusation was false.

"Is that really so?"

He appeared to be speaking sincerely, and, when she had taken a long
breath of relief, she said to him:

"I believe you," with a beautiful smile. Then she hung down her head,
and, without looking at him:

"Besides, nobody has any claim on you!"

So then she had divined nothing; and she despised him, seeing that she
did not think he could love her well enough to remain faithful to her!
Frederick, forgetting his overtures while with the other, looked on the
permission accorded to him as an insult to himself.

After this she suggested that he ought now and then to pay Rosanette a
visit, to get a little glimpse of what she was like.

Arnoux presently made his appearance, and, five minutes later, wished to
carry him off to Rosanette's abode.

The situation was becoming intolerable.

His attention was diverted by a letter from a notary, who was going to
send him fifteen thousand francs the following day; and, in order to
make up for his neglect of Deslauriers, he went forthwith to tell him
this good news.

The advocate was lodging in the Rue des Trois-Maries, on the fifth
floor, over a courtyard. His study, a little tiled apartment, chilly,
and with a grey paper on the walls, had as its principal decoration a
gold medal, the prize awarded him on the occasion of taking out his
degree as a Doctor of Laws, which was fixed in an ebony frame near the
mirror. A mahogany bookcase enclosed under its glass front a hundred
volumes, more or less. The writing-desk, covered with sheep-leather,
occupied the centre of the apartment. Four old armchairs upholstered in
green velvet were placed in the corners; and a heap of shavings made a
blaze in the fireplace, where there was always a bundle of sticks ready
to be lighted as soon as he rang the bell. It was his consultation-hour,
and the advocate had on a white cravat.

The announcement as to the fifteen thousand francs (he had, no doubt,
given up all hope of getting the amount) made him chuckle with delight.

"That's right, old fellow, that's right--that's quite right!"

He threw some wood into the fire, sat down again, and immediately began
talking about the journal. The first thing to do was to get rid of
