preoccupied with the great artists of the Renaissance that he kept
talking about them persistently. For a whole hour he went on musing
aloud on those splendid lives, full of genius, glory, and sumptuous
displays, with triumphal entries into the cities, and galas by
torchlight among half-naked women, beautiful as goddesses.

"You were made to live in those days. A creature of your calibre would
have deserved a monseigneur."

Rosanette thought the compliments he paid her very pretty. The day was
fixed for the next sitting. Frederick took it on himself to bring the
accessories.

As the heat of the stove had stupefied her a little, they went home on
foot through the Rue du Bac, and reached the Pont Royal.

It was fine weather, piercingly bright and warm. Some windows of houses
in the city shone in the distance, like plates of gold, whilst behind
them at the right the turrets of Nôtre Dame showed their outlines in
black against the blue sky, softly bathed at the horizon in grey
vapours.

The wind began to swell; and Rosanette, having declared that she felt
hungry, they entered the "Patisserie Anglaise."

Young women with their children stood eating in front of the marble
buffet, where plates of little cakes had glass covers pressed down on
them. Rosanette swallowed two cream-tarts. The powdered sugar formed
moustaches at the sides of her mouth. From time to time, in order to
wipe it, she drew out her handkerchief from her muff, and her face,
under her green silk hood, resembled a full-blown rose in the midst of
its leaves.

They resumed their walk. In the Rue de la Paix she stood before a
goldsmith's shop to look at a bracelet. Frederick wished to make her a
present of it.

"No!" said she; "keep your money!"

He was hurt by these words.

"What's the matter now with the ducky? We are melancholy?"

And, the conversation having been renewed, he began making the same
protestations of love to her as usual.

"You know well 'tis impossible!"

"Why?"

"Ah! because----"

They went on side by side, she leaning on his arm, and the flounces of
her gown kept flapping against his legs. Then, he recalled to mind one
winter twilight when on the same footpath Madame Arnoux walked thus by
his side, and he became so much absorbed in this recollection that he no
longer saw Rosanette, and did not bestow a thought upon her.

She kept looking straight before her in a careless fashion, lagging a
little, like a lazy child. It was the hour when people had just come
back from their promenade, and equipages were making their way at a
quick trot over the hard pavement.

Pellerin's flatteries having probably recurred to her mind, she heaved a
sigh.

"Ah! there are some lucky women in the world. Decidedly, I was made for
a rich man!"

He replied, with a certain brutality in his tone:

"You have one, in the meantime!" for M. Oudry was looked upon as a man
that could count a million three times over.

She asked for nothing better than to get free from him.

"What prevents you from doing so?" And he gave utterance to bitter jests
about this old bewigged citizen, pointing out to her that such an
intrigue was unworthy of her, and that she ought to break it off.

"Yes," replied the Maréchale, as if talking to herself. "'Tis what I
shall end by doing, no doubt!"

Frederick was charmed by this disinterestedness. She slackened her pace,
and he fancied that she was fatigued. She obstinately refused to let him
take a cab, and she parted with him at her door, sending him a kiss with
her finger-tips.

"Ah! what a pity! and to think that imbeciles take me for a man of
wealth!"

He reached home in a gloomy frame of mind.

Hussonnet and Deslauriers were awaiting him. The Bohemian, seated before
the table, made sketches of Turks' heads; and the advocate, in dirty
boots, lay asleep on the sofa.

"Ha! at last," he exclaimed. "But how sullen you look! Will you listen
to me?"

His vogue as a tutor had fallen off, for he crammed his pupils with
theories unfavourable for their examinations. He had appeared in two or
three cases in which he had been unsuccessful, and each new
disappointment flung him back with greater force on the dream of his
earlier days--a journal in which he could show himself off, avenge
himself, and spit forth his bile and his opinions. Fortune and
reputation, moreover, would follow as a necessary consequence. It was in
this hope that he had got round the Bohemian, Hussonnet happening to be
the possessor of a press.

At present, he printed it on pink paper. He invented hoaxes, composed
rebuses, tried to engage in polemics, and even intended, in spite of the
situation of the premises, to get up concerts. A year's subscription was
to give a right to a place in the orchestra in one of the principal
theatres of Paris. Besides, the board of management took on itself to
furnish foreigners with all necessary information, artistic and
otherwise. But the printer gave vent to threats; there were three
quarters' rent due to the landlord. All sorts of embarrassments arose;
and Hussonnet would have allowed _L'Art_ to perish, were it not for the
exhortations of the advocate, who kept every day exciting his mind. He
had brought the other with him, in order to give more weight to the
application he was now making.

"We've come about the journal," said he.

"What! are you still thinking about that?" said Frederick, in an absent
tone.

"Certainly, I am thinking about it!"

And he explained his plan anew. By means of the Bourse returns, they
would get into communication with financiers, and would thus obtain the
hundred thousand francs indispensable as security. But, in order that
the print might be transformed into a political journal, it was
necessary beforehand to have a large _clientèle_, and for that purpose
to make up their minds to go to some expense--so much for the cost of
paper and printing, and for outlay at the office; in short, a sum of
about fifteen thousand francs.

"I have no funds," said Frederick.

"And what are we to do, then?" said Deslauriers, with folded arms.

Frederick, hurt by the attitude which Deslauriers was assuming, replied:

"Is that my fault?"

"Ah! very fine. A man has wood in his fire, truffles on his table, a
good bed, a library, a carriage, every kind of comfort. But let another
man shiver under the slates, dine at twenty sous, work like a convict,
