At last, when the hour had struck:

"Ah! well, _andiamo, caro mio_!" And she gave a final touch to her
head-bands, and left directions for Delphine.

"Is Madame coming home to dinner?"

"Why should we, indeed? We shall dine together somewhere--at the Café
Anglais, wherever you wish."

"Be it so!"

Her little dogs began yelping around her.

"We can bring them with us, can't we?"

Frederick carried them himself to the vehicle. It was a hired berlin
with two post-horses and a postilion. He had put his man-servant in the
back seat. The Maréchale appeared satisfied with his attentions. Then,
as soon as she had seated herself, she asked him whether he had been
lately at the Arnouxs'.

"Not for the past month," said Frederick.

"As for me, I met him the day before yesterday. He would have even come
to-day, but he has all sorts of troubles--another lawsuit--I don't know
what. What a queer man!"

Frederick added with an air of indifference:

"Now that I think of it, do you still see--what's that his name
is?--that ex-vocalist--Delmar?"

She replied dryly:

"No; that's all over."

So it was clear that there had been a rupture between them. Frederick
derived some hope from this circumstance.

They descended the Quartier Bréda at an easy pace. As it happened to be
Sunday, the streets were deserted, and some citizens' faces presented
themselves at the windows. The carriage went on more rapidly. The noise
of wheels made the passers-by turn round; the leather of the hood, which
had slid down, was glittering. The man-servant doubled himself up, and
the two Havanese, beside one another, seemed like two ermine muffs laid
on the cushions. Frederick let himself jog up and down with the rocking
of the carriage-straps. The Maréchale turned her head to the right and
to the left with a smile on her face.

Her straw hat of mother-of-pearl colour was trimmed with black lace. The
hood of her bournous floated in the wind, and she sheltered herself
from the rays of the sun under a parasol of lilac satin pointed at the
top like a pagoda.

"What loves of little fingers!" said Frederick, softly taking her other
hand, her left being adorned with a gold bracelet in the form of a
curb-chain.

"I say! that's pretty! Where did it come from?"

"Oh! I've had it a long time," said the Maréchale.

The young man did not challenge this hypocritical answer in any way. He
preferred to profit by the circumstance. And, still keeping hold of the
wrist, he pressed his lips on it between the glove and the cuff.

"Stop! People will see us!"

"Pooh! What does it signify?"

After passing by the Place de la Concorde, they drove along the Quai de
la Conférence and the Quai de Billy, where might be noticed a cedar in a
garden. Rosanette believed that Lebanon was situated in China; she
laughed herself at her own ignorance, and asked Frederick to give her
lessons in geography. Then, leaving the Trocadéro at the right, they
crossed the Pont de Jéna, and drew up at length in the middle of the
Champ de Mars, near some other vehicles already drawn up in the
Hippodrome.

The grass hillocks were covered with common people. Some spectators
might be seen on the balcony of the Military School; and the two
pavilions outside the weighing-room, the two galleries contained within
its enclosure, and a third in front of that of the king, were filled
with a fashionably dressed crowd whose deportment showed their regard
for this as yet novel form of amusement.

The public around the course, more select at this period, had a less
vulgar aspect. It was the era of trouser-straps, velvet collars, and
white gloves. The ladies, attired in showy colours, displayed gowns with
long waists; and seated on the tiers of the stands, they formed, so to
speak, immense groups of flowers, spotted here and there with black by
the men's costumes. But every glance was directed towards the celebrated
Algerian Bou-Maza, who sat, impassive, between two staff officers in one
of the private galleries. That of the Jockey Club contained none but
grave-looking gentlemen.

The more enthusiastic portion of the throng were seated underneath,
close to the track, protected by two lines of sticks which supported
ropes. In the immense oval described by this passage, cocoanut-sellers
were shaking their rattles, others were selling programmes of the races,
others were hawking cigars, with loud cries. On every side there was a
great murmur. The municipal guards passed to and fro. A bell, hung from
a post covered with figures, began ringing. Five horses appeared, and
the spectators in the galleries resumed their seats.

Meanwhile, big clouds touched with their winding outlines the tops of
the elms opposite. Rosanette was afraid that it was going to rain.

"I have umbrellas," said Frederick, "and everything that we need to
afford ourselves diversion," he added, lifting up the chest, in which
there was a stock of provisions in a basket.

"Bravo! we understand each other!"

"And we'll understand each other still better, shall we not?"

"That may be," she said, colouring.

The jockeys, in silk jackets, were trying to draw up their horses in
order, and were holding them back with both hands. Somebody lowered a
red flag. Then the entire five bent over the bristling manes, and off
they started. At first they remained pressed close to each other in a
single mass; this presently stretched out and became cut up. The jockey
in the yellow jacket was near falling in the middle of the first round;
for a long time it was uncertain whether Filly or Tibi should take the
lead; then Tom Pouce appeared in front. But Clubstick, who had been in
the rear since the start, came up with the others and outstripped them,
so that he was the first to reach the winning-post, beating Sir Charles
by two lengths. It was a surprise. There was a shout of applause; the
planks shook with the stamping of feet.

"We are amusing ourselves," said the Maréchale. "I love you, darling!"

Frederick no longer doubted that his happiness was secure. Rosanette's
last words were a confirmation of it.

A hundred paces away from him, in a four-wheeled cabriolet, a lady could
be seen. She stretched her head out of the carriage-door, and then
quickly drew it in again. This movement was repeated several times.
Frederick could not distinguish her face. He had a strong suspicion,
however, that it was Madame Arnoux. And yet this seemed impossible! Why
should she have come there?

He stepped out of his own vehicle on the pretence of strolling into the
weighing-room.

"You are not very gallant!" said Rosanette.

He paid no heed to her, and went on. The four-wheeled cabriolet, turning
