Rosanette did not know anyone to whom she could intrust them.

Then, he turned round to the Bohemian:

"Look here, Hussonnet; sacrifice yourself!"

"Oh! yes, my boy! That would be a very obliging act!"

Hussonnet set off, without even requiring to have an appeal made to him.

In what way could they repay him for his kindness? Frederick did not
bestow a thought on it. He was even beginning to rejoice at finding
himself alone with her, when a waiter entered.

"Madame, somebody is asking for you!"

"What! again?"

"However, I must see who it is," said Rosanette.

He was thirsting for her; he wanted her. This disappearance seemed to
him an act of prevarication, almost a piece of rudeness. What, then,
did she mean? Was it not enough to have insulted Madame Arnoux? So much
for the latter, all the same! Now he hated all women; and he felt the
tears choking him, for his love had been misunderstood and his desire
eluded.

The Maréchale returned, and presented Cisy to him.

"I have invited Monsieur. I have done right, have I not?"

"How is that! Oh! certainly."

Frederick, with the smile of a criminal about to be executed, beckoned
to the gentleman to take a seat.

The Maréchale began to run her eye through the bill of fare, stopping at
every fantastic name.

"Suppose we eat a turban of rabbits _à la Richeliéu_ and a pudding _à la
d'Orléans_?"[]

[Footnote : The word "Orléans" means light woollen cloth, and
possibly Cisy's pun might be rendered: "Oh! no cloth pudding,
please."--Translator.]

"Oh! not Orléans, pray!" exclaimed Cisy, who was a Legitimist, and
thought of making a pun.

"Would you prefer a turbot _à la_ Chambord?" she next asked.

Frederick was disgusted with this display of politeness.

The Maréchale made up her mind to order a simple fillet of beef cut up
into steaks, some crayfishes, truffles, a pine-apple salad, and vanilla
ices.

"We'll see what next. Go on for the present! Ah! I was forgetting! Bring
me a sausage!--not with garlic!"

And she called the waiter "young man," struck her glass with her knife,
and flung up the crumbs of her bread to the ceiling. She wished to
drink some Burgundy immediately.

"It is not taken in the beginning," said Frederick.

This was sometimes done, according to the Vicomte.

"Oh! no. Never!"

"Yes, indeed; I assure you!"

"Ha! you see!"

The look with which she accompanied these words meant: "This is a rich
man--pay attention to what he says!"

Meantime, the door was opening every moment; the waiters kept shouting;
and on an infernal piano in the adjoining room some one was strumming a
waltz. Then the races led to a discussion about horsemanship and the two
rival systems. Cisy was upholding Baucher and Frederick the Comte d'Aure
when Rosanette shrugged her shoulders:

"Enough--my God!--he is a better judge of these things than you
are--come now!"

She kept nibbling at a pomegranate, with her elbow resting on the table.
The wax-candles of the candelabrum in front of her were flickering in
the wind. This white light penetrated her skin with mother-of-pearl
tones, gave a pink hue to her lids, and made her eyeballs glitter. The
red colour of the fruit blended with the purple of her lips; her thin
nostrils heaved; and there was about her entire person an air of
insolence, intoxication, and recklessness that exasperated Frederick,
and yet filled his heart with wild desires.

Then, she asked, in a calm voice, who owned that big landau with
chestnut-coloured livery.

Cisy replied that it was "the Comtesse Dambreuse"

"They're very rich--aren't they?"

"Oh! very rich! although Madame Dambreuse, who was merely a Mademoiselle
Boutron and the daughter of a prefect, had a very modest fortune."

Her husband, on the other hand, must have inherited several
estates--Cisy enumerated them: as he visited the Dambreuses, he knew
their family history.

Frederick, in order to make himself disagreeable to the other, took a
pleasure in contradicting him. He maintained that Madame Dambreuse's
maiden name was De Boutron, which proved that she was of a noble family.

"No matter! I'd like to have her equipage!" said the Maréchale, throwing
herself back on the armchair.

And the sleeve of her dress, slipping up a little, showed on her left
wrist a bracelet adorned with three opals.

Frederick noticed it.

"Look here! why----"

All three looked into one another's faces, and reddened.

The door was cautiously half-opened; the brim of a hat could be seen,
and then Hussonnet's profile exhibited itself.

"Pray excuse me if I disturb the lovers!"

But he stopped, astonished at seeing Cisy, and that Cisy had taken his
own seat.

Another cover was brought; and, as he was very hungry, he snatched up at
random from what remained of the dinner some meat which was in a dish,
fruit out of a basket, and drank with one hand while he helped himself
with the other, all the time telling them the result of his mission. The
two bow-wows had been taken home. Nothing fresh at the house. He had
found the cook in the company of a soldier--a fictitious story which he
had especially invented for the sake of effect.

The Maréchale took down her cloak from the window-screw. Frederick made
a rush towards the bell, calling out to the waiter, who was some
distance away:

"A carriage!"

"I have one of my own," said the Vicomte.

"But, Monsieur!"
