All this time Delmar kept rolling his eyeballs about.

"But really, my dear, my own pet..."

It was the same way on the occasion when he saw her next. As soon as
Frederick entered, she sat up on a cushion in order to embrace him with
more ease, called him a darling, a "dearie," put a flower in his
button-hole, and settled his cravat. These delicate attentions were
redoubled when Delmar happened to be there. Were they advances on her
part? So it seemed to Frederick.

As for deceiving a friend, Arnoux, in his place, would not have had many
scruples on that score, and he had every right not to adhere to rigidly
virtuous principles with regard to this man's mistress, seeing that his
relations with the wife had been strictly honourable, for so he
thought--or rather he would have liked Arnoux to think so, in any event,
as a sort of justification of his own prodigious cowardice. Nevertheless
he felt somewhat bewildered; and presently he made up his mind to lay
siege boldly to the Maréchale.

So, one afternoon, just as she was stooping down in front of her chest
of drawers, he came across to her, and repeated his overtures without a
pause.

Thereupon, she began to cry, saying that she was very unfortunate, but
that people should not despise her on that account.

He only made fresh advances. She now adopted a different plan, namely,
to laugh at his attempts without stopping. He thought it a clever thing
to answer her sarcasms with repartees in the same strain, in which there
was even a touch of exaggeration. But he made too great a display of
gaiety to convince her that he was in earnest; and their comradeship was
an impediment to any outpouring of serious feeling. At last, when she
said one day, in reply to his amorous whispers, that she would not take
another woman's leavings, he answered.

"What other woman?"

"Ah! yes, go and meet Madame Arnoux again!"

For Frederick used to talk about her often. Arnoux, on his side, had the
same mania. At last she lost patience at always hearing this woman's
praises sung, and her insinuation was a kind of revenge.

Frederick resented it. However, Rosanette was beginning to excite his
love to an unusual degree. Sometimes, assuming the attitude of a woman
of experience, she spoke ill of love with a sceptical smile that made
him feel inclined to box her ears. A quarter of an hour afterwards, it
was the only thing of any consequence in the world, and, with her arms
crossed over her breast, as if she were clasping some one close to her:
"Oh, yes, 'tis good! 'tis good!" and her eyelids would quiver in a kind
of rapturous swoon. It was impossible to understand her, to know, for
instance, whether she loved Arnoux, for she made fun of him, and yet
seemed jealous of him. So likewise with the Vatnaz, whom she would
sometimes call a wretch, and at other times her best friend. In short,
there was about her entire person, even to the very arrangement of her
chignon over her head, an inexpressible something, which seemed like a
challenge; and he desired her for the satisfaction, above all, of
conquering her and being her master.

How was he to accomplish this? for she often sent him away
unceremoniously, appearing only for a moment between two doors in order
to say in a subdued voice, "I'm engaged--for the evening;" or else he
found her surrounded by a dozen persons; and when they were alone, so
many impediments presented themselves one after the other, that one
would have sworn there was a bet to keep matters from going any further.
He invited her to dinner; as a rule, she declined the invitation. On one
occasion, she accepted it, but did not come.

A Machiavellian idea arose in his brain.

Having heard from Dussardier about Pellerin's complaints against
himself, he thought of giving the artist an order to paint the
Maréchale's portrait, a life-sized portrait, which would necessitate a
good number of sittings. He would not fail to be present at all of them.
The habitual incorrectness of the painter would facilitate their private
conversations. So then he would urge Rosanette to get the picture
executed in order to make a present of her face to her dear Arnoux. She
consented, for she saw herself in the midst of the Grand Salon in the
most prominent position with a crowd of people staring at her picture,
and the newspapers would all talk about it, which at once would set her
afloat.

As for Pellerin, he eagerly snatched at the offer. This portrait ought
to place him in the position of a great man; it ought to be a
masterpiece. He passed in review in his memory all the portraits by
great masters with which he was acquainted, and decided finally in
favour of a Titian, which would be set off with ornaments in the style
of Veronese. Therefore, he would carry out his design without artificial
backgrounds in a bold light, which would illuminate the flesh-tints with
a single tone, and which would make the accessories glitter.

"Suppose I were to put on her," he thought, "a pink silk dress with an
Oriental bournous? Oh, no! the bournous is only a rascally thing! Or
suppose, rather, I were to make her wear blue velvet with a grey
background, richly coloured? We might likewise give her a white guipure
collar with a black fan and a scarlet curtain behind." And thus, seeking
for ideas, he enlarged his conception, and regarded it with admiration.

He felt his heart beating when Rosanette, accompanied by Frederick,
called at his house for the first sitting. He placed her standing up on
a sort of platform in the midst of the apartment, and, finding fault
with the light and expressing regret at the loss of his former studio,
he first made her lean on her elbow against a pedestal, then sit down in
an armchair, and, drawing away from her and coming near her again by
turns in order to adjust with a fillip the folds of her dress, he
watched her with eyelids half-closed, and appealed to Frederick's taste
with a passing word.

"Well, no," he exclaimed; "I return to my own idea. I will set you up in
the Venetian style."

She would have a poppy-coloured velvet gown with a jewelled girdle; and
her wide sleeve lined with ermine would afford a glimpse of her bare
arm, which was to touch the balustrade of a staircase rising behind her.
At her left, a large column would mount as far as the top of the canvas
to meet certain structures so as to form an arch. Underneath one would
vaguely distinguish groups of orange-trees almost black, through which
the blue sky, with its streaks of white cloud, would seem cut into
fragments. On the baluster, covered with a carpet, there would be, on a
silver dish, a bouquet of flowers, a chaplet of amber, a poniard, and a
little chest of antique ivory, rather yellow with age, which would
appear to be disgorging gold sequins. Some of them, falling on the
ground here and there, would form brilliant splashes, as it were, in
such a way as to direct one's glance towards the tip of her foot, for
she would be standing on the last step but one in a natural position, as
if in the act of moving under the glow of the broad sunlight.

He went to look for a picture-case, which he laid on the platform to
represent the step. Then he arranged as accessories, on a stool by way
of balustrade, his pea-jacket, a buckler, a sardine-box, a bundle of
pens, and a knife; and when he had flung in front of Rosanette a dozen
big sous, he made her assume the attitude he required.

"Just try to imagine that these things are riches, magnificent presents.
The head a little on one side! Perfect! and don't stir! This majestic
posture exactly suits your style of beauty."

She wore a plaid dress and carried a big muff, and only kept from
laughing outright by an effort of self-control.

"As regards the head-dress, we will mingle with it a circle of pearls.
It always produces a striking effect with red hair."

The Maréchale burst out into an exclamation, remarking that she had not
red hair.

"Nonsense! The red of painters is not that of ordinary people."

He began to sketch the position of the masses; and he was so much
