
In front of the door-keeper's lodge they met Martinon, flushed, excited,
with a smile on his face and the halo of victory around his brow. He had
just passed his final examination without any impediment. All he had now
to do was the thesis. Before a fortnight he would be a licentiate. His
family enjoyed the acquaintance of a Minister; "a beautiful career" was
opening before him.

"All the same, this puts you into a mess," said Deslauriers.

There is nothing so humiliating as to see blockheads succeed in
undertakings in which we fail. Frederick, filled with vexation, replied
that he did not care a straw about the matter. He had higher
pretensions; and as Hussonnet made a show of leaving, Frederick took him
aside, and said to him:

"Not a word about this to them, mind!"

It was easy to keep it secret, since Arnoux was starting the next
morning for Germany.

When he came back in the evening the clerk found his friend singularly
altered: he danced about and whistled; and the other was astonished at
this capricious change of mood. Frederick declared that he did not
intend to go home to his mother, as he meant to spend his holidays
working.

At the news of Arnoux's departure, a feeling of delight had taken
possession of him. He might present himself at the house whenever he
liked without any fear of having his visits broken in upon. The
consciousness of absolute security would make him self-confident. At
last he would not stand aloof, he would not be separated from her!
Something more powerful than an iron chain attached him to Paris; a
voice from the depths of his heart called out to him to remain.

There were certain obstacles in his path. These he got over by writing
to his mother: he first of all admitted that he had failed to pass,
owing to alterations made in the course--a mere mischance--an unfair
thing; besides, all the great advocates (he referred to them by name)
had been rejected at their examinations. But he calculated on presenting
himself again in the month of November. Now, having no time to lose, he
would not go home this year; and he asked, in addition to the quarterly
allowance, for two hundred and fifty francs, to get coached in law by a
private tutor, which would be of great assistance to him; and he threw
around the entire epistle a garland of regrets, condolences, expressions
of endearment, and protestations of filial love.

Madame Moreau, who had been expecting him the following day, was doubly
grieved. She threw a veil over her son's misadventure, and in answer
told him to "come all the same." Frederick would not give way, and the
result was a falling out between them. However, at the end of the week,
he received the amount of the quarter's allowance together with the sum
required for the payment of the private tutor, which helped to pay for
a pair of pearl-grey trousers, a white felt hat, and a gold-headed
switch. When he had procured all these things he thought:

"Perhaps this is only a hairdresser's fancy on my part!"

And a feeling of considerable hesitation took possession of him.

In order to make sure as to whether he ought to call on Madame Arnoux,
he tossed three coins into the air in succession. On each occasion luck
was in his favour. So then Fate must have ordained it. He hailed a cab
and drove to the Rue de Choiseul.

He quickly ascended the staircase and drew the bell-pull, but without
effect. He felt as if he were about to faint.

Then, with fierce energy, he shook the heavy silk tassel. There was a
resounding peal which gradually died away till no further sound was
heard. Frederick got rather frightened.

He pasted his ear to the door--not a breath! He looked in through the
key-hole, and only saw two reed-points on the wall-paper in the midst of
designs of flowers. At last, he was on the point of going away when he
changed his mind. This time, he gave a timid little ring. The door flew
open, and Arnoux himself appeared on the threshold, with his hair all in
disorder, his face crimson, and his features distorted by an expression
of sullen embarrassment.

"Hallo! What the deuce brings you here? Come in!"

He led Frederick, not into the boudoir or into the bedroom, but into the
dining-room, where on the table could be seen a bottle of champagne and
two glasses; and, in an abrupt tone:

"There is something you want to ask me, my dear friend?"

"No! nothing! nothing!" stammered the young man, trying to think of some
excuse for his visit. At length, he said to Arnoux that he had called to
know whether they had heard from him, as Hussonnet had announced that he
had gone to Germany.

"Not at all!" returned Arnoux. "What a feather-headed fellow that is to
take everything in the wrong way!"

In order to conceal his agitation, Frederick kept walking from right to
left in the dining-room. Happening to come into contact with a chair, he
knocked down a parasol which had been laid across it, and the ivory
handle got broken.

"Good heavens!" he exclaimed. "How sorry I am for having broken Madame
Arnoux's parasol!"

At this remark, the picture-dealer raised his head and smiled in a very
peculiar fashion. Frederick, taking advantage of the opportunity thus
offered to talk about her, added shyly:

"Could I not see her?"

No. She had gone to the country to see her mother, who was ill.

He did not venture to ask any questions as to the length of time that
she would be away. He merely enquired what was Madame Arnoux's native
place.

"Chartres. Does this astonish you?"

"Astonish me? Oh, no! Why should it! Not in the least!"

After that, they could find absolutely nothing to talk about. Arnoux,
having made a cigarette for himself, kept walking round the table,
puffing. Frederick, standing near the stove, stared at the walls, the
whatnot, and the floor; and delightful pictures flitted through his
memory, or, rather, before his eyes. Then he left the apartment.

A piece of a newspaper, rolled up into a ball, lay on the floor in the
anteroom. Arnoux snatched it up, and, raising himself on the tips of his
toes, he stuck it into the bell, in order, as he said, that he might be
able to go and finish his interrupted siesta. Then, as he grasped
Frederick's hand:

"Kindly tell the porter that I am not in."

And he shut the door after him with a bang.

Frederick descended the staircase step by step. The ill-success of this
first attempt discouraged him as to the possible results of those that
might follow. Then began three months of absolute boredom. As he had
nothing to do, his melancholy was aggravated by the want of occupation.

He spent whole hours gazing from the top of his balcony at the river as
it flowed between the quays, with their bulwarks of grey stone,
blackened here and there by the seams of the sewers, with a pontoon of
washerwomen moored close to the bank, where some brats were amusing
themselves by making a water-spaniel swim in the slime. His eyes,
turning aside from the stone bridge of Nôtre Dame and the three
suspension bridges, continually directed their glance towards the
Quai-aux-Ormes, resting on a group of old trees, resembling the
linden-trees of the Montereau wharf. The Saint-Jacques tower, the Hôtel
