"Good-bye, darling! That was a very nice evening party of yours."

Then, bending close to her ear: "Take care of him!"

"Till better times come," returned the Maréchale, in drawling tones, as
she turned her back.

Arnoux and Frederick returned together, just as they had come. The
dealer in faïence looked so gloomy that his companion wished to know if
he were ill.

"I? Not at all!"

He bit his moustache, knitted his brows; and Frederick asked him, was it
his business that annoyed him.

"By no means!"

Then all of a sudden:

"You know him--Père Oudry--don't you?"

And, with a spiteful expression on his countenance:

"He's rich, the old scoundrel!"

After this, Arnoux spoke about an important piece of ware-making, which
had to be finished that day at his works. He wanted to see it; the
train was starting in an hour.

"Meantime, I must go and embrace my wife."

"Ha! his wife!" thought Frederick. Then he made his way home to go to
bed, with his head aching terribly; and, to appease his thirst, he
swallowed a whole carafe of water.

Another thirst had come to him--the thirst for women, for licentious
pleasure, and all that Parisian life permitted him to enjoy. He felt
somewhat stunned, like a man coming out of a ship, and in the visions
that haunted his first sleep, he saw the shoulders of the fishwife, the
loins of the 'longshorewoman, the calves of the Polish lady, and the
head-dress of the female savage flying past him and coming back again
continually. Then, two large black eyes, which had not been at the ball,
appeared before him; and, light as butterflies, burning as torches, they
came and went, ascended to the cornice and descended to his very mouth.

Frederick made desperate efforts to recognise those eyes, without
succeeding in doing so. But already the dream had taken hold of him. It
seemed to him that he was yoked beside Arnoux to the pole of a
hackney-coach, and that the Maréchale, astride of him, was
disembowelling him with her gold spurs.




CHAPTER VIII.

Frederick Entertains


Frederick found a little mansion at the corner of the Rue Rumfort, and
he bought it along with the brougham, the horse, the furniture, and two
flower-stands which were taken from the Arnoux's house to be placed on
each side of his drawing-room door. In the rear of this apartment were a
bedroom and a closet. The idea occurred to his mind to put up
Deslauriers there. But how could he receive her--_her_, his future
mistress? The presence of a friend would be an obstacle. He knocked down
the partition-wall in order to enlarge the drawing-room, and converted
the closet into a smoking-room.

He bought the works of the poets whom he loved, books of travel,
atlases, and dictionaries, for he had innumerable plans of study. He
hurried on the workmen, rushed about to the different shops, and in his
impatience to enjoy, carried off everything without even holding out for
a bargain beforehand.

From the tradesmen's bills, Frederick ascertained that he would have to
expend very soon forty thousand francs, not including the succession
duties, which would exceed thirty-seven thousand. As his fortune was in
landed property, he wrote to the notary at Havre to sell a portion of it
in order to pay off his debts, and to have some money at his disposal.
Then, anxious to become acquainted at last with that vague entity,
glittering and indefinable, which is known as "society," he sent a note
to the Dambreuses to know whether he might be at liberty to call upon
them. Madame, in reply, said she would expect a visit from him the
following day.

This happened to be their reception-day. Carriages were standing in the
courtyard. Two footmen rushed forward under the marquée, and a third at
the head of the stairs began walking in front of him.

He was conducted through an anteroom, a second room, and then a
drawing-room with high windows and a monumental mantel-shelf supporting
a time-piece in the form of a sphere, and two enormous porcelain vases,
in each of which bristled, like a golden bush, a cluster of sconces.
Pictures in the manner of Espagnolet hung on the walls. The heavy
tapestry portières fell majestically, and the armchairs, the brackets,
the tables, the entire furniture, which was in the style of the Second
Empire, had a certain imposing and diplomatic air.

Frederick smiled with pleasure in spite of himself.

At last he reached an oval apartment wainscoted in cypress-wood, stuffed
with dainty furniture, and letting in the light through a single sheet
of plate-glass, which looked out on a garden. Madame Dambreuse was
seated at the fireside, with a dozen persons gathered round her in a
circle. With a polite greeting, she made a sign to him to take a seat,
without, however, exhibiting any surprise at not having seen him for so
long a time.

Just at the moment when he was entering the room, they had been praising
the eloquence of the Abbé Coeur. Then they deplored the immorality of
servants, a topic suggested by a theft which a _valet-de-chambre_ had
committed, and they began to indulge in tittle-tattle. Old Madame de
Sommery had a cold; Mademoiselle de Turvisot had got married; the
Montcharrons would not return before the end of January; neither would
the Bretancourts, now that people remained in the country till a late
period of the year. And the triviality of the conversation was, so to
speak, intensified by the luxuriousness of the surroundings; but what
they said was less stupid than their way of talking, which was aimless,
disconnected, and utterly devoid of animation. And yet there were
present men versed in life--an ex-minister, the curé of a large parish,
two or three Government officials of high rank. They adhered to the most
hackneyed commonplaces. Some of them resembled weary dowagers; others
had the appearance of horse-jockeys; and old men accompanied their
wives, of whom they were old enough to be the grandfathers.

Madame Dambreuse received all of them graciously. When it was mentioned
that anyone was ill, she knitted her brows with a painful expression on
her face, and when balls or evening parties were discussed, assumed a
joyous air. She would ere long be compelled to deprive herself of these
pleasures, for she was going to take away from a boarding-school a niece
of her husband, an orphan. The guests extolled her devotedness: this was
behaving like a true mother of a family.

Frederick gazed at her attentively. The dull skin of her face looked as
if it had been stretched out, and had a bloom in which there was no
brilliancy; like that of preserved fruit. But her hair, which was in
corkscrew curls, after the English fashion, was finer than silk; her
eyes of a sparkling blue; and all her movements were dainty. Seated at
the lower end of the apartment, on a small sofa, she kept brushing off
the red flock from a Japanese screen, no doubt in order to let her hands
be seen to greater advantage--long narrow hands, a little thin, with
fingers tilting up at the points. She wore a grey moiré gown with a
high-necked body, like a Puritan lady.

Frederick asked her whether she intended to go to La Fortelle this year.
Madame Dambreuse was unable to say. He was sure, however, of one thing,
that one would be bored to death in Nogent.

