Then the visitors thronged in more quickly. There was an incessant
rustling of robes on the carpet. Ladies, seated on the edges of chairs,
gave vent to little sneering laughs, articulated two or three words, and
at the end of five minutes left along with their young daughters. It
soon became impossible to follow the conversation, and Frederick
withdrew when Madame Dambreuse said to him:

"Every Wednesday, is it not, Monsieur Moreau?" making up for her
previous display of indifference by these simple words.

He was satisfied. Nevertheless, he took a deep breath when he got out
into the open air; and, needing a less artificial environment, Frederick
recalled to mind that he owed the Maréchale a visit.

The door of the anteroom was open. Two Havanese lapdogs rushed forward.
A voice exclaimed:

"Delphine! Delphine! Is that you, Felix?"

He stood there without advancing a step. The two little dogs kept
yelping continually. At length Rosanette appeared, wrapped up in a sort
of dressing-gown of white muslin trimmed with lace, and with her
stockingless feet in Turkish slippers.

"Ah! excuse me, Monsieur! I thought it was the hairdresser. One minute;
I am coming back!"

And he was left alone in the dining-room. The Venetian blinds were
closed. Frederick, as he cast a glance round, was beginning to recall
the hubbub of the other night, when he noticed on the table, in the
middle of the room, a man's hat, an old felt hat, bruised, greasy,
dirty. To whom did this hat belong? Impudently displaying its torn
lining, it seemed to say:

"I have the laugh, after all! I am the master!"

The Maréchale suddenly reappeared on the scene. She took up the hat,
opened the conservatory, flung it in there, shut the door again (other
doors flew open and closed again at the same moment), and, having
brought Frederick through the kitchen, she introduced him into her
dressing-room.

It could at once be seen that this was the most frequented room in the
house, and, so to speak, its true moral centre. The walls, the
armchairs, and a big divan with a spring were adorned with a chintz
pattern on which was traced a great deal of foliage. On a white marble
table stood two large washhand-basins of fine blue earthenware. Crystal
shelves, forming a whatnot overhead, were laden with phials, brushes,
combs, sticks of cosmetic, and powder-boxes. The fire was reflected in a
high cheval-glass. A sheet was hanging outside a bath, and odours of
almond-paste and of benzoin were exhaled.

"You'll excuse the disorder. I'm dining in the city this evening."

And as she turned on her heel, she was near crushing one of the little
dogs. Frederick declared that they were charming. She lifted up the pair
of them, and raising their black snouts up to her face:

"Come! do a laugh--kiss the gentleman!"

A man dressed in a dirty overcoat with a fur collar here entered
abruptly.

"Felix, my worthy fellow," said she, "you'll have that business of yours
disposed of next Sunday without fail."

The man proceeded to dress her hair. Frederick told her he had heard
news of her friends, Madame de Rochegune, Madame de Saint-Florentin, and
Madame Lombard, every woman being noble, as if it were at the mansion of
the Dambreuses. Then he talked about the theatres. An extraordinary
performance was to be given that evening at the Ambigu.

"Shall you go?"

"Faith, no! I'm staying at home."

Delphine appeared. Her mistress gave her a scolding for having gone out
without permission.

The other vowed that she was just "returning from market."

"Well, bring me your book. You have no objection, isn't that so?"

And, reading the pass-book in a low tone, Rosanette made remarks on
every item. The different sums were not added up correctly.

"Hand me over four sous!"

Delphine handed the amount over to her, and, when she had sent the maid
away:

"Ah! Holy Virgin! could I be more unfortunate than I am with these
creatures?"

Frederick was shocked at this complaint about servants. It recalled the
others too vividly to his mind, and established between the two houses a
kind of vexatious equality.

When Delphine came back again, she drew close to the Maréchale's side in
order to whisper something in her ear.

"Ah, no! I don't want her!"

Delphine presented herself once more.

"Madame, she insists."

"Ah, what a plague! Throw her out!"

At the same moment, an old lady, dressed in black, pushed forward the
door. Frederick heard nothing, saw nothing. Rosanette rushed into her
apartment to meet her.

When she reappeared her cheeks were flushed, and she sat down in one of
the armchairs without saying a word. A tear fell down her face; then,
turning towards the young man, softly:

"What is your Christian name?"

"Frederick."

"Ha! Federico! It doesn't annoy you when I address you in that way?"

And she gazed at him in a coaxing sort of way that was almost amorous.

All of a sudden she uttered an exclamation of delight at the sight of
Mademoiselle Vatnaz.

The lady-artist had no time to lose before presiding at her _table
d'hôte_ at six o'clock sharp; and she was panting for breath, being
completely exhausted. She first took out of her pocket a gold chain in a
paper, then various objects that she had bought.

"You should know that there are in the Rue Joubert splendid Suède gloves
at thirty-six sous. Your dyer wants eight days more. As for the guipure,
I told you that they would dye it again. Bugneaux has got the instalment
you paid. That's all, I think. You owe me a hundred and eighty-five
francs."

Rosanette went to a drawer to get ten napoleons. Neither of the pair had
any money. Frederick offered some.

"I'll pay you back," said the Vatnaz, as she stuffed the fifteen francs
into her handbag. "But you are a naughty boy! I don't love you any
longer--you didn't get me to dance with you even once the other evening!
Ah! my dear, I came across a case of stuffed humming-birds which are
perfect loves at a shop in the Quai Voltaire. If I were in your place, I
would make myself a present of them. Look here! What do you think of
it?"

