and sprawl through want in the mire--is it the rich man's fault?"

And he repeated, "Is it the rich man's fault?" with a Ciceronian irony
which smacked of the law-courts.

Frederick tried to speak.

"However, I understand one has certain wants--aristocratic wants; for,
no doubt, some woman----"

"Well, even if that were so? Am I not free----?"

"Oh! quite free!"

And, after a minute's silence:

"Promises are so convenient!"

"Good God! I don't deny that I gave them!" said Frederick.

The advocate went on:

"At college we take oaths; we are going to set up a phalanx; we are
going to imitate Balzac's Thirteen. Then, on meeting a friend after a
separation: 'Good night, old fellow! Go about your business!' For he who
might help the other carefully keeps everything for himself alone."

"How is that?"

"Yes, you have not even introduced me to the Dambreuses."

Frederick cast a scrutinising glance at him. With his shabby frock-coat,
his spectacles of rough glass, and his sallow face, that advocate seemed
to him such a typical specimen of the penniless pedant that he could not
prevent his lips from curling with a disdainful smile.

Deslauriers perceived this, and reddened.

He had already taken his hat to leave. Hussonnet, filled with
uneasiness, tried to mollify him with appealing looks, and, as Frederick
was turning his back on him:

"Look here, my boy, become my Mæcenas! Protect the arts!"

Frederick, with an abrupt movement of resignation, took a sheet of
paper, and, having scrawled some lines on it, handed it to him. The
Bohemian's face lighted up.

Then, passing across the sheet of paper to Deslauriers:

"Apologise, my fine fellow!"

Their friend begged his notary to send him fifteen thousand francs as
quickly as possible.

"Ah! I recognise you in that," said Deslauriers.

"On the faith of a gentleman," added the Bohemian, "you are a noble
fellow, you'll be placed in the gallery of useful men!"

The advocate remarked:

"You'll lose nothing by it, 'tis an excellent speculation."

"Faith," exclaimed Hussonnet, "I'd stake my head at the scaffold on its
success!"

And he said so many foolish things, and promised so many wonderful
things, in which perhaps he believed, that Frederick did not know
whether he did this in order to laugh at others or at himself.

The same evening he received a letter from his mother. She expressed
astonishment at not seeing him yet a minister, while indulging in a
little banter at his expense. Then she spoke of her health, and informed
him that M. Roque had now become one of her visitors.

"Since he is a widower, I thought there would be no objection to
inviting him to the house. Louise is greatly changed for the better."
And in a postscript: "You have told me nothing about your fine
acquaintance, M. Dambreuse; if I were you, I would make use of him."

Why not? His intellectual ambitions had left him, and his fortune (he
saw it clearly) was insufficient, for when his debts had been paid, and
the sum agreed on remitted to the others, his income would be diminished
by four thousand at least! Moreover, he felt the need of giving up this
sort of life, and attaching himself to some pursuit. So, next day, when
dining at Madame Arnoux's, he said that his mother was tormenting him in
order to make him take up a profession.

"But I was under the impression," she said, "that M. Dambreuse was going
to get you into the Council of State? That would suit you very well."

So, then, she wished him to take this course. He regarded her wish as a
command.

The banker, as on the first occasion, was seated at his desk, and, with
a gesture, intimated that he desired Frederick to wait a few minutes;
for a gentleman who was standing at the door with his back turned had
been discussing some serious topic with him.

The subject of their conversation was the proposed amalgamation of the
different coal-mining companies.

On each side of the glass hung portraits of General Foy and Louis
Philippe. Cardboard shelves rose along the panels up to the ceiling, and
there were six straw chairs, M. Dambreuse not requiring a more
fashionably-furnished apartment for the transaction of business. It
resembled those gloomy kitchens in which great banquets are prepared.

Frederick noticed particularly two chests of prodigious size which stood
in the corners. He asked himself how many millions they might contain.
The banker unlocked one of them, and as the iron plate revolved, it
disclosed to view nothing inside but blue paper books full of entries.

At last, the person who had been talking to M. Dambreuse passed in front
of Frederick. It was Père Oudry. The two saluted one another, their
faces colouring--a circumstance which surprised M. Dambreuse. However,
he exhibited the utmost affability, observing that nothing would be
easier than to recommend the young man to the Keeper of the Seals. They
would be too happy to have him, he added, concluding his polite
attentions by inviting him to an evening party which he would be giving
in a few days.

Frederick was stepping into a brougham on his way to this party when a
note from the Maréchale reached him. By the light of the carriage-lamps
he read:

"Darling, I have followed your advice: I have just expelled my savage.
After to-morrow evening, liberty! Say whether I am not brave!"

Nothing more. But it was clearly an invitation to him to take the vacant
place. He uttered an exclamation, squeezed the note into his pocket, and
set forth.

Two municipal guards on horseback were stationed in the street. A row of
lamps burned on the two front gates, and some servants were calling out
in the courtyard to have the carriages brought up to the end of the
steps before the house under the marquée.

Then suddenly the noise in the vestibule ceased.

Large trees filled up the space in front of the staircase. The porcelain
globes shed a light which waved like white moiré satin on the walls.

Frederick rushed up the steps in a joyous frame of mind. An usher
announced his name. M. Dambreuse extended his hand. Almost at the very
same moment, Madame Dambreuse appeared. She wore a mauve dress trimmed
with lace. The ringlets of her hair were more abundant than usual, and
not a single jewel did she display.

