there."

He looked at his watch.

"Ah! there's no hurry. The bank does not close till five o'clock."

And, at half-past four, when he had cashed the cheque:

"'Tis useless now; I should not find him in. I'll go this evening." Thus
giving himself the opportunity of changing his mind, for there always
remain in the conscience some of those sophistries which we pour into it
ourselves. It preserves the after-taste of them, like some unwholesome
liquor.

He walked along the boulevards, and dined alone at the restaurant. Then
he listened to one act of a play at the Vaudeville, in order to divert
his thoughts. But his bank-notes caused him as much embarrassment as if
he had stolen them. He would not have been very sorry if he had lost
them.

When he reached home again he found a letter containing these words:

"What news? My wife joins me, dear friend, in the hope, etc.--Yours."

And then there was a flourish after his signature.

"His wife! She appeals to me!"

At the same moment Arnoux appeared, to have an answer as to whether he
had been able to obtain the sum so sorely needed.

"Wait a moment; here it is," said Frederick.

And, twenty-four hours later, he gave this reply to Deslauriers:

"I have no money."

The advocate came back three days, one after the other, and urged
Frederick to write to the notary. He even offered to take a trip to
Havre in connection with the matter.

At the end of the week, Frederick timidly asked the worthy Arnoux for
his fifteen thousand francs. Arnoux put it off till the following day,
and then till the day after. Frederick ventured out late at night,
fearing lest Deslauriers might come on him by surprise.

One evening, somebody knocked against him at the corner of the
Madeleine. It was he.

And Deslauriers accompanied Frederick as far as the door of a house in
the Faubourg Poissonnière.

"Wait for me!"

He waited. At last, after three quarters of an hour, Frederick came out,
accompanied by Arnoux, and made signs to him to have patience a little
longer. The earthenware merchant and his companion went up the Rue de
Hauteville arm-in-arm, and then turned down the Rue de Chabrol.

The night was dark, with gusts of tepid wind. Arnoux walked on slowly,
talking about the Galleries of Commerce--a succession of covered
passages which would have led from the Boulevard Saint-Denis to the
Châtelet, a marvellous speculation, into which he was very anxious to
enter; and he stopped from time to time in order to have a look at the
grisettes' faces in front of the shop-windows, and then, raising his
head again, resumed the thread of his discourse.

Frederick heard Deslauriers' steps behind him like reproaches, like
blows falling on his conscience. But he did not venture to claim his
money, through a feeling of bashfulness, and also through a fear that
it would be fruitless. The other was drawing nearer. He made up his mind
to ask.

Arnoux, in a very flippant tone, said that, as he had not got in his
outstanding debts, he was really unable to pay back the fifteen thousand
francs.

"You have no need of money, I fancy?"

At that moment Deslauriers came up to Frederick, and, taking him aside:

"Be honest. Have you got the amount? Yes or no?"

"Well, then, no," said Frederick; "I've lost it."

"Ah! and in what way?"

"At play."

Deslauriers, without saying a single word in reply, made a very low bow,
and went away. Arnoux had taken advantage of the opportunity to light a
cigar in a tobacconist's shop. When he came back, he wanted to know from
Frederick "who was that young man?"

"Oh! nobody--a friend."

Then, three minutes later, in front of Rosanette's door:

"Come on up," said Arnoux; "she'll be glad to see you. What a savage you
are just now!"

A gas-lamp, which was directly opposite, threw its light on him; and,
with his cigar between his white teeth and his air of contentment, there
was something intolerable about him.

"Ha! now that I think of it, my notary has been at your place this
morning about that mortgage-registry business. 'Tis my wife reminded me
about it."

"A wife with brains!" returned Frederick automatically.

"I believe you."

And once more Arnoux began to sing his wife's praises. There was no one
like her for spirit, tenderness, and thrift; he added in a low tone,
rolling his eyes about: "And a woman with so many charms, too!"

"Good-bye!" said Frederick.

Arnoux made a step closer to him.

"Hold on! Why are you going?" And, with his hand half-stretched out
towards Frederick, he stared at the young man, quite abashed by the look
of anger in his face.

Frederick repeated in a dry tone, "Good-bye!"

He hurried down the Rue de Bréda like a stone rolling headlong, raging
against Arnoux, swearing in his own mind that he would never see the man
again, nor her either, so broken-hearted and desolate did he feel. In
place of the rupture which he had anticipated, here was the other, on
the contrary, exhibiting towards her a most perfect attachment from the
ends of her hair to the inmost depths of her soul. Frederick was
exasperated by the vulgarity of this man. Everything, then, belonged to
him! He would meet Arnoux again at his mistress's door; and the
mortification of a rupture would be added to rage at his own
powerlessness. Besides, he felt humiliated by the other's display of
integrity in offering him guaranties for his money. He would have liked
to strangle him, and over the pangs of disappointment floated in his
conscience, like a fog, the sense of his baseness towards his friend.
Rising tears nearly suffocated him.

Deslauriers descended the Rue des Martyrs, swearing aloud with
indignation; for his project, like an obelisk that has fallen, now
assumed extraordinary proportions. He considered himself robbed, as if
he had suffered a great loss. His friendship for Frederick was dead, and
he experienced a feeling of joy at it--it was a sort of compensation to
him! A hatred of all rich people took possession of him. He leaned
towards Sénécal's opinions, and resolved to make every effort to
propagate them.
