by the preceding operations.

At every opening in the walls, in corners, in the middle of the
corridor, everywhere, earthenware vessels had been placed side by side.

Frederick began to feel bored.

"Perhaps these things are tiresome to you?" said she.

Fearing lest it might be necessary to terminate his visit there and
then, he affected, on the contrary, a tone of great enthusiasm. He even
expressed regret at not having devoted himself to this branch of
industry.

She appeared surprised.

"Certainly! I would have been able to live near you."

And as he tried to catch her eye, Madame Arnoux, in order to avoid him,
took off a bracket little balls of paste, which had come from abortive
readjustments, flattened them out into a thin cake, and pressed her hand
over them.

"Might I carry these away with me?" said Frederick.

"Good heavens! are you so childish?"

He was about to reply when in came Sénécal.

The sub-manager, on the threshold, had noticed a breach of the rules.
The workshops should be swept every week. This was Saturday, and, as the
workmen had not done what was required, Sénécal announced that they
would have to remain an hour longer.

"So much the worse for you!"

They stooped over the work assigned to them unmurmuringly, but their
rage could be divined by the hoarse sounds which came from their chests.
They were, moreover, very easy to manage, having all been dismissed from
the big manufactory. The Republican had shown himself a hard taskmaster
to them. A mere theorist, he regarded the people only in the mass, and
exhibited an utter absence of pity for individuals.

Frederick, annoyed by his presence, asked Madame Arnoux in a low tone
whether they could have an opportunity of seeing the kilns. They
descended to the ground-floor; and she was just explaining the use of
caskets, when Sénécal, who had followed close behind, placed himself
between them.

He continued the explanation of his own motion, expatiated on the
various kinds of combustibles, the process of placing in the kiln, the
pyroscopes, the cylindrical furnaces; the instruments for rounding, the
lustres, and the metals, making a prodigious display of chemical terms,
such as "chloride," "sulphuret," "borax," and "carbonate." Frederick did
not understand a single one of them, and kept turning round every minute
towards Madame Arnoux.

"You are not listening," said she. "M. Sénécal, however, is very clear.
He knows all these things much better than I."

The mathematician, flattered by this eulogy, proposed to show the way in
which colours were laid on. Frederick gave Madame Arnoux an anxious,
questioning look. She remained impassive, not caring to be alone with
him, very probably, and yet unwilling to leave him.

He offered her his arm.

"No--many thanks! the staircase is too narrow!"

And, when they had reached the top, Sénécal opened the door of an
apartment filled with women.

They were handling brushes, phials, shells, and plates of glass. Along
the cornice, close to the wall, extended boards with figures engraved on
them; scraps of thin paper floated about, and a melting-stove sent forth
fumes that made the temperature oppressive, while there mingled with it
the odour of turpentine.

The workwomen had nearly all sordid costumes. It was noticeable,
however, that one of them wore a Madras handkerchief, and long
earrings. Of slight frame, and, at the same time, plump, she had large
black eyes and the fleshy lips of a negress. Her ample bosom projected
from under her chemise, which was fastened round her waist by the string
of her petticoat; and, with one elbow on the board of the work-table and
the other arm hanging down, she gazed vaguely at the open country, a
long distance away. Beside her were a bottle of wine and some pork
chops.

The regulations prohibited eating in the workshops, a rule intended to
secure cleanliness at work and to keep the hands in a healthy condition.

Sénécal, through a sense of duty or a longing to exercise despotic
authority, shouted out to her ere he had come near her, while pointing
towards a framed placard:

"I say, you girl from Bordeaux over there! read out for me Article !"

"Well, what then?"

"What then, mademoiselle? You'll have to pay a fine of three francs."

She looked him straight in the face in an impudent fashion.

"What does that signify to me? The master will take off your fine when
he comes back! I laugh at you, my good man!"

Sénécal, who was walking with his hands behind his back, like an usher
in the study-room, contented himself with smiling.

"Article , insubordination, ten francs!"

The girl from Bordeaux resumed her work. Madame Arnoux, through a sense
of propriety, said nothing; but her brows contracted. Frederick
murmured:

"Ha! you are very severe for a democrat!"

The other replied in a magisterial tone:

"Democracy is not the unbounded license of individualism. It is the
equality of all belonging to the same community before the law, the
distribution of work, order."

"You are forgetting humanity!" said Frederick.

Madame Arnoux took his arm. Sénécal, perhaps, offended by this mark of
silent approbation, went away.

Frederick experienced an immense relief. Since morning he had been
looking out for the opportunity to declare itself; now it had arrived.
Besides, Madame Arnoux's spontaneous movements seemed to him to contain
promises; and he asked her, as if on the pretext of warming their feet,
to come up to her room. But, when he was seated close beside her, he
began once more to feel embarrassed. He was at a loss for a
starting-point. Sénécal, luckily, suggested an idea to his mind.

"Nothing could be more stupid," said he, "than this punishment!"

Madame Arnoux replied: "There are certain severe measures which are
indispensable!"

"What! you who are so good! Oh! I am mistaken, for you sometimes take
pleasure in making other people suffer!"

"I don't understand riddles, my friend!"

And her austere look, still more than the words she used, checked him.
Frederick was determined to go on. A volume of De Musset chanced to be
on the chest of drawers; he turned over some pages, then began to talk
about love, about his hopes and his transports.
