like waves, from which their waists emerged; and their breasts were
clearly outlined by the slope of their corsages. Nearly every one of
them had a bouquet of violets in her hand. The dull shade of their
gloves showed off the whiteness of their arms, which formed a contrast
with its human flesh tints. Over the shoulders of some of them hung
fringe or mourning-weeds, and, every now and then, as they quivered with
emotion, it seemed as if their bodices were about to fall down.

But the decorum of their countenances tempered the exciting effect of
their costumes. Several of them had a placidity almost like that of
animals; and this resemblance to the brute creation on the part of
half-nude women made him think of the interior of a harem--indeed, a
grosser comparison suggested itself to the young man's mind.

Every variety of beauty was to be found there--some English ladies, with
the profile familiar in "keepsakes"; an Italian, whose black eyes shot
forth lava-like flashes, like a Vesuvius; three sisters, dressed in
blue; three Normans, fresh as April apples; a tall red-haired girl, with
a set of amethysts. And the bright scintillation of diamonds, which
trembled in aigrettes worn over their hair, the luminous spots of
precious stones laid over their breasts, and the delightful radiance of
pearls which adorned their foreheads mingled with the glitter of gold
rings, as well as with the lace, powder, the feathers, the vermilion of
dainty mouths, and the mother-of-pearl hue of teeth. The ceiling,
rounded like a cupola, gave to the boudoir the form of a flower-basket,
and a current of perfumed air circulated under the flapping of their
fans.

Frederick, planting himself behind them, put up his eyeglass and scanned
their shoulders, not all of which did he consider irreproachable. He
thought about the Maréchale, and this dispelled the temptations that
beset him or consoled him for not yielding to them.

He gazed, however, at Madame Dambreuse, and he considered her charming,
in spite of her mouth being rather large and her nostrils too dilated.
But she was remarkably graceful in appearance. There was, as it were, an
expression of passionate languor in the ringlets of her hair, and her
forehead, which was like agate, seemed to cover a great deal, and
indicated a masterful intelligence.

She had placed beside her her husband's niece, a rather plain-looking
young person. From time to time she left her seat to receive those who
had just come in; and the murmur of feminine voices, made, as it were, a
cackling like that of birds.

They were talking about the Tunisian ambassadors and their costumes. One
lady had been present at the last reception of the Academy. Another
referred to the _Don Juan_ of Molière, which had recently been performed
at the Théâtre Français.

But with a significant glance towards her niece, Madame Dambreuse laid a
finger on her lips, while the smile which escaped from her contradicted
this display of austerity.

Suddenly, Martinon appeared at the door directly in front of her. She
arose at once. He offered her his arm. Frederick, in order to watch the
progress of these gallantries on Martinon's part, walked past the
card-table, and came up with them in the large drawing-room. Madame
Dambreuse very soon quitted her cavalier, and began chatting with
Frederick himself in a very familiar tone.

She understood that he did not play cards, and did not dance.

"Young people have a tendency to be melancholy!" Then, with a single
comprehensive glance around:

"Besides, this sort of thing is not amusing--at least for certain
natures!"

And she drew up in front of the row of armchairs, uttering a few polite
remarks here and there, while some old men with double eyeglasses came
to pay court to her. She introduced Frederick to some of them. M.
Dambreuse touched him lightly on the elbow, and led him out on the
terrace.

He had seen the Minister. The thing was not easy to manage. Before he
could be qualified for the post of auditor to the Council of State, he
should pass an examination. Frederick, seized with an unaccountable
self-confidence, replied that he had a knowledge of the subjects
prescribed for it.

The financier was not surprised at this, after all the eulogies M. Roque
had pronounced on his abilities.

At the mention of this name, a vision of little Louise, her house and
her room, passed through his mind, and he remembered how he had on
nights like this stood at her window listening to the wagoners driving
past. This recollection of his griefs brought back the thought of Madame
Arnoux, and he relapsed into silence as he continued to pace up and down
the terrace. The windows shone amid the darkness like slabs of flame.
The buzz of the ball gradually grew fainter; the carriages were
beginning to leave.

"Why in the world," M. Dambreuse went on, "are you so anxious to be
attached to the Council of State?"

And he declared, in the tone of a man of broad views, that the public
functions led to nothing--he could speak with some authority on that
point--business was much better.

Frederick urged as an objection the difficulty of grappling with all the
details of business.

"Pooh! I could post you up well in them in a very short time."

Would he like to be a partner in any of his own undertakings?

The young man saw, as by a lightning-flash, an enormous fortune coming
into his hands.

"Let us go in again," said the banker. "You are staying for supper with
us, are you not?"

It was three o'clock. They left the terrace.

In the dining-room, a table at which supper was served up awaited the
guests.

M. Dambreuse perceived Martinon, and, drawing near his wife, in a low
tone:

"Is it you who invited him?"

She answered dryly:

"Yes, of course."

The niece was not present.

The guests drank a great deal of wine, and laughed very loudly; and
risky jokes did not give any offence, all present experiencing that
sense of relief which follows a somewhat prolonged period of constraint.

Martinon alone displayed anything like gravity. He refused to drink
champagne, as he thought this good form, and, moreover, he assumed an
air of tact and politeness, for when M. Dambreuse, who had a contracted
chest, complained of an oppression, he made repeated enquiries about
that gentleman's health, and then let his blue eyes wander in the
direction of Madame Dambreuse.

She questioned Frederick in order to find out which of the young ladies
he liked best. He had noticed none of them in particular, and besides,
he preferred the women of thirty.

"There, perhaps, you show your sense," she returned.

Then, as they were putting on their pelisses and paletots, M. Dambreuse
said to him:

"Come and see me one of these mornings and we'll have a chat."
