who happened to be--she now made no concealment any longer about it--the
ex-singer of the Alhambra, and who, though his name was Auguste
Delamare, had first called himself Anténor Delamarre, then Delmas, then
Belmar, and at last Delmar, thus modifying and perfecting his name, as
his celebrity increased, for he had forsaken the public-house concert
for the theatre, and had even just made his _début_ in a noisy fashion
at the Ambigu in _Gaspardo le Pécheur_.

Hussonnet, on seeing him, knitted his brows. Since his play had been
rejected, he hated actors. It was impossible to conceive the vanity of
individuals of this sort, and above all of this fellow. "What a prig!
Just look at him!"

After a light bow towards Rosanette, Delmar leaned back against the
mantelpiece; and he remained motionless with one hand over his heart,
his left foot thrust forward, his eyes raised towards heaven, with his
wreath of gilt laurels above his cowl, while he strove to put into the
expression of his face a considerable amount of poetry in order to
fascinate the ladies. They made, at some distance, a great circle around
him.

But the Vatnaz, having given Rosanette a prolonged embrace, came to beg
of Hussonnet to revise, with a view to the improvement of the style, an
educational work which she intended to publish, under the title of "The
Young Ladies' Garland," a collection of literature and moral philosophy.

The man of letters promised to assist her in the preparation of the
work. Then she asked him whether he could not in one of the prints to
which he had access give her friend a slight puff, and even assign to
him, later, some part. Hussonnet had forgotten to take a glass of punch
on account of her.

It was Arnoux who had brewed the beverage; and, followed by the Comte's
groom carrying an empty tray, he offered it to the ladies with a
self-satisfied air.

When he came to pass in front of M. Oudry, Rosanette stopped him.

"Well--and this little business?"

He coloured slightly; finally, addressing the old man:

"Our fair friend tells me that you would have the kindness----"

"What of that, neighbour? I am quite at your service!"

And M. Dambreuse's name was pronounced. As they were talking to one
another in low tones, Frederick could only hear indistinctly; and he
made his way to the other side of the mantelpiece, where Rosanette and
Delmar were chatting together.

The mummer had a vulgar countenance, made, like the scenery of the
stage, to be viewed from a distance--coarse hands, big feet, and a heavy
jaw; and he disparaged the most distinguished actors, spoke of poets
with patronising contempt, made use of the expressions "my organ," "my
physique," "my powers," enamelling his conversation with words that were
scarcely intelligible even to himself, and for which he had quite an
affection, such as "_morbidezza_," "analogue," and "homogeneity."

Rosanette listened to him with little nods of approbation. One could see
her enthusiasm bursting out under the paint on her cheeks, and a touch
of moisture passed like a veil over her bright eyes of an indefinable
colour. How could such a man as this fascinate her? Frederick internally
excited himself to greater contempt for him, in order to banish,
perhaps, the species of envy which he felt with regard to him.

Mademoiselle Vatnaz was now with Arnoux, and, while laughing from time
to time very loudly, she cast glances towards Rosanette, of whom M.
Oudry did not lose sight.

Then Arnoux and the Vatnaz disappeared. The old man began talking in a
subdued voice to Rosanette.

"Well, yes, 'tis settled then! Leave me alone!"

And she asked Frederick to go and give a look into the kitchen to see
whether Arnoux happened to be there.

A battalion of glasses half-full covered the floor; and the saucepans,
the pots, the turbot-kettle, and the frying-stove were all in a state of
commotion. Arnoux was giving directions to the servants, whom he
"thee'd" and "thou'd," beating up the mustard, tasting the sauces, and
larking with the housemaid.

"All right," he said; "tell them 'tis ready! I'm going to have it served
up."

The dancing had ceased. The women came and sat down; the men were
walking about. In the centre of the drawing-room, one of the curtains
stretched over a window was swelling in the wind; and the Sphinx, in
spite of the observations of everyone, exposed her sweating arms to the
current of air.

Where could Rosanette be? Frederick went on further to find her, even
into her boudoir and her bedroom. Some, in order to be alone, or to be
in pairs, had retreated into the corners. Whisperings intermingled with
the shade. There were little laughs stifled under handkerchiefs, and at
the sides of women's corsages one could catch glimpses of fans quivering
with slow, gentle movements, like the beating of a wounded bird's wings.

As he entered the hot-house, he saw under the large leaves of a caladium
near the jet d'eau, Delmar lying on his face on the sofa covered with
linen cloth. Rosanette, seated beside him, had passed her fingers
through his hair; and they were gazing into each other's faces. At the
same moment, Arnoux came in at the opposite side--that which was near
the aviary. Delmar sprang to his feet; then he went out at a rapid pace,
without turning round; and even paused close to the door to gather a
hibiscus flower, with which he adorned his button-hole. Rosanette hung
down her head; Frederick, who caught a sight of her profile, saw that
she was in tears.

"I say! What's the matter with you?" exclaimed Arnoux.

She shrugged her shoulders without replying.

"Is it on account of him?" he went on.

She threw her arms round his neck, and kissing him on the forehead,
slowly:

"You know well that I will always love you, my big fellow! Think no more
about it! Let us go to supper!"

A copper chandelier with forty wax tapers lighted up the dining-room,
the walls of which were hidden from view under some fine old earthenware
that was hung up there; and this crude light, falling perpendicularly,
rendered still whiter, amid the side-dishes and the fruits, a huge
turbot which occupied the centre of the tablecloth, with plates all
round filled with crayfish soup. With a rustle of garments, the women,
having arranged their skirts, their sleeves, and their scarfs, took
their seats beside one another; the men, standing up, posted themselves
at the corners. Pellerin and M. Oudry were placed near Rosanette. Arnoux
was facing her. Palazot and his female companion had just gone out.

"Good-bye to them!" said she. "Now let us begin the attack!"

And the choir-boy, a facetious man with a big sign of the cross, said
grace.

The ladies were scandalised, and especially the fishwife, the mother of
a young girl of whom she wished to make an honest woman. Neither did
Arnoux like "that sort of thing," as he considered that religion ought
to be respected.

A German clock with a cock attached to it happening to chime out the
hour of two, gave rise to a number of jokes about the cuckoo. All kinds
of talk followed--puns, anecdotes, bragging remarks, bets, lies taken
for truth, improbable assertions, a tumult of words, which soon became
dispersed in the form of chats between particular individuals. The wines
went round; the dishes succeeded each other; the doctor carved. An
