back, broke into a trot.

Frederick at the same moment, found himself button-holed by Cisy.

"Good-morrow, my dear boy! how are you going on? Hussonnet is over
there! Are you listening to me?"

Frederick tried to shake him off in order to get up with the
four-wheeled cabriolet. The Maréchale beckoned to him to come round to
her. Cisy perceived her, and obstinately persisted in bidding her
good-day.

Since the termination of the regular period of mourning for his
grandmother, he had realised his ideal, and succeeded in "getting the
proper stamp." A Scotch plaid waistcoat, a short coat, large bows over
the pumps, and an entrance-card stuck in the ribbon of his hat; nothing,
in fact, was wanting to produce what he described himself as his
_chic_--a _chic_ characterised by Anglomania and the swagger of the
musketeer. He began by finding fault with the Champ de Mars, which he
referred to as an "execrable turf," then spoke of the Chantilly races,
and the droll things that had occurred there, swore that he could drink
a dozen glasses of champagne while the clock was striking the midnight
hour, offered to make a bet with the Maréchale, softly caressed her two
lapdogs; and, leaning against the carriage-door on one elbow, he kept
talking nonsense, with the handle of his walking-stick in his mouth, his
legs wide apart, and his back stretched out. Frederick, standing beside
him, was smoking, while endeavouring to make out what had become of the
cabriolet.

The bell having rung, Cisy took himself off, to the great delight of
Rosanette, who said he had been boring her to death.

The second race had nothing special about it; neither had the third,
save that a man was thrown over the shaft of a cart while it was taking
place. The fourth, in which eight horses contested the City Stakes, was
more interesting.

The spectators in the gallery had clambered to the top of their seats.
The others, standing up in the vehicles, followed with opera-glasses in
their hands the movements of the jockeys. They could be seen starting
out like red, yellow, white, or blue spots across the entire space
occupied by the crowd that had gathered around the ring of the
hippodrome. At a distance, their speed did not appear to be very great;
at the opposite side of the Champ de Mars, they seemed even to be
slackening their pace, and to be merely slipping along in such a way
that the horses' bellies touched the ground without their outstretched
legs bending at all. But, coming back at a more rapid stride, they
looked bigger; they cut the air in their wild gallop. The sun's rays
quivered; pebbles went flying about under their hoofs. The wind, blowing
out the jockeys' jackets, made them flutter like veils. Each of them
lashed the animal he rode with great blows of his whip in order to reach
the winning-post--that was the goal they aimed at. One swept away the
figures, another was hoisted off his saddle, and, in the midst of a
burst of applause, the victorious horse dragged his feet to the
weighing-room, all covered with sweat, his knees stiffened, his neck and
shoulders bent down, while his rider, looking as if he were expiring in
his saddle, clung to the animal's flanks.

The final start was retarded by a dispute which had arisen. The crowd,
getting tired, began to scatter. Groups of men were chatting at the
lower end of each gallery. The talk was of a free-and-easy description.
Some fashionable ladies left, scandalised by seeing fast women in their
immediate vicinity.

There were also some specimens of the ladies who appeared at public
balls, some light-comedy actresses of the boulevards, and it was not the
best-looking portion of them that got the most appreciation. The elderly
Georgine Aubert, she whom a writer of vaudevilles called the Louis XI.
of her profession, horribly painted, and giving vent every now and then
to a laugh resembling a grunt, remained reclining at full length in her
big calash, covered with a sable fur-tippet, as if it were midwinter.
Madame de Remoussat, who had become fashionable by means of a notorious
trial in which she figured, sat enthroned on the seat of a brake in
company with some Americans; and Thérèse Bachelu, with her look of a
Gothic virgin, filled with her dozen furbelows the interior of a trap
which had, in place of an apron, a flower-stand filled with roses. The
Maréchale was jealous of these magnificent displays. In order to attract
attention, she began to make vehement gestures and to speak in a very
loud voice.

Gentlemen recognised her, and bowed to her. She returned their
salutations while telling Frederick their names. They were all counts,
viscounts, dukes, and marquises, and carried a high head, for in all
eyes he could read a certain respect for his good fortune.

Cisy had a no less happy air in the midst of the circle of mature men
that surrounded them. Their faces wore cynical smiles above their
cravats, as if they were laughing at him. At length he gave a tap in
the hand of the oldest of them, and made his way towards the Maréchale.

She was eating, with an affectation of gluttony, a slice of _pâté de
foie gras_. Frederick, in order to make himself agreeable to her,
followed her example, with a bottle of wine on his knees.

The four-wheeled cabriolet reappeared. It _was_ Madame Arnoux! Her face
was startlingly pale.

"Give me some champagne," said Rosanette.

And, lifting up her glass, full to the brim as high as possible, she
exclaimed:

"Look over there! Look at my protector's wife, one of the virtuous
women!"

There was a great burst of laughter all round her; and the cabriolet
disappeared from view. Frederick tugged impatiently at her dress, and
was on the point of flying into a passion. But Cisy was there, in the
same attitude as before, and, with increased assurance, he invited
Rosanette to dine with him that very evening.

"Impossible!" she replied; "we're going together to the Café Anglais."

Frederick, as if he had heard nothing, remained silent; and Cisy quitted
the Maréchale with a look of disappointment on his face.

While he had been talking to her at the right-hand door of the carriage,
Hussonnet presented himself at the opposite side, and, catching the
words "Café Anglais":

"It's a nice establishment; suppose we had a pick there, eh?"

"Just as you like," said Frederick, who, sunk down in the corner of the
berlin, was gazing at the horizon as the four-wheeled cabriolet vanished
from his sight, feeling that an irreparable thing had happened, and
that there was an end of his great love. And the other woman was there
beside him, the gay and easy love! But, worn out, full of conflicting
desires, and no longer even knowing what he wanted, he was possessed by
a feeling of infinite sadness, a longing to die.

A great noise of footsteps and of voices made him raise his head. The
little ragamuffins assembled round the track sprang over the ropes and
came to stare at the galleries. Thereupon their occupants rose to go. A
few drops of rain began to fall. The crush of vehicles increased, and
Hussonnet got lost in it.

"Well! so much the better!" said Frederick.

"We like to be alone better--don't we?" said the Maréchale, as she
placed her hand in his.

Then there swept past him with a glitter of copper and steel a
magnificent landau to which were yoked four horses driven in the Daumont
style by two jockeys in velvet vests with gold fringes. Madame Dambreuse
was by her husband's side, and Martinon was on the other seat facing
them. All three of them gazed at Frederick in astonishment.

"They have recognised me!" said he to himself.

Rosanette wished to stop in order to get a better view of the people
