driving away from the course. Madame Arnoux might again make her
appearance! He called out to the postilion:

"Go on! go on! forward!" And the berlin dashed towards the
Champs-Élysées in the midst of the other vehicles--calashes, britzkas,
wurths, tandems, tilburies, dog-carts, tilted carts with leather
curtains, in which workmen in a jovial mood were singing, or one-horse
chaises driven by fathers of families. In victorias crammed with people
some young fellows seated on the others' feet let their legs both hang
down. Large broughams, which had their seats lined with cloth, carried
dowagers fast asleep, or else a splendid machine passed with a seat as
simple and coquettish as a dandy's black coat.

The shower grew heavier. Umbrellas, parasols, and mackintoshes were put
into requisition. People cried out at some distance away: "Good-day!"
"Are you quite well?" "Yes!" "No!" "Bye-bye!"--and the faces succeeded
each other with the rapidity of Chinese shadows.

Frederick and Rosanette did not say a word to each other, feeling a sort
of dizziness at seeing all these wheels continually revolving close to
them.

At times, the rows of carriages, too closely pressed together, stopped
all at the same time in several lines. Then they remained side by side,
and their occupants scanned one another. Over the sides of panels
adorned with coats-of-arms indifferent glances were cast on the crowd.
Eyes full of envy gleamed from the interiors of hackney-coaches.
Depreciatory smiles responded to the haughty manner in which some people
carried their heads. Mouths gaping wide expressed idiotic admiration;
and, here and there, some lounger, in the middle of the road, fell back
with a bound, in order to avoid a rider who had been galloping through
the midst of the vehicles, and had succeeded in getting away from them.
Then, everything set itself in motion once more; the coachmen let go the
reins, and lowered their long whips; the horses, excited, shook their
curb-chains, and flung foam around them; and the cruppers and the
harness getting moist, were smoking with the watery evaporation, through
which struggled the rays of the sinking sun. Passing under the Arc de
Triomphe, there stretched out at the height of a man, a reddish light,
which shed a glittering lustre on the naves of the wheels, the handles
of the carriage-doors, the ends of the shafts, and the rings of the
carriage-beds; and on the two sides of the great avenue--like a river in
which manes, garments, and human heads were undulating--the trees, all
glittering with rain, rose up like two green walls. The blue of the sky
overhead, reappearing in certain places, had the soft hue of satin.

Then, Frederick recalled the days, already far away, when he yearned for
the inexpressible happiness of finding himself in one of these carriages
by the side of one of these women. He had attained to this bliss, and
yet he was not thereby one jot the happier.

The rain had ceased falling. The pedestrians, who had sought shelter
between the columns of the Public Storerooms, took their departure.
Persons who had been walking along the Rue Royale, went up again towards
the boulevard. In front of the residence of the Minister of Foreign
Affairs a group of boobies had taken up their posts on the steps.

When it had got up as high as the Chinese Baths, as there were holes in
the pavement, the berlin slackened its pace. A man in a hazel-coloured
paletot was walking on the edge of the footpath. A splash, spurting out
from under the springs, showed itself on his back. The man turned round
in a rage. Frederick grew pale; he had recognised Deslauriers.

At the door of the Café Anglais he sent away the carriage. Rosanette had
gone in before him while he was paying the postilion.

He found her subsequently on the stairs chatting with a gentleman.
Frederick took her arm; but in the lobby a second gentleman stopped her.

"Go on," said she; "I am at your service."

And he entered the private room alone. Through the two open windows
people could be seen at the casements of the other houses opposite.
Large watery masses were quivering on the pavement as it began to dry,
and a magnolia, placed on the side of a balcony, shed a perfume through
the apartment. This fragrance and freshness had a relaxing effect on his
nerves. He sank down on the red divan underneath the glass.

The Maréchale here entered the room, and, kissing him on the forehead:

"Poor pet! there's something annoying you!"

"Perhaps so," was his reply.

"You are not alone; take heart!"--which was as much as to say: "Let us
each forget our own concerns in a bliss which we shall enjoy in common."

Then she placed the petal of a flower between her lips and extended it
towards him so that he might peck at it. This movement, full of grace
and of almost voluptuous gentleness, had a softening influence on
Frederick.

"Why do you give me pain?" said he, thinking of Madame Arnoux.

"I give you pain?"

And, standing before him, she looked at him with her lashes drawn close
together and her two hands resting on his shoulders.

All his virtue, all his rancour gave way before the utter weakness of
his will.

He continued:

"Because you won't love me," and he took her on his knees.

She gave way to him. He pressed his two hands round her waist. The
crackling sound of her silk dress inflamed him.

"Where are they?" said Hussonnet's voice in the lobby outside.

The Maréchale arose abruptly, and went across to the other side of the
room, where she sat down with her back to the door.

She ordered oysters, and they seated themselves at table.

Hussonnet was not amusing. By dint of writing every day on all sorts of
subjects, reading many newspapers, listening to a great number of
discussions, and uttering paradoxes for the purpose of dazzling people,
he had in the end lost the exact idea of things, blinding himself with
his own feeble fireworks. The embarrassments of a life which had
formerly been frivolous, but which was now full of difficulty, kept him
in a state of perpetual agitation; and his impotency, which he did not
wish to avow, rendered him snappish and sarcastic. Referring to a new
ballet entitled _Ozai_, he gave a thorough blowing-up to the dancing,
and then, when the opera was in question, he attacked the Italians, now
replaced by a company of Spanish actors, "as if people had not quite
enough of Castilles[] already!" Frederick was shocked at this, owing
to his romantic attachment to Spain, and, with a view to diverting the
conversation into a new channel, he enquired about the Collége of
France, where Edgar Quinet and Mickiewicz had attended. But Hussonnet,
an admirer of M. de Maistre, declared himself on the side of Authority
and Spiritualism. Nevertheless, he had doubts about the most
well-established facts, contradicted history, and disputed about things
whose certainty could not be questioned; so that at mention of the word
"geometry," he exclaimed: "What fudge this geometry is!" All this he
intermingled with imitations of actors. Sainville was specially his
model.

[Footnote : This pun of Hussonnet turns on the double sense of the
word "Castille," which not only means a place in Spain, but also an
altercation.--Translator.]

Frederick was quite bored by these quibbles. In an outburst of
impatience he pushed his foot under the table, and pressed it on one of
the little dogs.

Thereupon both animals began barking in a horrible fashion.

"You ought to get them sent home!" said he, abruptly.

