 



 


The size of the WH population was estimated at  animals in  with a declining trend 
(Regehr et al. in prep., and unpublished data in PBSG  Canadian Research Report p,). 

A quota increase of  bears (from  to ) was implemented for Nunavut in / season 
(Dyck et al. , Nunavut Report to PBTC p.l), based on Native residents’ reports that more 
polar bears are being observed along the coast in recent years, which they interpret as evidence 
that the sub-population is increasing (PBSG  Canadian Research Report p.). This finding 
was discussed by PBSG members in the  lUCN PBSG meeting, who questioned whether 
this population continues to be managed on the best available scientific data, as called for in the 
 Agreement. 

This population is harvested by Nunavut hunters. Manitoba has a quota of  that is used for the 
Polar Bear Control Program if bears become a threat to public safety. The / harvest 
was ! bears by Nunavut and  bears by Manitoba hunters (PBTC ). 

o. Southern Hudson Bay (SH) 

The estimated size of the SH population size in  was , animals (PBSG  p. ). 

The sub-population is harvested by hunters from Nunavut, Quebec, and Ontario (Manitoba 
shares management responsibility but does not hunt this sub-population). The - 
harvest was  bears by Nunavut and  bears by Ontario hunters (PBTC ). 

p. Kane Basin (KB) 

The current size of the KB population is estimated at approximately  bears based on - 
 data, (M. Taylor, unpublished data in PBSG  Greenland Research Report p. 

Greenland hunters harvested an average of  per year from this sub-population from - 
(Born and Sonne , Greenland Research Report to PBSG p. ). Prior to , this sub- 


 



 


population was harvested only by Greenland hunters, but since , Nunavut hunters from 
Grise Fjord have also harvested bears from KB (PBSG  p. ). The combined harvest of 
- bears per year from Greenland and Nunavut is believed to be unsustainable (PBSG  p. 
). The current quota in Nunavut is set at  bears per year (Dyck et al. , Nunavut Report to 
PBTC p.  ). Greenland and Canada are continuing to hold co-management discussions for this 
population (PBSG  p. ). 

q. Baffin Bay (BB) 

The current size for the BB population based on - data, is , bears (PBSG , 
Greenland Research Report, p.). Harvest levels in - averaged    polar bears 
annually from the Greenland side (PBSG  Greenland Research Report p.) and  in 
Nunavut (Aars et al. ). During the last  years (-) an average of  bears/year 
were taken in Greenland (Aars el al. ) A quota increase of  bears (from  to ) was 
implemented by Nunavut in / (Dyck et al. , Nunavut Report to PBTC p.l), 

Greenland’s harvest levels of polar bears in Baffin Bay have increased significantly since  
and were particularly high during -. It is unknown whether this is related to an 
increase in hunting effort, increased efficiency of reporting, or because sea ice cover in eastern 
Baffin Bay has decreased, forcing an increased number of bears on to the shore. Canada and 
Greenland are holding co-management discussions to address the severe over-harvest of this 
population. 


r. Davis Strait (DS) 

The current size of the DS population size is unknown. In  a population estimate of , 
animals was proposed because that was the minimum number of animals required to sustain the 
existing level of harvest (PBSG  p.). Nunavut currently uses a population estimate of 
, bears for harvest management purposes. A three-year population survey was initiated in 
. 


 



 


The DS sub-population is hunted by both Greenland hunters and Canadian hunters from 
Nunavut, Labrador, and Quebec. While quotas are in place for Nunavut and Labrador, Quebec 
does not manage with a quota system and the harvest there is unregulated. Quebec reported a 
harvest of  bears and Labrador  bears in - (PBTC report). Greenland hunters had an 
average catch of  polar bear per year during - (Born and Sonne , Greenland 
Research Report to PBSG, p.). In Nunavut, a harvest quota increase of  bears (from  to ) 
was implemented in / (Dyck et al. , Nunavut Report to PBTC p.  ), based on Inuit 
reports that the sub-population has increased since . Nunavut harvested  bears in - 
 (PBTC ). Co-management discussions between Greenland and Canada are on-going. 

s. Arctic Basin (AB) 

Polar bear densities are believed to be low; no population surveys have been done of the AB 
population, and a rough population estimate is perhaps  animals (PBSG , Canadian 
Management Report p.). No harvest quota has been set, and there is no known harvest, except 
for an occasional defense kill (PBSG , Canadian Management Report p,) 

Summary 

At present, concern exists for potential over-harvest of the BB, CS, KB, and WH populations of 
polar bears. In other populations like East Greenland and Davis Strait, a high number of polar 
bears are taken annually despite lack of scientific information about population size. 

Considerable debate has occurred regarding the recent changes in population estimates and quota 
increases for some populations in Nunavut (Aars et al. ). The question arises whether 
increasing quotas based on IQ (and the perception that the populations were increasing because 
hunters were seeing more bears along the coast) constitutes a “sound conservation practice” and 
is “based on best scientific data”. Most scientists indicated that increased numbers of bear along 
the coastline could be related to changes in bear distribution (lack of suitable ice habitat) rather 
than an increase in the population size, and until additional inventories are done, a precautionary 

 



 


approach should be used when setting polar bear harvest limits (Aars et al. ), Recent 
computer simulations indicate that harvesting polar bear populations at or near MSY involves 
more risk (e.g, the probability that harvest will result in population decline) than previously 
believed (PBSG ). Also, managers must consider the cumulative effects of harvest in 
combination with other stressors such as diminishing ice habitat, high level of pollutants in some 
populations, increased bear-human interactions, and the overall lack of current data regarding 
polar bears and their habitat. 

On the other hand, for most of the world’s harvested polar bear populations, the economic and 
cultural value associated with both subsistence and sport hunting of polar bears is an important 
consideration in polar bear conservation (Freeman and Wenzel ). One concern is that if 
polar bears are listed as “threatened” and that action results in a ban on polar bear hunting or 
import of sport hunted trophies into other countries, a serious economic effect may occur in 
small hunting communities in Nunavut, and local hunters may see less value in conserving bears 
and abiding by the harvest management practices that are currently in place, and therefore, an 
increase in nuisance or defense kills may occur. Regardless of what the U.S. decides regarding 
listing polar bearsunder the ESA, other jurisdictions have a right and obligation to manage their 
polar bear populations. In instances of cooperative management of shared stocks (e.g, Canada 
and Greenland, U.S. and Russia) a decision to list the species may have indirect or direct 
implications. 

C. Disease and Predation 

. Disease 

Except for the presence of Trichinella larvae, the occurrence of diseases and parasites in polar 
