that there was false information there. I am not hitting climate 
models in a critical way. I am showing the challenge that is there 
on reproducing climate results on a regional basis. 

If in trying to reproduce the past we see such model errors, one 
must assume that predicting the future would produce similar op- 
portunity for regional errors. I want to encourage the Committee 
to be suspicious of media reports in which weather extremes are 
given as proof of human-induced climate change. 

Weather extremes occur somewhere all the time. For example, 
you have seen recent reports perhaps about the U.S. surface tem- 
perature data showing January through March the highest ever in 
one surface temperature data set of the United States, not others. 

The satellite data provides information for the entire globe and 
show that, yes, indeed, the tropospheric temperatures were well 
above average for the  contiguous states. However, most of the 
globe experienced below average temperatures in that massive bulk 
of the atmosphere. 

It was our turn to be warm while in places such as the equatorial 
oceans and the Sahara Desert, it was their turn to be cool. Other 
climate data give us similar information. Hurricanes have not in- 
creased. Tornadoes have not increased. Droughts and wet spells 
have not statistically increased, or decreased. 

Let me quickly add, there are many more people and much more 
wealth in the paths of these destructive events, so losses have in- 
creased but that is not due to climate change. Deaths in U.S. cities 
are no longer correlated with high temperatures, though deaths 
still increase during cold temperatures. 

When looking at data such as these, especially on a regional 
basis, climate change, and in particular, the human factor of cli- 
mate change, is very difficult to detect at all. 

I will close with three questions and a plea. Is the climate chang- 
ing? Yes, it always has and it always will, but it is very difficult 
to detect on decadal time scales. 



 


Are climate models useful? Yes, and improving. At this point, 
their utility is mostly in global average scale, yet there are still 
some significant shortcomings even there. 

Is that portion of climate change due to human factors good, bad, 
or inconsequential? And that, no one knows, although we do know 
that the plant world thrives on additional CO in the atmosphere. 

What I do know is that we depend on data to answer these ques- 
tions. The global data network is decaying at the very time we 
need it most. 

If the richest country in the world could do anything, it would 
be to step up efforts to monitor the present global climate, recon- 
struct the past climate, assure easy and timely access to data, and 
to support scientists to study the data on which to depend such im- 
portant answers. 

Thank you. 

The Chairman. Thank you very much, Dr. Christy. 

[The prepared statement of Dr. Christy follows:] 

Prepared Statement of Dr. John R. Christy, Director, 

Earth System Science Center, University of Alabama 

Mr. Chairman and Committee Members, I am pleased to accept your invitation 
to offer information on climate change along with my own assessment. I am John 
Christy, Professor of Atmospheric Science and Director of the Earth System Science 
Center at the University of Alabama in Huntsville. 

Carbon Dioxide 

The concentration of carbon dioxide (CO) is increasing in the atmosphere due pri- 
marily to the combustion of fossil fuels. It is our great fortune (because we produce 
so much of it) that CO is not a pollutant. In simple terms, CO is plant food. The 
green world we see around us would disappear if not for atmospheric CCU These 
plants largely evolved at a time when the atmospheric CO concentration was many 
times what it is today. Indeed, numerous studies indicate the present biosphere is 
being invigorated by the human-induced rise of CO. In and of itself, therefore, the 
increasing concentration of CO does not pose a toxic risk to the planet. It is the 
secondary impact of CO that may present challenges to human life in the future. 
It has been proposed that CO increases could cause climate change of a magnitude 
beyond what naturally occurs that would force costly adaptation or significant eco- 
logical stress. For example, sea level rise and/or reduced rainfall would be two pos- 
sible effects likely to be costly to those regions so affected. Data from the past and 
projections from climate models are employed to provide insight on these concerns. 

Climate Models 

Climate models attempt to describe the ocean/atmospheric system with equations 
which approximate the processes of nature. No model is perfect because the system 
is incredibly complex. One modest goal of model simulations is to describe and pre- 
dict the evolution of the ocean/atmospheric system in a way that is useful to dis- 
cover possible environmental hazards which lie ahead. The goal is not to achieve 
a perfect forecast for every type of weather in every unique geographic region, but 
to provide information on changes in large-scale features. If in testing models for 
current large-scale features one finds conflict with observations, this suggests that 
at least some fundamental process, for example heat transfer, are not adequately 
described in the models. 

Global Averages 

A universal feature of climate model projections of global average temperature 
changes due to enhanced greenhouse gasses is a rise in the temperature of the at- 
mosphere from the surface to , feet. This temperature rise itself is projected 
to be significant at the surface, with increasing magnitude as one rises through this 
layer called the troposphere. Most people use the term Global Warming to describe 
this temperature rise. 



 


Over the past -years various calculations of surface temperature do indeed show 
a rise between +. and +.°F (. and .°C depending on which estimate is 
used.) This represents about half of the total surface warming since the th cen- 
tury. In the troposphere, however, the values, which include the satellite data Dr. 
Roy Spencer of NASA and I produce, show only a very slight warming between 
+. and +.°F (+. and +.°C) — a rate less than a third that observed at 
the surface. So, rather than seeing a warming that increases with altitude as cli- 
mate models project, we see that in the real world the warming substantially de- 
creases with altitude. 

It is critically important in my view to correctly model tropospheric temperature 
changes because this is where much of the global atmospheric heat is moved about 
and eventually expelled to space. This layer also has a strong influence on surface 
temperature through radiation processes. It is conceivable that a model which re- 
tains too much heat in the troposphere, may also retain too much at the surface. 


Surface and Satellite 
Global Temperatures 



The most recent modeling attempts which seek to reconcile this disparity suggest 
that when some of the actual climate processes are factored in, the models come 
very close to reality. These processes are events such as the Mt. Pinatubo eruption 
and slow changes such as ozone depletion. 

