effects of the Exxon Valdez oil spill in the sub-Arctic Prince William Sound, noted that 
persistence of toxic subsurface oil and chronic exposure through bioaccumulation, even at sub- 
lethal concentrations, can have long-term effects on wildlife. 

To determine whether polar bears will experience negative biological effects from exposure to 
environmental contaminant concentrations, additional research needs to be conducted to 
determine threshold values (including sublethal effects such as reduced resistance to disease, 
potential for endocrine disruption, and altered behavior) for all contaminants found in polar bear 
tissues. A better understanding of how contaminant mixtures may affect polar bears is needed 
since contaminants are rarely found in isolation. Factors for consideration should include the 
biological effects of contaminant concentrations that exceed currently defined threshold levels, 
documentation of the exposure to new organohalogen compounds of concern, and the effects of 
climate change on contaminant exposure and biological consequences to polar bears. 


 



 


e. Status of regulatory actions pertaining to contaminants 

The formation of the Arctic Environmental Protection Strategy (AEPS) in , supported by 
Canada, Denmark/Greenland, Iceland, Norway, Sweden, former Soviet Union, and the U.S., was 
one of the first international initiatives to address environmental protection of the Arctic (AEPS 
  a, Wilson ). Five programs, the Arctic Monitoring and Assessment Programme 
(AMAP), Conservation of Arctic Flora and Fauna (CAFF), Emergency Prevention, Preparedness 
and Response (EPPR), Protection of the Arctic Marine Environment (PAMI), and Sustainable 
Development and Utilization (SDU), were created under AEPS to implement this initiative. 

Since then there have been many international and national initiatives and agreements that 
recognize the need to prevent and reduce environmental impacts of contaminants to the Arctic 
(AEPS b, see Wilson () fora list and brief summary of some of these initiatives and 
agreements). Some of the pollutants now regulated by international treaties include a suite of 
POPs, including PCBs, dioxins, furans, hexachlorobenzene, aldrin, chlordane, dieldrin, DDT, 
endrin, heptachlor, mirex, and toxaphene. Two of the more important agreements, which have 
been signed, but not ratified by all the countries that participate in AEPS, are the Convention of 
the Long-Range Transboundary Air Pollution (LRTAP) and the Stockholm Convention on 
Persistent Organic Pollutants (AMAP ). The LRTAP convention seeks to reduce and 
control existing transboundary air pollution and new sources throughout the Arctic and mid- 
latitude regions. The Stockholm Convention on Persistent Organic Pollutants identified a suite of 
POPs to be banned or restricted (UNEP ). Although it is difficult to assess the success and 
implementation of individual agreements, the manufacture, use, and emissions of some of the 
pollutants found in the Arctic has been reduced. 

The Montreal Protocol set standards to reduce the production of CFCs and other ozone-depleting 
substances (Albritton et al. ). The greenhouse gases which cause depletion of the 
stratospheric ozone layer seem to be in decline after peaking in   (Albritton et al. ). 

This overall decline is occurring even though some new greenhouse gases such as 
hydrochlorofluorocarbons (HCFCs) and hydroflurocarbons (MFCs), which either were 


 



 


previously used or developed to replace the currently regulated CFCs, are increasing (Albritton 
etal. ). 

PCBs, which have been produced in the U.S. since , decreased from a high of , metric 
tons in  to , metric tons in  (Chemical Engineering News ). Breivik et al. 
() estimated that % of the use of PCBs occurred in the industrialized areas in the northern 
hemisphere (° to °N). Within this area the U.S., Japan, Italy, Germany, France, United 
Kingdom, and Spain contributed % of the global usage (Breivik et al. ). In the U.S. and 
Canada the use of PCBs is now restricted to closed systems that existed before the ban took 
effect in  (Ramamoorthy and Ramamoorthy ). Approximately  capacitors (closed 
systems) out of an estimated . million in the U.S. rupture every year, spilling PCBs into the 
environment (Ramamoorthy and Ramamoorthy ). Although Russia stopped production in 
, a significant amount of PCBs are still being used and are being released annually to the 
environment (AMAP ). In Norway approximately  tons of PCBs out of  tons of 
technical PCB are contained in products that are still in use (de March et al. ). In Sweden, 
approximately -, tons PCBs were imported to be used in condensers and transformers. 
Open use of PCBs was banned in Sweden  and closed sources in  (de March et al. 

). In Sweden it is estimated that approximately - tons of PCBs used in sealants in 
pre-fabricated buildings prior to , which are currently eroding (Hammar  in De March 
et al. ), - tons in existing insulated window glass, and - tons in floor paints 
(KEMl a in De March et al. ) occur in Sweden. Iceland banned PCBs in  and sent 
all equipment containing PCBs abroad for destruction. 

Production of Technical HCH, which consists of a-, P-, y- (the only insecticidally active isomer), 
and -HCH isomers, began in , between  and  it is estimated that , million 
tons were used globally (Li et al. a). China was the largest producer of technical HCH from 
-. Technical HCH was banned, which means the use was actually stopped, in Canada 
in , the U.S. in , China in , and the Russian Federation in  (Li et al. b). In 
, % of the global consumption of a-HCH occurred in India, China, and the Russian 
Federation, From  to  the estimated annual tonnage of a-HCH increased in India and 

 



 


the former Soviet Union and decreased dramatically in China (de March et al. ). India 
banned technical HCH in  for agricultural use but kept it for public health uses (De Wit et 
al. ). 

Lindane, which contains almost % y-HCH, replaced technical HCH in the late s and 
s in the U.S., Canada, and western Europe and in China in  (De Wit et al. ) and 
was used as a crop pesticide and seed treatment by France, Canada, and the U.S. in the s. 

By  the use of lindane increased in India, the former Soviet Union, France, Canada, Nigeria, 
and Mexico and decreased in China, Italy, East Germany, and the U.S. (Li et al. b, de March 
et al.  ). Although lindane is still used worldwide, the global usage dropped significantly by 
, compared to  , due primarily to restrictions and bans implemented by many countries 
(De Wit et al. ). 

Production of DDT has decreased globally since  in most countries. Based on information 
provided to the UNEP, at the Stockholm Convention, only India (the largest producer) and China 
currently produce DDT for fighting malaria and other insect-borne diseases (UNEP ). 

Since , the use of polychlorobornanes and polychlorinated camphenes (toxaphene), have 
been either banned or severely restricted worldwide. Current information from the Stockholm 
Convention suggests that production of toxaphene may have ceased globally (De Wit et al. 

). However toxaphene is still being released from agricultural soils in U.S., Mexico, 

Central America, and the former Soviet Union (De Wit et al. ). 

The U.S. was the primary producer and user of technical grade chlordane, which consists of  
compounds, and is used primarily as a soil insecticide and termiticide. Following the voluntary 
closure of the national and international plants of the sole U.S. manufacturer in , Singapore 
and China have the only remaining chlordane production facilities (de Wit et al. ). 

Although production of dieldrin ceased in , emissions from old stock piles which were 
donated to African countries in the  and s still continue (UNEP ). Dieldrin is used 

 



 


as a soil insecticide and in tropical countries for locust and disease vector control (De Wit et al. 
). 

PBDEs have been used as flame retardants in North America and Europe, including polyurethane 
foams, since the s (de Boer et al. ). Between  and  several European nations 
restricted the use and manufacture of PBDEs resulting in sharp decrease in global use in Europe 
by  (BSEF ). Canada recently implemented a notice to list all PBDEs under Canadian 
Environmental Protection Act. Although it is not yet a national policy, eight states, within the 
