


N on-mutagen ic , 
tpnor ppomoKf 
A Peroxisome 
prolifer*rkin. 

Inhibits GJIC 


I'Bl' 

and 

nerabr>litcs 

Impfise.t in 

iiivcrtchraic*., 

Drtormities. 

W Reproduction 


Inhibits liver 
cytrxhrome 

PS lA, 

’B, ajui A 

SunxesKS 
nimune s:r^«ii 


.Vlay be caA;inogcnic 









 


Endocrine System 

Polar bears, because of their position at the top of the Arctic marine food chain, have some of the 
highest concentrations of OCs of any Arctic mammals (Braune et al. ). Polar bears are able 
to biotransform OC contaminants, resulting in high concentrations of OC metabolites, some of 
which have demonstrated endocrine disrupting activity (Letcher et al. , Braune et al. ), 
Braune et al. () concluded that the “effects of OC exposure in Arctic wildlife are greatest for 
this species” because of the high OC concentrations and the ability of polar bears to metabolize 
these compound to toxic metabolites. PCBs and hydroxylated (HO) PCBs have been shown to 
interfere with retinol (vitamin A) (Rolland , Simms and Ross ) and thyroid hormones 
(Brouwer et al, , Braethen et al. ) which are important for the growth and development 
of mammals (Skaare et al. a). Specifically retinol is thought to be important in the growth 
and development of epithelial tissues and the immune system (Skaare et al. a). The presence 
of -OH-HpCS, a metabolite of octochlorostyrene, is thought to be able to bind to transthyretin 
(TTR), a transport protein, thus affecting the transport of the thyroid hormone and circulating 
retinol concentrations (Sandau et al. ). Polar bears with higher SPCBs concentration had 
significantly lower retinol concentrations (Sandau ). In contrast, polar bears with higher 
concentrations of HO-PCBs (Letcher et al. , Sandala et al. , Sandau et al. ) had 
higher retinol concentrations. PCB metabolites have also been shown to disrupt the normal 
activity of thyroid and estrogen in endocrine system in laboratory animals (Letcher et al. ). 
High levels of PBDEs have been shown to affect thyroid function and have been associated with 
developmental toxicity in laboratory rats (de Wit ) and in polar bears from Svalbard 
(Braethen et al. , Skaare et al. a). In contrast, concentrations of SPCBs, SCHLvS, 
£DDTs, IHCHs, HCB, Dieldrin, and SPBDEs found in polar bears from East Greenland were 
not thought to have adverse effects on lymph nodes, spleen, thyroid and thymus tissues which 
are involved in immunological responses (Kirkegaard et al. ). The presence of higher 
secondary follicle counts in response to higher concentrations of ICHLs SHCHs HCB, and 
dieldrin may indicate increased infection rates in the spleens from East Greenland polar bears. 
High concentrations of SPCBs, SCHLs, SDDTs, and dieldrin are suspected to reduce the bone 
mineral density in subadult male and female polar bears and adult males (Sonne et al, ). 


 



 


Reproduction 

Numerous laboratory studies have linked PCBs and OC pesticides, including PCDDs, PCDFs, 
PCBs, SCCPs, PCNs, OCs, PBDEs, and PFOS to reproductive and developmental toxicity (de 
Wit et al. ). However, more study is needed to fully understand the biological effects of 
contaminants on polar bear recruitment and survival rates. Polischuk et al. (, ) found 
that adult female polar bears with cubs had significantly lower concentrations of £PCBs, 

EDDTs, SCHLs, SHCHs, IClBs than females that had lost their cubs by the following fall. The 
loss of these contaminants from the females that retained their cubs was not due to offloading 
the contaminants to the cubs through nursing because the contaminants were measured in milk as 
the females emerged from the den when all females still had their cubs. Polischuk et al. () 
found that concentrations of ZPCBs and ZCHLs in milk approximately doubled when polar bears 
were using their fat resources (i.e. fasting), thus increasing the exposure of nursing cubs to high 
concentrations of OCs during a critical developmental period. The data from Polischuk et al. 
, suggests that the critical point for cub survival may be between - ppm in the breast milk. 
However this may also be due to the low fat content in the female which in turn may result in 
higher PCB concentrations. However, if there is a toxic link between PCB concentrations and 
cub survival this would explain the lower cub survival and a scarcity of older females (>  yrs) 
in the Svalbard population (Wiig et al. , Derocher et al. ). Adult female polar bears 
with higher PCB concentrations from Svalbard, Norway exhibited higher progesterone 
concentrations (Haave et al ). Haave et al. () speculated that high levels of 
progesterone could inhibit secretion of follicle-stimulating hormone, thus preventing normal 
ovulation from occurring. 

Immune System 

An assessment of the effects of high concentrations of OCs on the immune system of free 
ranging polar bears in Svalbard, Norway, and Churchill, Canada, found that bears with high 
concentrations of ZPCBs, sum of organochlorine pesticides (ZOCPs), or the interaction of the 


 



 


SPCBs and SOCPs had decreased ability to produce antibodies to influenza-, reo- and herpes 
viruses, tetanus toxoid, and Mannheimia sp. (Lie et al. ). Lie et al. () also found that 
high EPCBs and lOCPs concentrations reduced the ability of lymphocyte populations to 
proliferate after stimulation with mitogens and antigens in vitro. Thus polar bears with high 
concentrations of SPCBs and SOCPs may be more susceptible to infections than polar bears with 
lower contaminant concentrations. The importance of immune competence is something that 
would only be tested during an epizootic event. 

c. Metals 

Numerous essential and non-essential elements have been reported on for polar bears, but the 
focus has been primarily on the most toxic and/or abundant elements in marine mammals, 
including mercury, cadmium, selenium, and lead. Increased development in the Arctic, release 
from natural deposits, and long-range transport of metals to the Arctic and sub-Arctic have raised 
concern about the potential effects on polar bears and other marine mammals (Norstrom et al. 
, Braune et al. , Pacyna and Keeler , Pacyna , Dietz et al. , Lindberg et 
al, , and Braune et al. ). Although other elements are of potential concern, the focus of 
this section will be on mercury, because of its potential toxicity at relatively low concentrations, 
ability to biomagnify and bioaccumulate in the food web, and due to -  fold increases in the 
Arctic since pre-industrial times (Braune et al. , Nilsson and Huntington , Dietz et al, 
). Mercury is a non-essential element that arises from both natural and anthropogenic 
sources (Dietz et al. , Lindberg et al. , Skov et al. ). Dietz et al.  estimated 
