

Prudhoe Bay in the late s has expanded both to the east and west. Exploration is underway 
in the National Petroleum Reserve, and seismic operations began in  in the Chukchi Sea. 

There are   producing oil fields on Alaska’s Arctic Slope (MMS , ). A network of 
roads, pipelines, and power lines serve as infrastructure to connect drill sites, production 
facilities, support facilities, and transportation hubs. The area of activity extends from 
northeastern portion of the National Petroleum Reserve - Alaska (“National Reserve”) to the 
Canning River and the eastern boundary of the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge (“Arctic 
Refuge”) (NRC ). 

Seven of the   producing oil fields are offshore. Three additional onshore fields are in the 
planning stages for development. Other potential future development includes  discoveries that 
may undergo some development-related activities within the next - years. Nine of sixteen 
potential fields are located offshore (MMS , ). 

Offshore oil development Is expanding and is forecasted to continue into the future. To date, 
offshore oil development accounts for only a small percentage of oil production on Alaska’s 
Arctic slope - as of December  only about . billion barrels have been produced offshore 
compared to approximately  . billion barrels on shore (NRC ). 

A  Presidential Executive Order  directed US departments and agencies to expedite 
projects that increase the production, transmission, or conservation of energy (MMS , 

). A Proposed Final -Year Offshore Oil and Gas Leasing Program for - (MMS 
, ) has been developed and includes three lease sales on the Beaufort Sea outer 
continental shelf, covering approximately . million acres for leasing (MMS ). Leasing 
incentives have included reduced royalties on oil production and lowered the minimum bid 
amount and rental rates for tracts leased (MMS ). The MMS states that at oil prices of $ 
per barrel or greater the incentives would not be needed since the high price alone would spur 
exploration and development activities (MMS ). 


 



 


Other developments planned or proposed for Alaska’s Arctic will contribute to the cumulative 
effect of development. These include a gas pipeline to transport natural gas from the Arctic to 
market, and the State of Alaska’s proposal to expand the Arctic Slope road networks connecting 
the Arctic Slope villages to Interior Alaska and to the North American road network (MMS 
). 


. Canada 

In the Canadian Beaufort Sea extensive exploration was conducted in the s and s, 
including  offshore exploration programs that resulted in significant oil and gas discoveries 
(Devon Canada Corporation ). Recently the Canadian government granted the Devon 
Canada Corporation an exploration license to conduct petroleum exploration within polar bear 
habitat in the southern Beaufort Sea (Devon Canada Corporation ). Nine offshore drilling 
locations within the landfast ice zone have been identified (Devon Canada Corporation ). 
Devon must drill at least one well in each of four areas delineated within the general lease prior 
to expiration of the license in . Failure to comply results in drilling rights reverting back to 
the federal government. Devon plans to drill the first well during the winter of -, and 
one well per winter season thereafter through . 

The largest potential future development in the region is the Mackenzie Gas Project, a pipeline 
through the Mackenzie River corridor to transport natural gas to market (Devon Canada 
Corporation ). The proposed gas pipeline has spurred a great deal of exploration for natural 
gas in the Mackenzie Delta and parts of the Tuktoyaktuk Peninsula (MMS , Devon Canada 
Corporation ). In eastern Canada, the provinces of Newfoundland and Quebec oversee 
regulatory actions that may lead to additional exploration and production of the Hebron, Ben 
Nevis, and West Ben Nevis prospects. Existing producing fields in this area include the 
Hibernia, Terra Nova, White Rose, and Grand Banks. 

. Norway 


 



 


Oil and gas development in polar bear habitat in Norwegian territory (Barents Sea) is relatively 
recent. In May , the Norwegian government awarded production licenses for seven areas of 
the Barents Sea, including four as seismic exploration areas (Larslad and Gooderham ). In 
December , the Norwegian government opened areas of the southern Barents Sea to 
continued year-round petroleum operations, with the exception of certain areas that will be re- 
assessed in an integrated management plan for the Barents Sea (Andersen and Gooderham ). 

The first producing gas field in this area, the Snohvit field, was approved in  and is expected 
to begin producing in  (Norwegian Petroleum Directorate ). In order to promote the 
discovery of additional gas resources near Snohvit, the Norwegian government included an area 
close to Snohvit in the announcement of awards in pre-defined areas for  (Larstad and 
Gooderham ). A facility is also under construction at Melkoya outside of Hammerfest to 
process gas and natural gas liquids from Snohvit, from which gas is transported under water from 
the gas field to the production facility, with production scheduled to begin in , now delayed 
to late  (Norwegian Petroleum Directorate , Andresen and Gooderham ). The 
government has recognized special environmental constraints on oil production in the Barents 
Sea region (Andresen and Gooderham , Larstad and Gooderham ), although oil and gas 
development in the Norwegian Arctic in polar bear habitat is expected to continue and to 
increase. The northern Barents Sea has not been opened for any oil and gas activities and will not 
be for many years. The management plan is open for reevaluation in , and then new areas 
and fields could be opened. Present constraints include no petroleum activities in areas closer 
than  km of land, no activities closer than  km from Bjomoya (Bear Island), and no 
activities in the areas of the polar front and ice edge. 

. Denmark (Greenland) 

The Greenland and Danish governments have been promoting oil and gas exploration and 
development off the coast of Greenland, and oil and gas activities have increased during the past 

several years (OBMP ). The , km^ Attamik license area about  km northwest of 

 



 


Nuuk, Greenland was licensed to EnCana corporation and NUNAOIL A/S, a state-owned oil 
company (GBMP ). In , EnCana carried out extensive exploration off the coast of West 
Greenland (GBMP ). Seismic testing has been conducted on an , km^ area since 
 (GBMP ). 

In , Greenland opened four areas off the west coast, the Lady Franklin Basin, Kangaamiut 
Basin, Ikermiut Ridge, and Paamiut Basin, in the Labrador Sea, Davis Strait, and Baffin Bay to 
oil exploration. A , km^area was licensed to EnCana and NUNAOIL over the Lady 
Franklin Basin (GBMP ). Large petroleum deposits are thought to exist offshore of 
Western Greenland (GBMP ). The Labrador Sea, Davis Strait, and Baffin Bay all pose 
serious challenges to oil exploration and development, including extreme climates and broken 
ice conditions for much of the year (GBMP ), Greenland and Danish governments' have 
promoted oil and gas exploration and development off the East Coast of Greenland that may also 
increase in the future. 

S. Russia 

Parallel plans for oil and gas development in the Russian Barents Sea are also moving forward 
(Derocher et al. b). The Russian government has approved plans for a privately owned oil 
pipeline from Russia's oil fields to Murmansk in North-west Russia (WWF ). Should the 
pipeline be built, major shipping terminals could be in operation by  (WWF ). 
Approximately . million barrels of oil a day could be transported by tanker from Murmansk to 
the US through the Barents Sea (WWF ). 

There are also plans for industrial oil production on the oil fields in the southeastern part of the 
Barents Sea (Belikov et al. ). 

. Bear-Human Interactions 


 

