to create some sort of rational approach in the Herd-Engle Amend- 
ment. And I am sympathetic to the notion that people in the 
United States are going to be hard-pressed to buy into something 
they do not see other people also buying into. 

The fact is, though, that China and other developing countries 
are currently embracing significant steps to achieve clean air. And 
they are moving forward. In China, for instance, they are restrict- 
ing certain kinds of vehicles, and are beginning to get conscious of 
these environmental issues. And they could actually qualify for 
participation very easily, based on many of the things they are 
doing now. 

What we have is a dividing line between us — the traditional view 
of the developed (and developing) world. We have gotten stuck in 
cement for lack of people’s willingness to really look at the long- 
run here. And I think we need to have some significant diplomacy 
exerted in order to try to pull us together now. We should not be 
that far off. 

But let met just touch on a couple of other quick points. I know 
Senator Brownback wants to ask questions. 

Just for the record, the , year basis that you are drawing 
conclusions on CO  increase from is based on the ice core, correct. 



 


Dr. Bradley. These are little bubbles of gas; essentially samples 
of the atmosphere that have been trapped in the ice and buried for 
years. 

Senator Kerry. I just want the record to reflect that I have read 
it and I am familiar with it. I want the record to reflect the accu- 
racy of that judgment showing that it is not some kind of hypoth- 
esis. 

You are able to take trapped C  through the ice cores, through 
the ice that has been there through these millennia, and measure 
precisely the level of C  increases over that period of time, cor- 
rect? 

Dr. Bradley. That is correct. 

Senator Kerry. And that is how we know to a certain degree the 
demarcation point of the Industrial Revolution and the introduction 
of CO  by human industrial efforts that has made this marked in- 
crease. 

Dr. Bradley. That is correct. 

Senator Kerry. We can track precisely the level of weather 
changes, heat changes over the last  years, at least, by meas- 
uring the C  gas in these cores. 

Dr. Bradley. That is right. I might also add that this , 
year limit is only because that is as long an ice core record as we 
have. I am sure if we had a  million year ice core record — I feel 
confident that if we had a  million year ice core record, we would 
still be heading toward uncharted waters in the future. 

Senator Kerry. Now, they also know that these things called 
“sinks” or entities that sequester carbon dioxide are ineffective on 
a constant basis. But the ocean is also a primary sink, correct? It 
is a huge sink. 

And the ocean, in fact, is warming. And the ocean contains very 
significant amounts of CO  that it holds onto for long periods of 
time. It is my understanding that the ocean could conceivably have 
some limit as to how much C  it, in fact, can sequester. 

And at some point, if we were to continue to pour it in, we could 
have overload, so that all of a sudden the ocean is no longer avail- 
able as a major sequesterer of C  , correct? 

Dr. Bradley. That is correct. 

Senator Kerry. And that could then have a profound impact, in 
terms of all of a sudden releasing this C  The benefits of this once 
extraordinary sink are then negated. And where do we go from 
there, is a legitimate question, is it not? 

Dr. Bradley. Yes. There are a number of these kind of thresh- 
olds in the climate system that we do not have a good handle on. 
And that is one, for sure. And changes in the ocean circulation, in 
general, are a great uncertainty. 

Senator Kerry. And our weather in the northeast is significantly 
dependent on the ocean, on the Gulf Stream and on its relation- 
ship. 

Dr. Bradley. That is right. 

Senator Kerry. So, if that were to simply be altered in a major 
way, we could have — who knows what — perhaps some catastrophe. 

Dr. Bradley. Yes. That is true in most parts of the world, where- 
in you have the economy and society has developed based on what 
they are used to. 



 


Senator Kerry. Given that reality, we make judgments here ev- 
eryday about flood plain settlement, about AIDS — the rate of 
spread of AIDS, about tobacco. We have spent $ billion in the 
last few years, based on judgments we make about potential 
threats from North Korea or Iraq or Iran. 

Here is a far more realistic, in my judgment, and definable quan- 
tifiable threat. And we are not even doing an adequate level of cli- 
mate change research. 

Dr. Bradley. Exactly. In fact, I would say, that we can carry on 
doing research. It is a trivial amount of money in the context of 
what we spend on other things, but what is really needed is a mas- 
sive national effort to develop alternative energy sources to find 
non-carbon based fuels that will allow us to continue our economic 
progress without continuing to increase the level of C  in the at- 
mosphere. 

Senator Kerry. But is it not true that, in fact, we are much fur- 
ther down that road than most Americans know, with respect to 
hydrogen, engine fuels or other alternatives? 

Dr. Bradley. I am not sure where we are, but wherever we are, 
we are not far enough along. Certainly, on the global scale, this is 
a critical issue. 

Senator Kerry. My point is, simply, that in , before Presi- 
dent Reagan arrived in Washington, we were the world’s leader in 
alternatives and renewables. And we had created an energy insti- 
tute out in Colorado, I believe. And professors left their universities 
and gave up tenure to go out there, and research the American fu- 
ture in renewable and alternative energy. 

In  the funding was cut completely. And we gave up our 
leadership to the Japanese and Europeans in those sectors, so that 
when the Communist block countries fell and they started search- 
ing for people who had the technology, they looked elsewhere than 
the United States. 

Dr. Bradley. That is exactly right. 

Senator Kerry. Now, I do not think this is as complicated as we 
