jection. 

[The referenced material can be found on page .] 

Senator Boxer. Certain pages I want to put in here, it is an 
amazing picture of a polar bear here, and then on the inside, they 
say, observations, and these are peer reviewed, have shown a de- 
cline in late summer Arctic sea ice extent of . percent per decade, 
and in the perennial sea ice area of . percent per decade. And 
it goes on. The fact that our Administration would, before they 
even utter the words climate change or global warming, would 
come out with this, I think. Dr. Foote, it puts you at odds with a 
tremendous number of scientists here. 

I want to show you another photograph, if I can, and I am sorry 
Senator Inhofe has left, because I know he loves these photographs. 
This is a photograph of some baby polar bears and how they — 
where’s Jeff? It is the babies. The babies in the den. 

Where’s Jim Inhofe when I — Andrew? Could you call Senator 
Inhofe back. I wanted to show him this photograph. 

[Laughter.] 

Senator Boxer. What happens when this ice goes away? It is se- 
rious business. And Dr. Foote, I know you care about the hunting 
of the Indian tribes, and I have great sympathy for their way of 
life, believe me. But at some point, science is science and we have 
to all deal with the science. 

So I am going to move on. I want to talk to Dr. Lovejoy. First 
of all, Mr. Chairman, I am going to leave after these questions, 
which I am sure Dr. Foote will be happy to know. 

[Laughter.] 

Senator Boxer. This is the best panel. I mean, as we were saying 
quietly, they’re just, they’re understated, they’re speaking from 
their heart, from their mind and from their experience. Dr. 



 


Lovejoy, could you explain to me the issue of the oceans acting as 
a sink for carbon, and how much do the oceans absorb of the car- 
bon? I know some it is man-made, some of it is natural. But do you 
have a picture of that, and what is the impact of this continuing 
action of the oceans to act as a sink? And at what point will it stop 
acting as a sink? Will there be a point where they can’t take in any 
more? 

Mr. Lovejoy. I can’t give you all the precise numbers, but I can 
get them for you. The reason we don’t have a lot more climate 
change is because the oceans have been taking up a huge amount. 

Senator Boxer. Is it about  percent? 

Mr. Lovejoy. It is at least  percent. They have been taking up 
a huge amount of heat and a huge amount of CO  . And a certain 
amount of that has translated, as I mentioned, into a rise in acid- 
ity. We remember acid lakes and acid rain, and we dealt with that 
pretty well with a great 

Senator Boxer. In the air. 

Mr. Lovejoy. — market mechanism, and sulfur in the coal. But in 
this case, you are talking about two-thirds of the earth’s surface 
changing its basic chemistry. It is simple high school chemistry. 

Senator Boxer. Well, I wanted Senator Warner, because he is a 
fisherman, to hear this again. So right now, the oceans are absorb- 
ing at least a third of the carbon dioxide, and it is causing more 
acid. That is having an impact on the sea life. And how is that 
showing up, if it is showing up right now? 

Mr. Lovejoy. This has been a bit of a surprise to the scientific 
community. You didn’t even hear about it  or  years ago. They 
actually so far have not picked up any immediate effects. But what 
we do know is that the calcium carbonate equilibrium, which just 
tens of thousands of different kinds of species used to build their 
shells, whether they are corals or clams or oysters or tiny little 
things which exist in the trillions as basis of food chains, at a cer- 
tain point many of them will have difficulty just constructing their 
shells. If it continues further, they reach a point in which in fact 
their shells will go into solution while the animals are still alive. 

Senator Boxer. Oh, boy, so anything with a shell. 

What about, and anybody who wants to comment on this last 
question, what about the warming of the oceans? So we have an 
impact of the acidity and then, is there a separate impact with the 
warming? 

Mr. Lovejoy. Let me just lead off. The first parts of the ocean 
which have shown themselves to be particularly sensitive to the 
warming are coral reefs. Corals are basically a partnership be- 
tween an algae and an animal. Just the smallest increase in water 
temperature will cause the coral to expel the alga, so you get what 
are called bleaching events. And all of a sudden, these extraor- 
dinary technicolor environments turn into a black and white movie. 

Those are happening more and more frequently, and the issue is, 
how soon will we see coral reefs that have so much, such frequent 
bleaching that they can’t recover? 

Senator Boxer. Thank you. Anybody else want to add to that. I 
still have a few seconds left. 

Mr. Mann. I think that is the prime example that we all see. I 
think the issue about the redistribution of species becomes a second 



 


part of this. Again, it is this issue of when you redistribute species, 
they also get out of synchrony with one another. What can typically 
happen is that you have food blooms, food species that are nec- 
essarily connected to seasonal daylight, typically over evolutionary 
time, the things that eat those food species have become in syn- 
chrony, but often the thing that synchronizes them is temperature. 
So if you are looking at something changing something else, the 
first one may be sunlight, the second one might be temperature. 

If you change the synchronizing function in the second part, it 
misses the food bloom. And there are in fact documented cases of 
this, it has been a debate in the fisheries literature for over  
years, called a simple mis-match theory. What you are liable to see 
is larger numbers of mis-matches. When you see larger numbers of 
mis-matches, you see failures to recruit, you see failures of year 
class in fisheries. That has not only great ecological effects, it po- 
tentially also has very significant economic effects. It doesn’t take 
much of a temperature change to do this. 

Senator Boxer. A mis-match? 

Mr. Mann. A mis-match. 

Senator Boxer. Thank you. 

Senator Lieberman. Thanks very much. Senator Boxer, for 
spending the time with us and for your continuing commitment to 
see this committee through to some accomplishment on this subject 
matter. 

Senator Warner, it is all yours. 

