mechanisms which take into account the threats to the species and existing and 
future human activities directly involving the species. 

For further information please contact: 

Andrew E. Derocher, Ph.D. 

Chair, lUCN/SSC Polar Bear Specialist Group 
Professor 

Department of Biological Sciences 
University of Alberta 
Edmonton, AB 
TG E 
Canada 

Telephone: () - 
Fax: () - 
E-mail: derocher@ualberta.ca 

Craig Hilton-Taylor 

Manager Red List Unit 

iUCN Species Programme 

c Huntingdon Road 

Cambridge CBS ODL England 

Tel: +--; Fax +-- 

Email: craig.hilton-taviortajssc-uk.orq 



 


U S, Contact: 

Nicolas Kulibafaa 
Senior Development Officer 
USA Muitilater Office 
lUCN-Wortd Conservation Union 
 Connecticut Avenue, NW 
Third Fioor 

Washington, DC - 
Telephone:    
Fax:    

E-maii: nku!ibaba@iucnus.org 



 


An Urgent Call to Action: 

Scientists and Evangelicals Unite to Protect Creation 


January ,  

National Press Club, Washington. D.C. 


Summary 

Scientific and evangelical leaders recently met to search for common ground in the protection of the creation, We 
happily discovered far more concordance than any of us had expected, quickly moving beyond dialogue to a shared 
sense of moral purpose. Important initiatives were already underway on both sides, and when compared they were 
found to be broadly overlapping, We clearly share a moral passion and sense of vocation to save the imperiled 
living world before our damages to it remake it as another kind of planet. We agree not only that reckless human 
activity has imperiled the Earth-especially the unsustainable and short-sighted lifestyles and public policies of 
our own nation-but also that we share a profound moral obligation to work together to call our nation, and other 
nations, to the kind of dramatic change urgently required in our day. We pledge our joint commitment to this 
effort in the unique moment now upon us. 


Background 

This meeting was convened by the Center for Health and the Global Environment at Harvard Medical School and 
the National Association of Evangelicals. It was envisioned as a first exploratory conference, based on a shared 
concern for the creation, to be held among people who were in some ways quite different in their worldviews, it 
now seems to us to be the beginning point of a major shared effort among scientists and evangelicals to protect 
life on Earth and the fragile life support systems that sustain it, drawing on the unique intellectual, spiritual, and 
moral contributions that each community can bring. 


Our Shared Concern 

We agree that our home, the Earth, which comes to us as that inexpressibly beautiful and mysterious gift that 
sustains our very lives, is seriously imperiled by human behavior. The harm is seen throughout the natural world, 
including a cascading set of problems such as climate change, habitat destruction, pollution, and species 
extinctions, as well as the spread of human infectious diseases, and other accelerating threats to the health of 
people and the well-being of societies. Each particular problem could be enumerated, but here it is enough to say 
that we are gradually destroying the sustaining community of life on which all living things on Earth depend. The 
costs of this destruction are already manifesting themselves around the world in profound and painful ways. The 
cost to humanity is already significant and may soon become incalculable. Being irreversible, many of these 
changes would affect all generations to come. 


We believe that the protection of life on Earth is a profound moral imperative. It addresses without discrimination 
the interests of all humanity as well as the value of the non-human world. It requires a new moral awakening to a 
compelling demand, clearly articulated in Scripture and supported by science, that we must steward the natural 
world in order to preserve for ourselves and future generations a beautiful, rich, and healthful environment. For 
many of us. this is a religious obligation, rooted in our sense of gratitude for Creation and reverence for its Creator. 


One fundamental motivation that we share is concern for the poorest of the poor, well over a billion people, who 
have little chance to improve their lives in devastated and often war-ravaged environments. At the same time, the 
natural environments in which they live, and where so much of Earth's biodiversity barely hang,s on, cannot 
survive the press of destitute people without other resources and with nowhere else to go. 


We declare that every sector of our nation's leadership-religious, scientific, business, political, and 
educational-must act now to work toward the fundamental change in values, lifestyles, and public policies 
required to address these worsening problems before it is too late. There is no e.xcuse for further delays. Business 
as usual cannot continue yet one more day. We pledge to work together at every level to lead our nation toward a 
responsible care for creation, and we call with one voice to our scientific and evangelical colleagues, and to all 
others, to join us in these efforts. 




 



Rev. Jim Ball Ph.D. 

Executive Director 

Evangeiica! Environmental Network 



Steven Bouma-Prediger Ph.D. 

John H. and Jeanne M. Jacobson Professor of 

Religion 

Hope College 

C f\ I ''*  ^ 

