
And so ultimately, it will boil down to the level of proof that peo- 
ple require in order to take meaningful action. 

The Chairman. Dr. Bradley. 

Dr. Bradley. With reference to this hockey stick issue, there 
may not be too many hockey sticks needed in the future, in Massa- 
chusetts anyway. 

[Laughter.] 

Dr. Bradley. We initially began this analysis originally by as- 
sembling as much data as we could and push the record back to, 
I think it was, maybe . And on the basis of that data set, we 
demonstrated that we could reproduce the instrumental data com- 
pletely independent from this — this network of paleo data. We then 
attempted to push it back a little bit further with a much sparser 
network of data. As you go through back in time, you lose more 
data. 

[Slide.] 

Dr. Bradley. But you can see from this record and we — we tried 
to be as honest as possible, by putting this yellow envelope of un- 
certainty. You can see the envelope of uncertainty gets bigger as 
you go back in time. 

But in the context of what the model projections are for the next 
century, the changes we have seen in the last , years are fairly 
trivial. 



 


And so I think that is the important value of this perspective. 
You step back beyond the period of our own experience, the last 
century or so. You look at it in the longer term, when clearly before 
, it was all due to natural variability. It was not due to green- 
house gases — a pre-industrial level of greenhouse gases. 

So what you see in that graph is just the earth doing its thing, 
solar variations, volcanic eruptions, whatever. Those are the ampli- 
tudes of change that we believe are real. 

And then you compare that with what are projected to — to take 
place in the future. And you can see that it is just off the scale. 

The Chairman. My final question — I appreciate the indulgence of 
my colleagues. 

If the blade part of the hockey stick here in your graph is largely 
accepted as valid, why is it that you think that there is not greater 
concern than that exists today about that blade of the hockey stick? 

Dr. Bradley. You know, this diagram is patched together from 
two pieces of information. I do not think it has been seen before, 
in fact. 

The left-hand side, the red and the yellow represent — the red is 
the instrumental element; the yellow is the reconstruction; and the 
gray area represents the projected. So that brings it all together 
and puts it in perspective. 

I think this diagram is compelling. And if it is seen more widely 
people will be forced to face the fact that these are very large 
changes. I think as we develop our science and we make these 
kinds of figures available to people, they will begin to realize the 
magnitude of change. 

Now, why do we not take it more seriously? Because the problem 
is incredibly difficult to resolve, as you no doubt, grapple with with- 
in yourself. 

How do — how are we going to deal with the fundamental use of 
fossil fuel in our society and around the world? How are we going 
to deal with the fact that the population growth is going to double 
this century? That is the fundamental driver of this change in tem- 
perature. 

Unless we can come to grips, we obviously are not going to do 
much about changing population growths. We have got to do some- 
thing about the carbon-based fuel economy of the world. We have 
got to come up with more efficient ways of managing our society. 

And in the long run, it obviously must be more beneficial to our 
economy to use less fossil fuel. It has got to be more sensible to run 
an engine on less energy, to run a factory on less energy, and use 
less energy to heat or cool our homes. The short-term costs may be 
profound. But the long-term has got to be a boost for our overall 
commerce, I would think. 

The Chairman. Any other panelists wish to — go ahead, Dr. 
Mahlman. We will go right down the list. Dr. Christy, you are in- 
cluded in this assessment. 

Dr. Mahlman. Oh, I think this is an extremely important ques- 
tion, and if I could repeat the question to know I understand it. 
Given all this, why are people not more concerned than — than they 
are 

The Chairman. Than they — yes. 



 


Dr. Mahlman [continuing]. Governments and everybody? I have 
had the good fortune to have spoken face to face to the order of 
, people on this — on this subject. And this comes up all the 
time. 

And it is a universal issue. And I would submit on the basis of 
my encounters with all these people that it boils down to a couple 
of things. 

One is that it is a hard problem to immediately associate with — 
with a really scary issue, until you start doing what we have been 
doing today, which is looking at each thing and finding out what 
sectors are — are affected and how they might be affected. And then 
suddenly, the potential for serious harm begins to creep out of that. 
And the second part 

The Chairman. By the way, including a new European — a group 
recently discovered a greenhouse gas with frightful characteristics, 
SF — SCF, I think. 

Dr. Mahlman. Yes. 

The Chairman. You are familiar with that? 

Dr. Mahlman. Yes. Dr. Watson and I will probably both quickly 
say that this is part of a class of extraordinarily long-lived green- 
house gases, most of them human produced, that have tremendous 
global warming potential. It is in the IPCC and the ozone assess- 
ment reports. 

And there is nothing, to me, particularly new about that. It is 
part of a whole class of fluorocarbons and other very long-lived 
greenhouse gases that exist in a few parts per trillion, that prob- 
ably will be removed quickly from manufacturing processes. So I do 
not see this as a new issue. 

The second thing I would like to say about why people are not 
acting and concerned so much is, in my view, this problem has an 
extraordinarily high degree of difficulty factor. It is very easy to 
demagogue it from all sorts of viewpoints, because it is not just a 
