

 


count for land use in each country’s participation in reducing 
greenhouse emissions, or removing carbon dioxide from the air. 
And that is an issue that needs to get sorted out. It is clearly going 
to be very important for both developed and developing countries. 

And then I know we have got panelists that can address that 
more precisely. So there are policy issues that are big ones, and 
have to do with how reforestation, and biomass, and no till farm- 
ing, how all that would get counted in any kind of international 
agreement of removal and reduction of greenhouse gases. 

Also, even if we knew all we need to know about this, actually 
getting it in practice in our country and in other countries is chal- 
lenging also. And that has major policy implications. 

But the issue is important. There is no doubt that this is a place 
we must look to to help with the carbon dioxide problem. 

Senator Brownback. So you support doing it, but your reserva- 
tion is that you want it done in a global context. 

Dr. Lane. It must be done in a global context. 

Senator Brownback. I mean, if I could challenge you for a 
minute on that. It seems to me that it would be useful for us to 
start moving that way now, and learning from wide scale imple- 
mentation of those practices, and that that is a benefit. 

I do not see that you do any harm, and you actually do a great 
deal of good, and you probably learn a lot by scaling up and doing 
those things, and doing it now. 

Dr. Lane. Without question, I think the — first of all, the science 
is something we are doing now, and should continue to increase our 
investments in this particular area of carbon sequestration. There 
is no reason the United States should not play a leadership role 
here as it does in so many other areas. And so nothing says that 
if one sees a good thing to do, one should not proceed to do it. 

Senator Brownback. Because, I mean, it seems like to me, that 
that almost gets us to Senator Kerry’s point about the United 
States showing some leadership on this, whereas there has been 
great concern about the Kyoto Treaty for the reasons that you ar- 
ticulated of a number of countries being allowed out of it that could 
offset any sort of gain that the United States would do. 

And that you almost could get past that issue as well, and in 
doing something here that is a good and right thing to do, that 
would show strong and aggressive U.S. leadership. And it would be 
a positive thing to do. 

Dr. Lane. But I do want to emphasize that our current assess- 
ment is that even under ideal land use, it is not expected to take 
care of the whole problem. 

Senator Brownback. No, I understand you on that. And I would 
not submit that it would, although I will submit that the research 
I have looked at, looks like it is very promising and will take care 
of a good portion of the problem. It does not do it all, but it has 
got a chance to really help us out in a very significant way. I will 
look forward to pursuing that with the Administration. 

We have the one bill that is out there that will be considered. 
I think as we re-write the farm bill, there will be a lot of looks at 
the issue of carbon sequestration, and I would hope that we could 
do an aggressive support internationally to other places that are 
looking to do the right thing. We can help in supporting that as 



 


well as keeping the carbon from either, first, ever being released, 
and increase the amount that is sequestered into the ground. 

Dr. Lane. Senator, we applaud your efforts here with the bill, 
and look forward to working with you on these matters that I just 
addressed. 

Senator Brownback. I look forward to working with you. 

Mr. Chairman, I have an opening statement I want to submit for 
the record, too, if I could. 

The Chairman. Without objection. 

[The prepared statement of Senator Brownback follows:] 

Prepared Statement of Hon. Sam Brownback, U.S. Senator from Kansas 

Thank you Mr. Chairman. I commend you for holding a hearing on a topic as im- 
portant and as controversial as climate change. 

Scientists generally agree that atmospheric concentrations of carbon dioxide are 
now projected to double by the middle of the next century — and continue to rise. 
This additional carbon in the atmosphere could lead to a number of disastrous con- 
sequences including significantly higher temperatures — which could have a detri- 
mental affect on certain forms of agriculture, disruption of ocean currents — leading 
to an increase in natural disasters, and coastland destruction. The potential effects 
from global warming are serious and warrant our close attention and study. 

The issue of climate change has been most closely linked to the international trea- 
ty on climate change — the Kyoto Treaty. This treaty had several flawed components 
and is highly unlikely to become policy — nor should it. However, the issue of climate 
change should not be linked solely to any one treaty. Instead, it is vital that we con- 
tinue our research and look for pro-active measures which can be taken to reduce 
carbon dioxide in the atmosphere without sacrificing our economy or our standard 
of living. Voluntary, incentive-based measures to improve the environment should 
be pursued regardless of the Kyoto Treaty. In the debate on climate change, there 
is a middle ground — it doesn’t have to be an all or nothing proposition. 

Recently, I have introduced legislation which would provide financial incentives 
to landowners who increase conservation practices which help pull carbon dioxide 
out of the atmosphere and store it as carbon in the soil. The Domestic Carbon Stor- 
age Incentives Act of  — seeks to encourage the positive contributions to the en- 
vironment made by the agriculture industry. 

My bill focuses on offsetting greenhouse gases through improved land manage- 
ment and conservation. As a result, these practices will also lead to better water 
quality, less runoff pollution, better wildlife habitat and an additional revenue 
source for farmers. It is a win-win proposition for agriculture and the environment. 
We must look for more of these opportunities if we are to avoid the often discussed 
negative economic impacts that a global climate treaty could bring — and research 
is vital to that goal. 

There are currently efforts to prevent the agencies (USDA in particular) and the 
administration from even researching this issue. I understand the complex and con- 
troversial nature of climate change. That is all the more reason to encourage vol- 
untary efforts to mitigate the problem and carefully study the science — not to avoid 
the issue. 

Again, I commend my colleague for holding this hearing and I look forward to the 
testimony and debate it may inspire. 

The Chairman. Thank you, Dr. Lane. Thank you very much for 
your great work and for appearing before the Committee. 

Dr. Lane. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, Senator Kerry. 

The Chairman. Our next panel will be Dr. Ray Bradley, Depart- 
ment Chair, Department of Geosciences, University of Massachu- 
setts; Dr. John R. Christy, Director of the Earth System Science 
Center, University of Alabama; Dr. Jerry Mahlman, Director of 
Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory of the National Oceanic 
