
appendix . lUCN Red List Criteria (Vulnerable)  

Figure . Circumpolar Map of Higher Density Polar Bear Denning Areas. Selected Polar Bear 
Terrestrul Denning Areas Compared to Past, Present, and Future Summer Sea-Ice Extent 

Source: Adapted from Lunn et al. (a:) and ACIA (:, )  

Table I. PBSG Status Table (PBSG )  

Table . Survival rates for population with data  

Table . Reproductive parameters for polar bear populations with data  


 



 


STATUS REVIEW OF THE 
POLAR BEAR (Ursus maritimus) 

I. Introduction to Polar Bear Status Review 

On February  , , the Center for Biological Diversity (CBD) filed a petition with the U.S. 
Fish and Wildlife Service (Service) to list the polar bear (JJrsus maritimus) as threatened 
throughout its range, pursuant to the Endangered Species Act of , as amended ( U.S.C, 
 et seq.) (Act). On July , , Natural Resources Defense Council and Greenpeace, inc. 
joined CBD as petitioners. 

Section (b)()(A) of the Act requires that we make a finding on whether a petition to list a 
species presents substantial scientific or commercial information indicating that the petitioned 
action may be warranted. To the maximum extent practicable, this finding is to be made within 
 days of receipt of the petition, and the finding is to be published promptly in the Federal 
Register. On February , , the Service published a positive -day finding in the Federal 
Register (meaning that we determined that the petition did present substantial scientific or 
commercial information that listing the polar bear under the Act may be warranted), and 
promptly initiated a status review of the species as required under the Act (USFWS a). 

The purpose of the status review/assessment is to obtain, synthesize, and evaluate the best 
available scientific and commercial data on the status of the polar bear and threats thereto. 
Information in the status assessment is to form the basis for the next finding the Act requires the 
Service to make, the -month finding that the petitioned action is either: () warranted; () not 
warranted; or () warranted but precluded. 

To ensure that the status review would be complete and based on the best available scientific and 
commercial information, we solicited information from the public on the status of the polar bear 


 



 


in two separate public comment periods announced in the Federal Register (USFWS a, 
b). In accordance with Office of Management and Budget and Service policy and 
guidelines for peer review, we also provided a draft of this status assessment to experts in the 
field of polar bear biology, climatology, toxicology, and/or, traditional ecological knowledge. 
We appreciate the comments we received from the peer reviewers and have incorporated them 
where appropriate. 

This document constitutes the Service’s “Range-Wide Polar Bear (Ursus maritimus) Status 
Review”. It is intended to be a detailed and comprehensive assessment of the status of 
knowledge of the species and threats thereto. 

II. Population Ecology and Characteristics of Taxon 

A. Taxonomy 

Throughout the Arctic polar bears are known by a variety of common names, among them are, 
nanook, nanuq, ice bear, sea bear, isbjorn, white bear, and eisbar. Phipps {  ) first proposed 
and described polar bear as a species distinct from other bears and provided a scientific name 
Ursus maritimus. A number of alternative namings followed: Pallas (  ) Ursus marinus'. 
Shaw () Ursus polaris: Knotterus-Meyer() Thallassarctos eogroenlandicus, 
Thalassarctos labrodorensis; and, Thalassacrostos jenaensis. Erdbrink () and Thenius 
() used Ursus (Thalarctos) maritimus, since interbreeding between grizzly bears (Ursus 
arctos) and polar bears had been observed in zoos. Kurt’en () examined the fossil evidence 
and suggested that polar bears originated from grizzly bears in Siberia during glacial ice 
advances of the mid-Pleistocene period. Kurt’en () and Manning () agreed that 
different populations of polar bears represent a single species based on morphometric data. 
Kurt’en () described the last Pleistocene occurrence of a subspecies, Ursus maritimus 
tyrannus, which was much larger than recent fossils. Harington (), Manning (), and 
Wilson () subsequently promoted the use of the name Ursus maritimus, that has been used 

 



 


since. Recent genetic research has confirmed that polar bears evolved from grizzly bears 
(Shields and Kocher , Cronin et al. , and Talbot and Shields a). The polar bear is 
usually considered a marine mammal since its primary habitat is the sea ice (Amstrup ), and 
it was included in those species covered under the Marine Mammal Protection Act of  
(MMPA, U.S.C. §  et seq.). 

B. General description 

Polar bears are characterized by large body size and a stocky form. Polar bears have a longer 
neck and proportionally smaller head than other members of the bear family although missing 
the distinct shoulder hump common to grizzly bears. Fur color varies between white, yellow, 
grey, or almost brown, and is affected by oxidation, i.e. exposure to the air, light conditions, and 
soiling or staining due to contact with fats obtained from prey items. The nose, lips, and skin of 
polar bears are black (DeMaster and Stirling , Amstrup ). 

Polar bears are the largest of the living bear species (DeMaster and Stirling ). Polar bears 
exhibit sexual dimorphism with female body length and skull size being considerably smaller 
and body mass considerably less than that of males (Derocher et al. ). Adult males have 
been recorded weighing  kg ( pounds) (Kolenosky et al. ), with some individuals 
too large for the weighing equipment, estimated at  kg (   pounds) (DeMaster and Stirling 
). Adult females weigh  to  kg (- pounds). Adult males range in nose to tail 
length from  to  cm (. - . feet) and adult females range in length from   to . cm 
(- feet) (Amstrup , Stirling ), 

C. Ecological Adaptations 

There is some uncertainty concerning when polar bears evolved from grizzly bears (Ursus 
arctos). Based on the relatively few specimens of polar bears in the fossil history Kurten (  ) 
estimated that polar bears may have evolved as recently as , to , years ago. Recent 


 



 


mtDNA information supported Kurten’s supposition of a relatively late polar bear evolution from 
within the range of grizzly bear population (Yu, L. et al. ). It has been proposed that polar 
bears are believed to have originated from a group of grizzly bears {Ursus arctos) which became 
isolated during the glacial periods of the mid-Pleistocene approximately , - , years 
ago (Talbot and Shields b). Age models based on molecular studies of evolutionary 
relationships among extant species of bears differ considerably as to the divergence time of polar 
bears from grizzly bears. Wayne et al. () suggested this happened , - , yrs ago 
while Yu et al. () concluded this might have happened , - , yrs ago. Only in 
portions of northern Canada and northern Alaska do the ranges of polar bears and grizzly bears 
overlap. Cross breeding of grizzly bears and polar bears in captivity has produced 
reproductively viable offspring (Gray ). The first documented case of cross breeding in the 
wild was reported in the spring of . A sport hunter in the Canadian southern Beaufort Sea 
region harvested a hybrid and genetic testing by Wildlife Genetics International in May  
confirmed breeding between a polar bear female and grizzly bear male had occurred. 

Evolutionary adaptations by polar bears to life on sea ice include: a white pelage with water 
