southerly parts of their range, and that local populations may be significantly 
reduced... .a significant decline in ringed seal numbers, especially in the 
production of young, is capable of producing negative effects on the reproduction 
and survival of polar bears (Stirling and Smith ). 

Ringed seals, and consequently polar bears, may also be impacted by changes in trophic 
dynamics. Changes in climate, sea-ice extent, and the timing of sea-ice formation and break-up 
will have variable affects on the lower trophic levels of the food web upon which polar bears 
depend (Derocher et al. ). 

c. Reduced Access to Prey 

Reductions in sea ice, which ringed seals use for birth lairs, will alter ringed seal distribution and 
abundance. Scientists predict that the decreases in adult body condition, natality, and cub 
survival in the Western Hudson Bay polar bear population observed to date due to earlier break- 
up dates and a shorter seal-hunting period will continue until female polar bears are in such poor 
condition that they do not reproduce (Derocher et al. ). Using parameters including the 
amount of polar bear body mass lost during fasts, predicted lengthening of the fasting period and 
shortening of the feeding period, and the apparent  kg body weight needed for females to 
reproduce, Derocher et al. () calculate that most females in the Western Hudson Bay 
population may be unable to successfully reproduce somewhere between  and . 

Derocher et al. () note that these calculations are simplifications, and that long-term trends 
may not be readily observable due to shorter-term fluctuations as climate change proceeds, but 
the authors predict, overall, a continuing gradual decline in population-related parameters that 
ultimately lead to population losses. Trends toward either earlier break-up or later freeze-up, or 

 



 


both, will likely occur in other areas in addition to Western Hudson Bay where polar bears 
seasonally use the land, such as Foxe Basin and south-eastern Baffin Island (Derocher et al. 
). Those populations will likely experience impacts comparable to those already observable 
in Western Hudson Bay (Stirling et al. ). Changes in the timing of sea-ice formation and 
break-up and the loss of the polar bear’s sea-ice habitat will pose increasing risk to polar bears as 
global warming advances (Derocher et al. ), and ultimately all polar bear populations will 
suffer. 

While predicting changes in trophic dynamics from climate change is complex and difficult, the 
likely impact on Arctic cod is significant for the polar bear. Global warming could increase 
productivity of some Arctic waters in the short term (Hammil and Smith , Stirling and 
Smith ). As Tynan and DeMaster () observed, “one of the central questions regarding 
climate change and the effects on Arctic marine mammals is whether a reduction of sea ice will 
increase productivity in a way that maintains suitable densities of important prey species, such as 
arctic cod.” In northern Hudson Bay it does not appear that arctic cod will maintain former 
levels of abundance during periods of reduced sea ice habitat. Moreover, if areas of leads, 
polynyas, and open water shift northward to areas over the less productive waters of the deep 
polar basin, there may be little increase in productivity since the deep polar basin waters are less 
productive to begin with (Tynan and DeMaster ). This could negatively impact other polar 
bear prey species. Species such as bearded seals and Pacific walrus feed on benthic prey, and are 
therefore found on ice cover over the shallow continental shelf areas (Lowry et al. , 

Sheffield et al. ). As sea ice declines these species feeding habitat would become limited to 
the areas within <km of the shoreline where these species could haul out (Bom et al ). 
Currently Pacific walrus give birth on the sea ice in the Bering Sea in the spring. If the sea ice in 
the Bering Sea disappears. Pacific walrus would most likely calve on the remaining sea ice in the 
Chukchi Sea or on land. Overall the reduction in sea ice is likely to result in a net reduction in 
abundance of ringed seals, bearded seals, and Pacific walrus (ACIA ). 

Ringed seal young-of-the-year provide the majority of the polar bear diet, therefore, fluctuations 
in the productivity of ringed seal pups will likely be reflected immediately on polar bear 


 



 


reproduction and cub survival (Stirling and Lunn ). Stirling and Lunn ( p. ) report 
that “the most critical factor affecting reproductive success, subsequent condition and probably 
survival of polar bears is the availability of ringed seal pups from about mid- April through to 
break-up sometime in July,” and that this is especially so for females with cubs of the year. 
Moreover, high levels of polar bear predation sustained by ringed seal populations are only 
possible because a large proportion of seals taken are young of the year (Stirling and Lunn 
 ), Predation by bears has modified the behaviors of northern hemisphere ice seals (Stirling 
), has significantly affected some seal populations (Hammill and Smith ), and also may 
have modified the distribution of seals (Amstrup ). 

Changes in prey availability may have especially large impacts on immature bears. Polar bears 
feed preferentially on blubber and adult bears often leave much of the meat (protein) behind. 
Younger bears, which are not believed to be as highly skilled hunters and not as efficient at 
taking seals, are known to utilize these kills to supplement their diet (Derocher et al. ). As 
prey availability decreases due to global warming, younger bears may be disproportionately 
impacted if there are fewer kills or greater consumption of kills resulting in le.ss excess prey to 
scavenge (Derocher et al. ), Altered prey distribution would also likely lead to increased 
competition for prey between dominant and subordinate bears, resulting in subordinate or sub- 
adult bears reduced access to prey (Derocher et al. ). Polar bear populations will decline in 
response to declines in ringed seal abundance and availability. 


. Projected population specific effects and timing sequence 

The populations that will be the most affected will be the Arctic Basin populations (CS, BA, SB 
and possibly the KA and LA populations) and those populations in which bears are required to 
fast for many months on land, because most or all of the sea ice melts during the summer (WH, 
SH, FB, DS, and BB). The Arctic Basin polar bear populations that occur in areas without 
significant land mass constraints or other open basin populations will be the most affected by 
large scale dramatic fluctuations in seasonal ice movements. The increased summer ice retreat 

 



 


into the polar basin, over deeper and less productive waters, will impact polar bears by altering 
distribution, increasing individual movements, reducing access to prey, increasing energetic 
demands, and correspondingly result in diminished physical body condition of bears. Prey 
species such as ringed seals will likely remain distributed in shallower more productive southerly 
areas characterized by vast expanses of open water. Secondary effects of diminished condition 
of polar bears, such as reduced reproductive rates, decreases in survival rates for cubs and 
possibly reduced survival rates for older age classes, have been demonstrated in the Western 
Hudson Bay (Stirling et al. , Regehr et al., in prep.). For those populations where the sea ice 
occurs seasonally, the effects of an increased length of the open water season will be detected or 
observed earlier rather than later, similar to those that summer in the polar basin. The 
populations that will be affected last will be those associated with island archipelagos such as the 
Canadian Arctic Islands (Norwegian Bay, Lancaster Sound, M’Clintock Channel, Viscount- 
Melville, Kane Basin, and Gulf of Bothia). 

Future Threats to Polar Bears from Global Climate Change 


Table : Likely Impacts to the Polar Bear from Global Climate Change 
Source: Adapted from Derocher et al. (). 


Characteristic 

Time Frame' 

Projected Change 

Body condition 

Short 

Decline, Increased variation 

Movement patterns 

Short 

Alteration of existing patterns 
