
Categories of status include our assessment of whether populations are not reduced, reduced, or 
severely reduced from historic levels of abundance, or if insufficient data is available to estimate 
status (data deficient). 

Population Viability Analysis 

For some populations, recent quantitative estimates of abundance and parameters of survival and 
reproduction are available to determine likelihoods of future population decline using PVA, The 
PVA model RISKMAN (Taylor et al. ta) is used to estimate risks of future declines in polar 
bear populations given demographic parameters and uncertainty in data. However, commentors 
noted that RISKMAN continues to be a work in progress and, although a useful tool, RISKMAN 
is an extremely complicated model which has not been thoroughly subjected to peer review. The 
mode! and documentation detailing the model’s structure are available at 

http://www.nrdpfc.ca/riskman/riskman.htm. Publications based on the RISKMAN model include 
Eastridge and Clark (), McLoughlin et al. (), and Taylor et al. (). 

RISKMAN can incorporate stochasticity into its population model at several levels, including 
sampling error in initial population size, variance about vital rates due to sample size and annual 
environmental variation (survival, reproduction, sex ratio), and demographic stochasticity. 
RISKMAN uses Monte Carlo techniques to generate a distribution of results, and then uses this 
distribution to estimate population size at a future time, population growth rate, and proportion of 
runs that result in a population decline set at a predetermined level by the user. The latter 
approach was adopted to estimate persistence probability. 

The approach to variance in this simulation was to pool sampling and environmental variances 
for survival and reproduction. The approach was chosen because: ) variances for reproductive 
parameters often did not lend themselves to separating the sampling component of variance from 
environmental variance, and ) it allows the risks of population decline including all sources of 

 



 


uncertainty in the data (i.e. pooling sampling error with environmental error presents more 
conservative outcomes of population persistence) to be quantified. 

For each population model, the frequency of occurrence of population declines and/or increases 
after  years was reported as the cumulative proportion of total simulation runs (, 
simulations). Model projections using these criteria were chosen because: ) the population 
inventory cycle for most areas is planned to be - years in duration, and ) we do not 
advocate using PVA over long time periods in view of potential significant changes to habitat 
resulting from Arctic climate change. In individual runs populations could recover from 
‘depletion’, but not from a condition where all males or all females or both were lost. Required 
population parameter estimates and standard error inputs included annual natural survival rate 
(stratified by age and sex as supported by the data), age of first reproduction, age-specific litter 
production rates for females available to have cubs (i.e. females with no cubs and females with 
-year-olds), litter size, the sex ratio of cubs, initial population size, and the sex, age, and family 
status distribution of the harvest. Input data are shown in Tables -. 

The standing age distribution measured from captured bears was always female-biased, likely 
due to long-term harvesting of males in populations for which simulations were performed 
(Table ). Because we wished to err on the side of caution, for all simulations we used the stable 
age distribution expected for the population at the anticipated annual removal rate as the initial 
age/sex distribution (i.e. initializing the population at the stable age distribution produced more 
conservative outcomes compared to that of the existing standing age distribution). The harvest 
selectivity and vulnerability array was identified by comparing the standing age distribution of 
the historical harvest of populations to the total mortality, stable age distribution. Harvest was 
stratified by sex, age (cubs and yearlings, age -, age -, and age >) and family status 
(alone, with cubs and yearlings, or with -year-olds). We ran harvest simulations using natural 
survival rates (without harvest), upon which anticipated annual removal rates (i.e. human-caused 
mortality from all sources) were added. 


C. Population Summary 


 



 


. East Greenland (EG) 

No inventories have been conducted in recent years to determine the size of the polar bear 
population in eastern Greenland. Satellite-telemetry has indicated that polar bears range widely 
along the coast of eastern Greenland and in the pack ice in the Greenland Sea and Fram Strait 
(Born et al. , Wiig et al, ). However, various studies have indicated that more or less 
resident groups of bears may occur within this range (Born , Sandell et al, ). Although 
there is little evidence of a genetic difference between populations in the eastern Greenland and 
Svalbard - Franz Josef Land regions (Paetkau et al. ), satellite telemetry and movement of 
marked animals indicate that the exchange between these populations is minimal (Wiig , 
Born et al. , Wiig et al. ). 

During -, the annual catch in eastern and southwestern Greenland averaged  bears 
(range, - bears per year) (Bom and Sonne ). The catch of polar bears taken in 
southwestern Greenland, south of ° N, must be added to the catch statistics from eastern 
Greenland because polar bears arrive in the southwestern region with the drift ice that comes 
around the southern tip from eastern Greenland (Sandell et al.   ). During   (first year of 
instituting a new catch recording system) and  there was no significant trend in the catch of 
polar bears in eastern and southwestern Greenland (Bom and Sonne ). Greenland introduced 
polar bear quotas taking effect on  January . The total quota for  is  polar bears for 
the two East Greenland municipalities Ittoqqortoormiit () and Ammassalik (). The 
maximum quota for those municipalities in Southwest Greenland that hunt bears coming from 
the East Greenland population is  for . 

Despite an increasing practice by hunters from Scoresby Sound in central East Greenland to go 
further north to take polar bears during spring, there is no information to indicate an overall 
increase in hunting by East Greenlanders (Sandell et al. ). Based on harvest sampling from 
 polar bears in Scoresby Sound during -, the proportion of adult (=independent) 
female polar bears in the catch in eastern Greenland is estimated at . (Danish National 


 



 


Environmental Research Institute, unpubl. data). 

Given the estimates of the proportion of adult females in the catch and an annual catch of about 
 bears (i.e. eastern and southwestern Greenland combined), a minimum population of about 
 individuals would be needed to sustain this take. However, the actual number of animals in 
the exploited population is unknown. 

During the last decades, the ice in the East Greenland area has diminished both in extent 
(Parkinson et al. , Parkinson b) and thickness (ACIA , Yu, Y. et al. ). It has 
been predicted that this trend will continue in this century (Rysgaard et al. ). Furthermore, 
polar bears in East Greenland have relatively high body burdens of organic pollutants (Norstrom 
et al.  , Dietz et al. ) and levels of these pollutants seem to have increased between   
and - (Dietz et al. ). Several studies indicate that organic pollutants may have 
negatively affected polar bears in this region (overveiw in Born and Sonne ). 

The effects of Arctic warming on East Greenland polar bears have not been documented. 
However, considering the effects of climate change in other parts of the Arctic (e.g.Westem 
Hudson Bay), these environmental changes may also be in effect and cause concern about how 
polar bears in East Greenland may be negatively affected. 

. Barents Sea (BS) 

The size of the BS population was estimated to be about  in August  (Aars et al. ) 
which suggests that earlier estimates based on den counts and ship surveys (Larsen ) were 
too high. This suggestion is further supported by ecological data that indicate the population 
grew steadily the first decade after protection from hunting in , and then either continued to 
grow or stabilized after that. Denning occurs on several islands both on Franz Josef Land 
(Belikov and Matveev ) and Svalbard (Larsen ). Studies on individual movement and 
population ecology using telemetry data and mark-recapture methods have been conducted in the 
Svalbard area since the early s (Larsen , , Wiig , Mauritzen et al. , 


 

