it takes partnership between government, the private sector and 
civil society. 

The Chairman. Dr. Christy, you will have the last word from me. 

Dr. Christy. OK. I just want to say “Amen” to something Dr. 
Watson said. In my experience as an educator in Africa, the edu- 
cational component was the key ingredient to seeing those societies 
bring about a better situation in the lives of the people, and I just 
wanted to echo the need for education of women in those countries. 

The Chairman. Thank you very much. 

Senator Kerry. 

Senator Kerry. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

[Pause.] 

Senator Kerry [presiding]: It seems to me that there is pretty 
broad agreement among you, not withstanding the differences, Dr. 
Christy, in your assessment of what you are willing to conclude 
from the satellite observations. 

You have a differing of opinion about what the consequences of 
global warming may be, but you do accept the fundamental 
premise of the human impact and the basic findings of the increase 
of warming taking place. 



 


And I take it that these circumstances have serious implications 
for us involved in policymaking. You do not think we should do 
nothing, do you? 

Dr. Christy. In terms of policy, I am not an expert, but 

Senator Kerry. Well do you think we should let CO  double? 
Should we just sit around and watch this happen? Is that your pol- 
icy recommendation? 

Dr. Christy. If I were to predict, I would say it was going to dou- 
ble no matter what policy is adopted. 

Senator Kerry. Realizing it is, would you simply sit back and ac- 
cept that, or would you now begin to do greater research and see 
what 

Dr. Christy. I would certainly support, especially in terms of en- 
ergy use, research on the alternatives that can be used to produce 
energy, and keep it cheap and affordable, because cheap energy 
means longer and better lives. 

Senator Kerry. So are you saying, about this process — I mean, 
here are four distinguished peers of yours 

Dr. Christy. And I feel surrounded sitting here. 

[Laughter.] 

Senator Kerry. Well, it is hard to find a whole lot of contrarians 
now. There are a few more but it is hard to find it is hard to fill 
a room with them. How many people are on the IPCC? ,, is 
it? 

Dr. Trenberth. There are several hundred as authors. There are 
several thousand, indeed, involved as reviewers. And indeed John 
is one of them, and so is Richard Lindsen, who is also a notable 
skeptic. 

Senator Kerry. Is there a great difference of opinion between 
those ? 

Dr. Watson? 

Dr. Watson. I think the majority see the climate issue the same 
way. They all recognize what is known. They all recognize what is 
unknown. 

I would say there are a half a dozen key contrarians, which in- 
clude Dick Lindsen, Fred Singer and Pat Michaels, but I would say 
the large majority of the scientists clearly fall on one side. 

And in the IPCC, we are trying desperately to make sure the full 
range of views is fully exposed. And so we can actually say what 
is known with certainty, what is less known, why do the majority 
think one way, and the minority think another. So we can actually 
explain what the implications of uncertainties are for policy formu- 
lation. 

Senator Kerry. Dr. Trenberth, what is your sense of the schools 
of thought here, and how we should come up? What is the dif- 
ference between these four or five that have been mentioned as the 
key contrarians and the vast majority who believe otherwise? 

Dr. Trenberth. I think we need to take into account some of the 
ideologies that come into play and recognize that there are dif- 
ferent views of the world. 

In the IPCC process, particularly in working group one, what we 
try to do is to make the best statement as to what can be said 
about this problem of global climate change and leave to the politi- 
cians what should actually be done about it. And often, I think, 



 


those things do get mixed up. And they often, I think, get mixed 
up by some of those people. 

We need to recognize that there are many value systems in the 
world today, from the extreme environmental position, which says 
we should stop the increases in greenhouse gases absolutely and 
mitigate the problem; to people who say technology will solve the 
problem, and we can just adapt to it as it goes along; to people who 
advocate sustainable development; to people who have vested inter- 
ests. 

And we have seen this in the tobacco industry, for instance, 
where often the strategy is to denigrate the science and to say that 
there is not a problem and recognize that they do have a vested 
interest. I do not think it is so much what you do about the prob- 
lem, but how you do it and doing it over an appropriate time scale, 
that would help to assuage some of the projections that you see. 

Senator Kerry. Well, it is completely fair and, I think, accurate 
to say, that some of the denigration of science has emanated from 
specific industries highly vested in fossil fuel. Is that accurate? 

Dr. Trenberth. That is, I believe, accurate. 

Senator Kerry. Is that accurate, Dr. Mahlman? 

Dr. Mahlman. I think it is accurate, but I would answer a little 
bit differently, in that if you look at this problem worldwide, there 
are people who are trying to frame-out the science the best that we 
know. 

Some of the issues we have just discussed here are ones where 
we can sit around at a table and discuss in a civil way and say, 
“Well, I disagree with you here or there,” and we would all go out 
to lunch together, and there would be no yelling, or screaming or 
slugging going on. 

[Laughter.] 
