
Dr. Lane. We do have evidence that all kinds of life, animal life 
and plant life, is responding to a global change. Fish appear to be 
moving. There is much evidence of early blooming of plants. In fact, 
even in Washington, the cherry blossoms are blooming an average 
of a week earlier, I think the number would be, than they were a 
decade or so ago. 

So ecosystems all over the world are showing some unusual 
movement that might be connected with climate change. 

The Chairman. A lot of this is in the oceans, right? 

Dr. Lane. Define 

The Chairman. A lot of these changes, we have seen in the 
oceans. What about the death of coral reefs? 

Dr. Lane. Coral reefs are dying all over the world. It is a serious 
problem. Some would predict that without finding the cause and 
doing something about it, we could lose essentially all of our coral 
reefs in the next  years. 

We have a significant research effort trying to understand the 
problem with coral reefs. Scientific opinion is that there may be 
several causes, including global warming, which sort of chases the 
algae out of the coral. 

The Chairman. What are some of the other reasons? 

Dr. Lane. Some of the others are pollution, some damage just 
from the human interaction directly with the coral, coral disease 
from causes we do not entirely understand. But there is a pretty 
strong opinion that the warming of the oceans may very well be re- 
sponsible for loss of coral. 



 


A recent example of that is with the El Nino event which may 
or may not be connected with overall global climate change, but 
which is a very significant climate feature. During the last severe 
El Nino, there was considerable coral bleaching and loss of coral 
due to the increased temperatures. 

So we know that if you increase the temperature of the ocean 
over the coral, you will lose coral. We simply do not know how 
large that effect is versus other possible problems that we have 
with our coral reefs. 

The Chairman. It seems to me that it is almost like connecting 
the dots here. We see example after example ranging from ice 
breaking up in the Antarctic to the death of coral reefs to the inex- 
orable increase in water levels, oceanic levels. Does that make any 
sense, or is it just that we are being a little bit hysterical? 

Dr. Lane. I think — picking up on your earlier statement, Mr. 
Chairman, I think the public understands something is going on, 
something is happening. 

Scientifically, the experts, who you will hear from shortly, have 
the data, and the analysis, and the modeling to show just what we 
know in detail scientifically and where the questions remain. But 
there are things going on that point to potential problems that per- 
haps we do not have what we would consider reliable scientific 
data on yet, but in time, we will better understand how the various 
dots connect. And maybe there is a dot that does not connect. 

Maybe there is some phenomenon out there that looks like it 
might connect with climate change, but in the end, we find it has 
nothing to do with it. We cannot know that for sure right now. 

That is why I think having the discussion about the science and 
helping the public understand — as you emphasized, Mr. Chairman, 
we need to do — what the science is and how the science consensus 
is formed, and why there will be debate and differences of opinion 
among experts, that is all good. 

That is the way science advances, and I think this potential for 
harm to the people of our country and our world due to global cli- 
mate change is so great that it behooves us to have this discussion, 
and have it as early as we can, and make the necessary investment 
to try to get the answers to some of these remaining questions. 

The Chairman. By intent, our next panel has experts of con- 
trasting views. And I think that that is the most important and 
only fair way to address this issue. 

When do you think — if we did everything in a perfect scenario, 
when do you think we could have some definitive answers to these 
largely unanswered questions, or some of them? 

In other words, what can we as Americans expect out of the sci- 
entific community and out of the $. billion investment in the 
U.S. Global Change Research Program? 

Dr. Lane. Senator, I think that we can expect significant 
progress in answering some of these questions. What the experts 
sort of need to help the Committee understand is “Which are we 
most likely to be able to pin down first, and which are we going 
to pin down next?” 

For example, one reason we are felt by the Academy to be falling 
a bit behind in our climate modeling has a lot to do with computer 
capability. I mean, our modelers are among the top experts in the 



 


world in this area, but for a variety of reasons, they really do not 
have access to the kind of computer capability that they need to 
run these big models. 

So, as we address that, and we are doing so in the President’s 
information technology initiatives that have received bi-partisan 
support, we will provide that capability. Then we will be able to 
run these models, get the error bars down, and answer the ques- 
tions most directly. 

So I hesitate to speculate on a particular question that “I think 
we are going to answer in  or  years,” but the progress has been 
very good since the last IPCC report. And I would anticipate just 
as great progress answering the remaining questions in the next 
period. 

The Chairman. Will we have some definitive answers within the 
next couple of years? 

Dr. Lane. I would expect we will have some definitive answers 
in the next several years. For example, places where we have made 
significant progress is in understanding the role — I emphasized the 
importance of clouds — understanding the role of clouds. 

One of the big uncertainties in the model is how clouds behave 
and how most appropriately to put them in the model. 

The second one is the effect of aerosols. Generally, the view is 
that aerosols, which can be anything from ice to crystals of other 
kinds and soot — just tiny little particles that are suspended in the 
atmosphere — the thought has been that those would generally have 
a cooling effect. They would reflect the sunlight before it gets down 
and has a chance to heat the earth and contribute to global warm- 
ing. 

By and large, my own view is that still is probably true, but 
there was a recent report from our international research activity 
