repellent guard hairs and dense under-fur; a short furred snout; small ears; teeth specialized for a 
carnivorous rather than an omnivorous diet; and feet with hair on the bottoms (Stirling ). 
Polar bears have large, paddle-like feet (Stirling ) that probably assist in swimming and also 
help to disperse weight and avoid breaking through when walking on thin ice (Stirling ). 
Polar bear claws are shorter and more strongly curved than those of grizzly bears, and larger and 
heavier than those of black bears, and appear to be well adapted to traveling over blocks of ice 
and snow and to securely gripping prey animals (Amstrup ). Polar bear teeth have evolved 
significantly from those of their grizzly bear ancestor (Amstrup ). Their teeth are better 
suited to grab prey and eat fat from the meat and hide and less well suited for grinding grasses or 
other vegetation (Amstrup ). 

Polar bears are well adapted for thermoregulation in the extreme cold conditions of the Arctic. 
Normal body temperature of a resting polar bear is 째C (.째 F), quite similar to other 
mammals (Best , Stirling ). Additionally a combination of fur and hide properties, and 

 



 


up to U centimeters (, in.) of blubber all serve as excellent insulators and operate to maintain 
body temperature and metabolic rate at near normal levels even at environmental temperatures of 
-째 C (-째 F) (Stirling  ). However, polar bears are susceptible to overheating (Best  , 
Stirling ). 

Polar bears radiate heat from their muzzle, nose, ears, footpads, and insides of the thighs, and 
also, apparently, from blood vessels in the shoulder region which lie only a few millimeters 
under the skin (Stirling ). Polar bears can also cool off by swimming, since water conducts 
heat about  times more efficiently than air (Stirling ). For young cubs, however, 
swimming may be dangerous if it chills their body too much (Blix and Lentfer , Stirling 
). Bears also conserve body temperature by curling into a ball when exposed to extremely 
cold, windy weather, or sprawl out to keep cool on warm days (Stirling ). Bears in warm 
areas like Hudson Bay also move very little in the summer in order to stay cool and conserve 
energy (Knudsen , Derocher and Stirling ). 

Unlike other species of bears, where both sexes may hibernate, only pregnant female polar bears 
hibernate through the winter (Stirling , Amstrup ). This is specialized winter dormancy, 
and not a true hibernation. It is typified by a slightly depressed heart rate and temperature, 
during which time the bear does not feed and lives off its accumulated fat stores (Stirling , 
Amstrup ). 

Unlike grizzly and black bears, polar bears can also enter a hibernation-like state facultatively, as 
needed (Derocher et al. ). This allows polar bears to feed hyperphagically, both seasonally 
and when an unpredictable opportunity presents itself, and then slow down their metabolism to 
make their stored fat reserves last longer during periods of food shortage (Derocher et al, , 
Ramsay et al. , Stirling and ritsland ). This, combined with an ability to digest fat 
with an efficiency of %, is probably the most important single adaptation of polar bears to the 
arctic environment. This is what allows bears to fast for months on shore in Hudson Bay during 
the summer. 


 



 


D. Distribution 

Polar bears evolved to utilize the Arctic sea-ice niche and are distributed throughout most ice- 
covered seas of the Northern Hemisphere, Their range is limited to areas where the sea is ice 
covered for much of the year. However, polar bears are not evenly distributed throughout areas 
of ice coverage. They are most abundant near shore in shallow-water areas and in other areas 
where currents and ocean upwellings increase productivity and serve to keep the ice cover from 
becoming too solidified in winter (Stirling and Smith , Stirling ct al. , Amstrup and 
DeMasterl, Stirling , Stirling and ritsland , Stirling and Lunn , Amstrup et 
al. b). 

Over most of their range, polar bears remain on the sea-ice year-round or visit land for only short 
periods. They occur throughout the East Siberian, Laptev, and Kara Seas of Russia, Fram Strait 
and Greenland Sea, Barents Sea of northern Europe, Baffin Bay, which separates Canada and 
Greenland, through most of the Canadian Arctic archipelago, and in the Chukchi and Beaufort 
Seas north and west of Alaska. In most areas, pregnant females come ashore in the fall to create 
a den in snow drifts in which to give birth. Earth dens are used by bears in Hudson Bay, until 
sufficient snow accumulates (Richardson et al. b). Following emergence from these 
maternal dens female polar bears will return to the sea ice as soon as their cubs are able. In some 
areas, notably the Beaufort and to a limited extent the Chukchi Seas of the polar basin, females 
may den and give birth to their young on drifting pack ice (Amstrup and Gardner ). 

The distribution of polar bears in most areas varies with the seasonal extent of sea-ice cover and 
availability of prey. In Alaska in the winter, sea-ice may extend  km south of the Bering 
Strait, and polar bears will extend their range to the southernmost proximity of the ice (Ray 
). Sea-ice disappears from the Bering Sea and is greatly reduced in the Chukchi Sea in the 
summer, and polar bears occupying these areas may migrate as much as  km to stay with the 
pack ice (Garner et al. , a). Throughout the polar basin, during the summer polar bears 
generally concentrate along the edge or into the adjacent persistent pack ice. Significant 


 



 


northerly and southerly movements appear to be dependent on seasonal melting and refreezing of 
ice (Amstrup et al. b). In other areas, for example, Hudson Bay, James Bay, Davis Strait, 
Baffin Bay, portions of the Canadian High Arctic, and some bears in the Barents Sea when the 
sea-ice melts, polar bears are forced onto land for up to several months while they wait for winter 
and new ice (Jonkel et al. , Schweinsburg , Prevett and Kolenosky , Schweinsburg 
and Lee , Ferguson et al. , Lunn et al. , Mauritzen et al. ). 

Distribution patterns for some populations during the open water and early fall seasons have 
changed in recent years. In the Beaufort Sea, greater numbers of polar bears (up to  
individuals) were found on shore during the period from  to  than at any previous time 
(Schliebe et al. a). The exact reason(s) for the change in distribution are uncertain and may 
involve a number of factors, although a statistically significant relationship exists between the 
number of bears using the coast and the distance the pack ice is from shore. Telemetry data and 
habitat use data from the southern Beaufort Sea indicate that polar bears are shifting their activity 
areas during the summer and fall (Amstrup, unpubl. data), apparently in response to ice that is 
retreating further from shore than it had in previous years. Gleason et al () analyzed fall 
bowhead whale aerial survey data collected from  to  and observed an easterly and 
northerly shift in distribution of polar bears in the Alaska Beaufort Sea apparently in response to 
changing ice conditions. Amstrup et al. (unpublished data) also noted a significant trend of 
increased use of land and water habitats by polar bears during recent years. 

In Baffin Bay, Davis Strait, Western Hudson Bay and other areas of Canada, Inuit hunters are 
reporting an increase in the numbers of bears present on land during summer and fall (Dowsley 
and Taylor , Dowsley ). In many instances, the hunters believe this a result of 
increased population size. In an extensively studied polar bear population with a long time series 
of capture data in Western Hudson Bay, data analysis indicates that this population has in fact 
declined from , bears in  to  bears in  and the distribution pattern appears to be 
changing (Regehr et al., in prep., Stirling and Parkinson ). Also the Baffin Bay (BB) 
population, which is currently being over harvested by at least double the sustainable yield, is 
declining as a result (Stirling and Parkinson ). Distribution changes in response to recently 

II 



 


recorded extreme ice retractions in areas such as the Chukchi Sea and other populations are 
undoubtedly occurring, yet remain unquantified by telemetry or aerial survey data. Shifts in the 
distribution in the Western Hudson Bay have been noted but are restricted to shifts within the 
same general area (Towns ). The home ranges and movement rates of polar bears in 
Western Hudson Bay were shown to have declined during the s and this was postulated to 
be related to reduced prey intake (Parks et al., in press). 

Following the lUCN classification, the Polar Bear Specialist Group (PBSG) has classified  
polar bear populations (Figure ) for the purposes of management. Scientists have defined these 
populations worldwide based on decades of intensive scientific studies of patterns in spatial 
segregation determined by telemetry data, survey and reconnaissance, marking and tagging 
studies, and traditional knowledge (Stirling and Taylor , Lunn et al. ). There is 
considerable overlap in areas occupied by members of these groups, and boundaries separating 
the groups have been adjusted as new data were collected. With the exception of the Arctic 
