higher levels. 

Disappearance over the last  years of Arctic sea ice, very prob- 
ably, due to human activities. There is some uncertainty about how 
much humans have had to do with that, but it is pretty well con- 
ceded that the models are now calculating that properly. 

Summer mid-continental dryness, probable. Model studies project 
a marked decrease in soil moisture over summer mid-latitude con- 
tinents. This projection remains sensitive to model assumptions, 
thus, I give it a two out of three bet. 

Increased tropical storm intensities, probable. A warmer, wetter 
atmosphere will likely lead to increased intensities of tropical 
storms such as hurricanes, and substantial increases in their pre- 
cipitation rates. 

We still know little about changes in the number of hurricanes. 
When people tell you there will be more hurricanes, we do not 
know where those kind of statements come from. So, when people 
say we are not finding increased numbers of hurricanes, I do not 
understand that either. 

Increased numbers of weather disturbances, uncertain. Although 
many speak of more large-scale storms, such as northeasters, and 
so forth, there is no solid evidence for this, in either models or the- 
ory. 

Global and regional details for the next  years, uncertain. The 
predicted warming, up to now, is not yet large compared to natural 
climate fluctuations. We can find it in the data, but it does not yet 
fully dominate. On these shorter time scales, the natural fluctua- 
tions can artificially reduce or enhance apparent measured green- 
house warming signals, especially so on regional scales. 

Endorsing Dr. Christy’s point, but raising the bet, variations on 
decadal scales at a particular region can be due to completely nat- 
ural effects, California and Southwest United States are particu- 
larly vulnerable to these natural fluctuations. 

Even though these uncertainties are daunting, important ad- 
vances have already been achieved in observing, understanding, 
and modeling the climate. Today’s models can simulate many as- 
pects of climate and its changes. 

Although major progress has been made, much more needs to be 
learned. More efforts are needed worldwide to provide a long-term 
climate measuring system that is really designed to do the job. 

Focused research into climate processes must be continued. Theo- 
ries must be formulated and re-evaluated in the light of newer 



 


data. Climate modeling efforts must receive resources that are in 
balance with the broader scientific programs. 

In my view, the U.S. Global Change Research Program has al- 
ready made important progress on these fronts. However, patient 
and sustained efforts will be required in the years ahead. 

I endorse Dr. Lane’s balanced presentation of this vital inter- 
agency effort under the U.S. Global Change Research Program. 
Through long-term research and measurements, uncertainties will 
decrease, and confidence for projections of climate change will in- 
crease. 

In summary, the greenhouse warming effect is quite real. The 
state of the science is strong, but important uncertainties do re- 
main. Finally, it is a virtually certain bet that this problem will 
refuse to go away no matter what is said or done about it over the 
next  to  years. 

Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

Prepared Statement of Dr. Jerry Mahlman, Director, Geophysical Fluid 

Dynamics Laboratory, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration 

Mr. Chairman: 

My name is Jerry Mahlman. I am the Director of the Geophysical Fluid Dynamics 
Laboratory of NCAA. For over thirty years our Laboratory has been a world leader 
in modeling the earth’s climate. I will evaluate scientific projections of climate 
change as well as their current uncertainties. 

We have long known that buildups of atmospheric carbon dioxide and other gases 
have the potential to warm earth’s climate, through the so-called “greenhouse” ef- 
fect. Today, I will discuss modeling the projections of climate changes due to these 
increasing greenhouse gases for a time around the middle of the century. 

Because I speak with credentials as a physical scientist, I do not offer personal 
opinions on what society should do about these projected climate changes. Societal 
actions in response to greenhouse warming involve value and policy judgements 
that are beyond the realm of climate science. 

At the onset, please recognize that a major international effort to assess climate 
warming was completed in . This is “The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate 
Change Assessment” (IPCC). The IPCC was established in  by the United Na- 
tions Environment Programme and the World Meteorological Organization to assess 
the available information on climate change and its environmental and economic im- 
pacts. This was the most widely accepted assessment ever on climate change. The 
 IPCC Assessment will be completed soon. I expect only small changes in its 
major conclusions, mainly concerning some important increases in scientific con- 
fidence. 

I strongly recommend your use of the IPCC assessments as a foundation for your 
own evaluations. I also recommend their use as a point of departure for evaluating 
the credibility of opinions that disagree with them. 

My information is derived from the strengths and weaknesses of climate models, 
climate theory, and widespread observations of the climate system. Climate models 
have improved in their ability to simulate the climate and its natural variability. 
Unfortunately, important uncertainties remain due to deficiencies in our scientific 
understanding and in computer power. However, significant progress is expected 
over the next  years. 

However, let me say at the outset: None of the uncertainties I will discuss can 
make current concerns about greenhouse warming go away. This problem is very 
real and will be with us for a very long time. 

I will give my evaluation of current model predictions of climate change in the 
middle of the next century by setting simple “betting odds.” By “Virtually Certain,” 
I mean that there is no plausible alternative; in effect, the bet is off the books. “Very 
Probable” means I estimate about a  out of  chance that this will happen within 
the range projected; “Probable” implies about a  out of  chance. “Uncertain” 
means a plausible effect, but which lacks appropriate evidence. Essentially, I set the 
odds; you choose your bet. My analysis is presented in decreasing levels of con- 
fidence. 



 


Human-Caused, Increasing Greenhouse Gases (virtually certain) 

There is no remaining doubt that increasing greenhouse gases are due to human 
activities. 

Radiative Effect of Increased Greenhouse Gases (virtually certain) 

Greenhouse gases absorb and reradiate infrared radiation. Independent of other 
factors, this property acts to produce an increased heating effect on the planet. 

A Doubling of Carbon Dioxide Expected (virtually certain) 

