scientists who are lined up, as we will bring out in some of the 
questions later on, marching in the aisles and saying it is man- 
made gases are now coming around and saying that it is not the 
case. 

Claude Allegre is a good example, from France. He was member 
of both the French and American Academy of Sciences. He is a geo- 
physicist. And he was one of the strongest promoters in France 
that it was man-made gases causing climate change. He has now 
come around and he said, no, the science does not support that any 
longer. And I can name scientist after scientist who has come to 
this conclusion. They say it is really all about money. That is what 
Claude Allegre said. And I think there is a lot of money in this 
issue, a lot of money. 

Lastly, it is true as we go through, we know about the little ice 
age and the Medieval warming period. We know what happened 
starting in the middle s in terms of the heating that took place 
at that time, up through about , from about  to . And 
at that time, all the magazines who are now talking about the 
world is coming to end because of global warming were saying an- 
other ice age is coming and we are all going to die. 

So with that, thank you for having this hearing. 

Senator Lieberman. Thank you very much. Senator Inhofe. 

Senator Isakson, welcome to the Subcommittee. It is the first 
chance I have had to publicly thank you for the great representa- 
tion you give my children and grandchildren who live in Georgia. 

OPENING STATEMENT OF THE HON. JOHNNY ISAKSON, U.S. 

SENATOR FROM THE STATE OF GEORGIA 

Senator Isakson. I am delighted to do it, Mr. Chairman. I am 
honored to be here. In light of the subject and the previous state- 
ments, I will not take time away from the panel, except to associate 
myself with the remarks of Senator Warner. I thought he made an 
excellent statement. I think I come to the meeting in the same way 
that he does, with an open mind, seeking unvarnished and unbi- 
ased fact in an issue that has an awful lot of both. So I appreciate 
Senator Warner’s statement, I appreciate the panelists being here 
today. I thank the Chairman for letting me have a moment. 

Senator Lieberman. Thank you. Senator Isakson. 



 


Now we will go to our witnesses. We have an outstanding panel, 
it is the only panel that the hearing will hear. I know I speak for 
myself and the whole subcommittee when I say we are really look- 
ing forward to listening and learning and then asking some ques- 
tions. 

The first witness is Dr. Thomas Lovejoy, who is Director of the 
Heinz Center for Science, Economic sand the Environment. He has 
served on science and environmental councils and committees in 
the Reagan, Bush and Clinton Administrations. He is the origi- 
nator of the concept of debt-for-nature swaps and created the public 
television series. Nature. He is the author of several books, includ- 
ing one on climate change and biodiversity. 

Dr. Lovejoy, it is a pleasure to welcome you and to see you again. 

STATEMENT OF THOMAS E. LOVEJOY, PRESIDENT, HEINZ 
CENTER FOR SCIENCE, ECONOMICS AND THE ENVIRONMENT 

Mr. Lovejoy. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and committee mem- 
bers, for the opportunity to share my testimony on climate change 
and the world of nature. It has been a subject I have been following 
for two decades. I have done two books on it, brought the second 
one for the committee, along with the scientific citations behind the 
main points in my testimony. 

Between the first book and the second book, which came out  
years ago, the difference is that one can definitely see signals in 
nature of plants and animal species and populations responding to 
the climate change. It has also moved from being essentially single 
examples, sort of anecdotal evidence to statistically robust evi- 
dence. We are seeing changes in the timing of flowering, we are 
seeing changes in the time of migration, changes in the time of 
nest building, egg laying. We are seeing changes in the actual dis- 
tributions of some species, where they occur. And we are beginning 
to see some mismatches occur between species that are related, like 
a butterfly and its food plant species for the caterpillar stage. 

The more important thing, I think, is to move from those signals 
of the moment to look forward with further climate change. And 
one can say the following things about it. Based on how biological 
communities responded to climate change in the geologic past, we 
can expect biological communities not to sort of move as a unit, but 
rather for the individual species to move in their own particular di- 
rections and at their own particular rates, which means that eco- 
logical communities will disassemble and the constituent species 
will assembly into novel communities. 

It is going to be a messy picture, watching that happen. The 
major difference between their response in the past and what we 
can expect in the future, of course, is that we have highly modified 
landscapes in many parts of the country and in the world, basically 
creating an obstacle course as species attempt to track their re- 
quired environmental conditions. 

And some species will actually have nowhere to go. With a cer- 
tain amount of sea level rise, the Key deer in the Florida Keys will 
have no habitat left. Species on tops of mountains as the climate 
warms will have no further up altitude direction to go. And we are 
also going to see a lot of ecosystem thresholds passed. We have al- 
ready seen a couple in this country. The warmer nights have been 



 


favoring certain insect pests like the wooly adelgid in Virginia and 
the pine bark beetle in British Columbia, Alaska and in the north- 
west. In the latter case, it is really quite dramatic, in some places 
up to  percent of the trees have died as a consequence. It looks 
like autumn foliage, except it is pine trees and it is a very serious 
forest management and fire management problem. 

So we are going to see these tipping points within ecosystems, 
many of which will be very hard to predict in advance. And we are 
also seeing system changes. The most prominent of those is the 
acidification of the oceans, which comes not from the climate 
change per se, but from the increased CO  in the atmosphere. So 
today, literally, the oceans are  percent more acid than in pre- 
industrial times, which has serious implications for any organism 
that builds a skeleton out of calcium carbonate. 

So one can conclude from all of that that the natural world is in- 
deed highly sensitive to climate change. Although it is hard to 
make the detailed projections, I think it is pretty clear that a dou- 
bling of CO  would be disastrous for the natural world. And even 
the figure of  parts per million, which some conservation groups 
have identified as a safe level to stop at, could be pretty messy in 
itself 

So that is an overview of the topic, and thank you for the oppor- 
tunity. 

Senator Lieberman. Thanks very much. Dr. Lovejoy. It was a so- 
bering beginning of our discussion. We look forward to questions. 

Dr. Roger Mann is our next witness. He is the Director of Re- 
