
The initial impetus for the  Polar Bear Agreement was a concern that over-harvest of polar 
bears was negatively impacting the species. The J Polar Bear Agreement is widely viewed 
as a success in that polar bear populations recovered from excessive harvests and severe 
population reductions in many areas. However, implementation of the terms of the  Polar 
Bear Agreement varied throughout the Arctic and some populations and locales require 
improvements to current harvest management practices, such as restricting harvest of females 


 



 


and cubs, establishing sustainable harvest limits, and controlling illegal harvests, have been 
identified for some populations or locales (PBSG ). The lack of protection of critical 
habitats by the Parties, with few notable exceptions for some denning areas, is a weakness of the 
Agreement (Prestrud and Stirling ). Further, the Parties acknowledged that additional 
efforts were necessary to protect habitat and emphasized national efforts to identify important 
denning and feeding habitats (Baur ). 

b. lUCN/SSC Polar Bear Specialist Group 

The Polar Bear Specialist Group (PBSG) operates under the lUCN Species Survival 
Commission. The PBSG was formed in  in response to polar bear conservation needs 
identified at a September  scientific meeting arranged by the University of Alaska in 
Fairbanks (Anonymous ). This was one of the first major scientific gatherings with the 
primary task to discuss international conservation measures regarding a single species, the polar 
bear. Subsequent to its formation, the PBSG contributed to the negotiation and development of 
the  Polar Bear Agreement. 

The PBSG meets periodically at  to  year intervals so as to comply with Article VII of the 
 Polar Bear Agreement, which instructs the Contracting Parties to “conduct national 
research programs on polar bears, particularly research relating to the conservation and 
management of the species. They shall as appropriate coordinate such research with the research 
carried out by other Parties, consult with other Parties on management of migrating polar bear 
populations, and exchange information on research and management programs, research results, 
and data on bears taken.” The PBSG held their ’'' working group meeting in Seattle, 
Washington, U.S., in June . 

The PBSG first evaluated the status of all polar bear populations in . In , , and 
 the PBSG conducted circumpolar status assessments, the results of which were published 
as part of the proceedings of each meeting. 


 



 


The PBSG also evaluates the status of this species under the lUCN Red List criteria. Previously, 
under the lUCN Red List program polar bears were classified as “Less rare but believed to be 
threatened-requires watching” (), “Vulnerab!e”{!, , , , ), and “Lower 
RIskyConservation Dependent” (). During the H* working group meeting, the PBSG re- 
evaluated the status of polar bears and based on climate change analysis and projected changes in 
sea ice, effects of climatic change on the distribution of polar bears, and the condition of polar 
bears including effects on reproduction and survival associated with climate change, the group 
agreed unanimously that a status designation of “Vulnerable” was warranted. 

c. Inupiat-Inuvialuit Agreement for the Management of Polar Bears of the 

Southern Beaufort Sea 

Telemetry research on polar bears in the s suggested that Alaskan and Canadian polar bear 
hunters were harvesting from the same southern Beaufort Sea population that ranged between 
Icy Cape in Alaska and Pearce Point, to the east of Paulatuk in Canada (Amstrup et al.l, 
Stirling et al.  ). Because harvests in Canada and Alaska were being managed differently and 
independently, recognition that the population was shared raised conservation concerns by the 
users and managers from each jurisdiction. 

The Inuvialuit and the Inupiat recognized the shared responsibility for conservation and need to 
coordinate harvest practices (Stirling , Treseder and Carpenter , Nageak et al. ). 
The user group management agreement for polar bears of the southern Beaufort Sea was signed 
in Inuvik, NWT in January , following two years of technical discussions and community 
consultations 

Provisions of the Agreement included: annual quotas (which may include problem kills), hunting 
seasons; protection of bears in or constructing dens and of females accompanied by cubs and 
yearlings; collection of specimens from killed bears to facilitate monitoring of the sex and age 
composition of the harvest; agreement to meet annually to exchange information on research and 
management, to set priorities, and to agree on quotas for the coming year; and, prohibition of 


 



 


hunting with aircraft or large motorized vessels and of trade in products taken in violation of the 
Agreement. To facilitate implementation, a Joint Commission was formed, comprised of two 
Commissioners appointed by each party, as well as a Technical Advisory Committee, appointed 
by the Joint Commission, made up of biologists from government agencies in both countries who 
were actively involved in collecting research and management data. These two groups meet 
annually at the same time and place, and decisions are made by consensus. In Canada, 
recommendations and decisions from the Commissioners are then implemented through 
Community Polar Bear Management Agreements, Inuvialuit Settlement Region Community 
Bylaws, and NWT Big Game Regulations; in the United States this agreement is implemented at 
the local level. There are no Federal, states, or local regulations that limit the number or type 
(male, female, cub) of polar bear that may be taken. Adherence to the agreement's terms in 
Alaska is voluntary, and levels of compliance may vary. However, Brower et al. () 
analyzed the overall effectiveness of this agreement and found that it had been successful in 
maintaining the total harvest and the proportion of females in the harvest within sustainable 
levels. The authors noted the need to improve harvest monitoring in Alaska and increase 
awareness of the need to prevent overharvest of females for both countries. 


d. Agreement between the United States of America and the Russian Federation 
on the Conservation and Management of the Alaska-Chukotka Polar Bear 
Population 

On October , , the U.S. and Russia signed a bilateral agreement for the conservation and 
management of polar bear populations shared between the two countries. The Agreement 
between the United States of America and the Russian Federation on the Conservation and 
Management of the Alaska-Chukotka Polar Bear Population (Bilateral Agreement) represents a 
significant effort by the U.S. and Russia to expand upon the progress made through the multi- 
lateral  Polar Bear Agreement and to implement unified conservation programs for this 
shared population. The Bilateral Agreement reiterates requirements of the  Polar Bear 


 



 


Agreement and includes restrictions on harvesting denning bears, females with cubs or cubs less 
than one year old, and prohibitions on the use of aircraft, large motorized vessels, and snares or 
poison for hunting polar bears. The Bilateral Agreement does not allow hunting for commercial 
purposes or commercial uses of polar bears or their parts. It also commits the Parties to the 
conservation of ecosystems and important habitats, with a focus on conserving polar bear 
habitats such as feeding, congregating and denning areas. The U.S. passed legislation on 
December ,  to enable full implemention of the Bilateral Agreement. 

e. The Convention on the International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild 
Fauna and Flora 

The Convention on international Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora (CITES) 
is a treaty aimed at protecting species at risk from international trade. CITES regulates 
international trade in animals and plants by listing species on one of its three appendices. The 
level of monitoring and control to which an animal or plant species is subject depends on which 
of the three appendices the species is listed. Appendix I includes species threatened with 
extinction, and their trade is only allowed in exceptional circumstances. Appendix II includes 
species not necessarily threatened with extinction, but for which trade must be controlled in 
