be less able to endure the challenges of global warming. 

An important way to help fish and wildlife survive the impacts of global warming is to 
provide a dedicated, stable source of funding to state wildlife agencies, allowing the states 
to prepare locally for the impacts of a changing climate. State fish and wildlife agencies 
are at the forefront of the conservation, protection and restoration of fish and wildlife. 

They are best positioned to work through cooperative partnerships to assist fish and 
wildlife in adapting to the changes caused by global warming. But, they lack adequate 
resources for taking on the challenge of protecting wildlife from global warming. The 
FY federal appropriation of $ million to the states through the State Wildlife Grants 
program is far short of what states need to conserve successfully our rich fish and wildlife 
heritage. State agencies need a guaranteed source of annual funding for climate adaptation 
that supplements the annual congressional appropriation for State Wildlife Grants. 

Accordingly, the National Wildlife Federation and  sportsmen groups, state fish and 
wildlife agencies, conservation groups and scientific societies have requested that any 
climate legislation include dedicated funding for the Wildlife Conservation and 
Restoration Account of the Pittman-Robertson Act, which funds the State Wildlife Grant 
Program (letter attached). By using the well-established structure of this account, a part of 
one of America’s landmark conservation laws, funds derived from a market-based 
regulatory system would be efficiently and fairly distributed to the states. 

For years, sportsmen have been paying license fees to help support the many successful 
conservation programs that have sustained our wildlife populations. But industrial 
pollution is threatening to undermine our conservation success throughout the nation. 
Polluters should contribute their fare share to sustaining wildlife populations. Adequate 
and consistent funding for the Wildlife Conservation and Restoration Account of the 
Pittman-Robertson Act is essential to enable states to meet the challenges facing wildlife 
from global warming. 



 


Congress will also need to fund the work of federal managers of land, water and wildlife 
so that these agencies can help ensure that wildlife populations within their jurisdictions 
survive global wanning. To date, very few federal agencies have updated their 
management plans to confront this leading threat to wildlife. Billions of dollars in 
conservation investments made by Congress in the past several decades are at risk of 
being lost if the federal government fails to adjust to the new reality of global wmming. 

On the other hand, if Congress points the way and provides the necessary funding, the 
United States can maintain our leadership in the stewardship of wildlife and ecosystems 
for future generations. 

Conclusion 

The National Wildlife Federation has worked for  years to advance non-partisan 
solutions to protect America's wildlife. The National Wildlife Federation is prepared now 
to work with Congress to advance science-based global wanning solutions. We cannot sit 
back and wait when we know that solutions are within reach and that the time for grasping 
them is rapidly dwindling. 

The Senate Environment and Public Works Committee has two bills pending before it — 
the Global Warming Pollution Reduction Act (S. ) and the Climate Stewardship and 
Innovation Act (S, )— that will put us on the pathway needed to solve global warming. 
The bills are led by several environmental champions who sit on this Committee. We urge 
all Senators on the Committee to work together on global wanning as your top priority and 
to move such bills out of Committee expeditiously for full Senate action. 

Thank you again for your attention to global warming’s impacts on wildlife. There is no 
more important conservation issue for our children’s future than global warming. 

Attachments 

NWF  Hunter/ Angler Survey 

Letter to Congress re Slate Wildlife Grant Program Funding 

Agenda for a Clean Energy Future to Combat Global Warming 

REFERENCES 



 


American Sportiishing Association. (). Sportfishing in America. Alexandria, VA. 

Barnett, T. P., Pierce, D. W., and Schnur, R. () Detection of anthropogenic climate 
change in the world's oceans. Science , v. , p. -. 

Boyd J. and Banzhaf S., (). What Are Ecosystem Services? The Need for 
Standardized Environmental Accounting Units. Resources for the Future, 
Washington, DC 

Daily, G.C. et al. (). Ecosystem Services: Benefits Supplied to Human Societies by 
Natural Ecosystems,  Issues in Ecology  . 

Daily, G.C. et al. (). Introduction: What Are Ecosystem Services? Nature ’s Services: 
Societal Dependence on Natural Ecosystems , - (Gretchen C. Daily ed.). 

Department of Energy () Annual Energy Outlook : With projections to . 
Online at httD://www.eia.doe.gov/oiaf/aeo/index.html 

Emanuel, K. (). Increasing destmctiveness of tropical cyclones over the past  
years. Nature, , -. 

Erwin, R.M. (). Atlantic seal level rise, lagoonal marsh loss, and wildlife habitat 
implications. Online at www.Dwrc.org/resshow/erwinlrs.htm. 

Folkestad, T. (, Dec. th) Quoted in news article by Smonite, T. ‘ Drowning polar 
bears worry researchers: Evidence hints that bear populations are on thin ice.’ 
newsfgi.nature.com 


Glick, P. (). Fueling the Fire: Global Warming, Fossil Fuels and the Fish and Wildlife 
of the American West. National Wildlife Federation, Reston, VA. 

Glick, P and Clough, J. (). An Unfavorable Tide: Global Warming, Coastal Habitats 
and Sportfishing in Florida. National Wildlife Federation, Reston, VA. 




 


Click, P., D. Inkley and C. Tufts (). Climate Change and Wildlife: Integrating 
Global Climate Policy Implementation with Local Conservation Action. 
Transactions of the * North American Wildlife and Natural Resource 
Conference. Wildlife Management Institute, Washington, D.C.: -. 

Holland, M.M., Bitz, C.M., and Tremblay, B, (, Dec th) Future Abrupt 
Reductions in the Summer Arctic Sea Ice. Geophysical Research Letters. 

Inkley, D.B., Anderson, M.Q, Blaustein, A.R., V.R. Burkett, Felzer, B., Griffith, B., Price, 
J., and Root, T.L. () Global climate change and wildlife in North 

America. Wildlife Society Technical Review -. The Wildlife Society: 

Bethesda, MD. 

Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. (). Fourth assessment report: Climate 
change . United Nations. 

International Association of Fish and Wildlife Agencies (lAFWA). (). America’s 
wildlife: The challenge ahead. Paige, L.C. Washington, D.C. 

Jackson, D. Z. (, Feb ). Muffled Warnings On Global Warming. The Boston Globe. 
Accessed online at www. bostonglobe.com. 

Johnson, D. H., and Grier, J. W. (). Determinants of breeding distributions of ducks. 
Wildlife Monographs, , -. 

Julius, S.H. (). What Are the Potential Impacts of Climate Change on Fresh Water 
Recreational Fishing Opportunities in the U.S.? Presentation to the Water 
