lowest concentrations in Alaska populations (Bemhoft et al. , Norstrom et al. , 
Andersen et al. , Kucklick et al. , Lie et al. , Verrault et al. , Braune el al. 
). In a comparison of chlorinated hydrocarbon contaminants and metabolites in polar bears 
from Alaska, Canada, East Greenland, and Svalbard, Norway from  to , XCHL 
concentrations were fairly uniformly distributed throughout the Arctic, with the lowest 


 



 


concentrations occurring in Alaska (Verreault et al. ). In contrast to the pattern exhibited by 
most other OCs, Alaska had the highest concentrations of ZHCH and pentachlorobenzene 
(PnCIBz), with polar bears from Alaska showing a six fold increase in ZHCH concentrations 
relative to Svalbard after adjusting for age (Verreault et al, ), 

Decreases in ZHCH in polar bear adipose tissue were noted between  and - in East 
Greenland (Dietz et al, ) and in Svalbard from - (AMAP ), In the Canadian 
Arctic, IHCH declined significantly between  and the s (Braune et al, ) and has 
remained relatively constant for the last decade (Norstrom ), From  to the s, the 
proportion of P-HCH making up the ZHCHs increased significantly for most populations, 
whereas the proportion of a-HCH decreased. The prevalence of the P-HCH isomer in polar bears 
is in contrast to ringed seal, a primary prey item, where a-HCH is the most common isomer 
(Kucklick et al, ). Suspected sources for the high concentrations of P-HCH in Alaska are 
China and Southeast Asia Li, et al, a, Li et al. b). 

XCHL concentrations have been shown to vary with sex (Muir et al.  ), age (Dietz et al. 

) , and season (Polischuk et al. , Deitz et al ). Concentrations of SCHL increased 
between  and  (Norstrom et al.l) and appeared to decline in most populations from 
-, except for Western Hudson Bay where they remained relatively unchanged 
(Verreault et al. ). HCB concentrations also have shown a similar decline (Braune et al. 

) . 

£DDT concentrations in adipose tissues declined in most Arctic polar bear populations since the 
active DDT period in the s (Norstrom , Fisk et al. , Dietz et al. , DeWit et al 
, Verreault et al. , Braune et al. ). A comparison of mean p,p’-DDE concentrations 
from female polar bears during - with samples from - indicated a continued 
decline in most populations except for Amundsen Gulf and East Greenland populations 
(Verreault et al. ), where p,p’-DDE concentrations remained relatively unchanged. In a 
similar study, Dietz et al. ( p. ) found that ZDDT and p,p’-DDE concentrations declined 
% in East Greenland from  to -. The BMF for DDE from seals is relatively low, 

 



 


indicating that polar bears can metabolize this compound rather quickly. Although the 
proportion of DDE with respect to SDDT maybe increasing, DDE concentrations are generally 
low compared to other POPs and thus not currently an important POP in polar bears. 

Polybrominated Diphenyl Ethers 

Polybrominated diphenyl ethers fPBDEs) share similar physical-chemical properties with PCBs 
(Wania and Dugani ), and are thought to be transported to the Arctic by similar pathways. 
Muir et al. () analyzed archived samples (Dietz et al , Verreault et al. ) for PBDE 
concentrations, finding the highest mean IPBDE concentrations in female polar bear adipose 
tissue from East Greenland and Svalbard. Lower concentrations of PBDE were found in adipose 
tissue from the Canadian and Alaskan populations (Muir et al. ). Differences between the 
PBDE concentrations and composition in liver tissue between the Southen Beaufort Sea and the 
Chukchi/Bering seas populations in Alaska suggest differences in the sources of PBDE exposure 
(Kannan et al. ). Overall, XPBDEs concentrations are much lower and less of a concern 
compared to PCBs, oxychlordane, and some of the more recently discovered perfluorinated 
compounds. PBDEs are metabolized to a high degree in polar bears and thus do not 
bioaccumulate as much as PCBs (Wolkers et al. ). Of the four principal PBDE congeners 
(PBDE , , , and ), PBDE  was the major congener (-%) found in polar bears 
(Ikonomou , Muir et al. ). Ikonomou () found that PBDE  concentrations were 
higher in polar bears than ringed seals from the Amundsen Gulf region in western Canada. 
Samples from the Canadian Arctic populations had higher proportions of PBDE , , and  
than the other populations (Muir et al. ). 

Ikonomou () found that SPBDEs increased exponentially in ringed seals from the 
Amundsen Gulf region between  and , but more recent data from  to  suggest 
that IPBDE concentrations may be leveling off or declining in this area (Ikonomou ). The 
annual production of PBDEs increased in the s from the . kt in  (Arias ). Use of 
PBDEs in  was estimated to be . kt, of which >% was in North America (AMAP ). 


 



 


By , the global use of PBDEs was considerably less in Europe compared to   due to 
restrictions put in place in different countries beginning in  (BSEF ). 

Perfluorooclane Sulphonale 

Perfluorooctane sulphonate (PFOS) levels were  times greater in polar bear livers from eastern 
Hudson Bay (Martin et al, ) than Alaska(Giesy and Kannan , Kannan et al. ), 
which suggests that eastern Hudson Bay may be closer to dominant mid-latitude manufacturing 
and use centers, relative to Alaska. Although PFOS concentrations have not been determined for 
most polar bear populations, concentrations found in eastern Hudson Bay indicate that PFOS is 
the most abundant organohalogen compound found to date (Martin et al. ). Even within 
Alaska, PFOS concentrations in polar bear livers from the CS subpopulation were greater than 
other persistent organic pollutants analyzed, including PBDEs, PCBs, and other OC compounds 
(Kannan et al. ). Although high concentrations of PFOS in the livers may have toxic 
significance, PFOS concentrations are probably not a major contaminant of the whole body as 
are PCBs and oxychlordane. The distribution of PFOS in polar bear tissues is unknown, since 
liver is the only tissue in which PFOS concentrations have been measured. The best study to 
date on the distribution of PFOS in the whole body was done in trout (Martin et al. ). In that 
study, the highest PFOS concentrations were in the liver, kidney, and blood plasma and the 
lowest concentrations were in muscle and adipose tissue and thus were not uniformly distributed 
throughout the body (Martin et al. ). The unique toxicological properties of PFOS, its 
environmental persistence and the increasing concentrations reported in polar bear livers from 
  to  by Smithwick et al. () are of concern. Doubling times in the eastern (near 
Baffin Island, Canada) and western (Barrow, Alaska) Arctic populations were . years and . 
years, respectively (Smithwick et al. ), indicate that polar bear populations closer to source 
areas experience increased risk. 

Biological Effects of Persistent Organic Pollutants 


 



 


Although baseline information on contaminant concentrations is available, determining the 
biological effects of these contaminants in polar bears is difficult. The synergistic effects of 
different contaminants (Payne et al. ), variations in bioaccumulation and biomagnification 
rates of different compounds through the food web, variation in the persistence and changes in 
chemical composition of compounds due to metabolism and abiotic degradation, and polar bear 
physiology (delayed implantation, lactation, fat metabolism, food habits, reproductive status, 
condition, age) are ail factors to be considered in determining overall biological effects (Fisk et 
al. , Fisk et ai. ). PCBs have been linked directly to impaired reproduction in ringed 
seals (Addison ), but not polar bears, since controlled experiments have not been conducted. 
However, field observations of reproductive impairment in females, lower survival of cubs, and 
increased mortality of females in Svalbard, Norway (Wiig , Wiig et al. , Skaare et al. 
, Haave et al. , Oskam et al. , Derocher et al. ) suggest that high 
concentrations of PCBs may have contributed to population level effects in the past. Currently it 
is not thought that present PCB concentrations are having population level effects. Other effects 
linked to PCB exposure in polar bears include induction of hepatic P enzymes (Letcher et al. 
), altered and impaired immune systems (Bemhoft et al. , Skaare et al. b, Larsen et 
al. , Lie et al. ), and changes in endocrine system function (Braethen et al. , Skaare 
et al,   a, Letcher et al. , Haave et al. , Oskam et a!. ), Table ,  summarizes 
biological effects (AMAP ). 


