Greenland harvest records (Table ). Co-management discussions between Greenland and 
Canada are ongoing. Greenland introduced polar bear quotas taking effect on January , . If 
the total -quota for those municipalities in NW and W Greenland that catch bears from the 
BB populations (i.e. Qaanaaq to Sisimiut) is summed, a total of  polar bears can be taken in 
Greenland from BB (assuming that  of a quota of  in Qaanaaq are taken from BB; see Kane 
Basin). 

. Davis Strait (DS) 


 



 


Based on the movements made by tagged animals and, more recently, of adult females with 
satellite telemetry, the DS population includes polar bears in the Labrador Sea, eastern Hudson 
Strait, Davis Strait south of Cape Dyer, and along the eastern edge of the Davis Strait-southern 
Baffin Bay pack ice. When bears occur in the latter area they are subject to catch from 
Greenlanders (Stirling and Kiliaan , Stirling et al. , Taylor and Lee , Taylor et al. 
b). A genetic study (Paetkau et al. ) indicated significant differences between bears 
from Davis Strait and both Baffin Bay and Foxe Basin. The initial population estimate of  
bears for the DS population (Stirling et al. ) was based on a subjective correction from the 
original mark-recapture estimate of  bears, which was felt to be too low because of possible 
bias in the sampling. In , the Canadian Polar Bear Technical Committee increased the 
estimate to , bears to account for bias in sampling created by the inability of researchers to 
survey the extensive area of offshore pack ice (Stirling and Taylor, unpubl. data). Traditional 
ecological knowledge also suggested that the population had increased over the last  years. 
The principal justification for this adjustment is based on the observation that the annual harvest 
has been sustained for the last  years and on non-quantitative observations that continue to 
suggest the population has increased. 

The PBSG has indicated that the DS population was either stable or perhaps declining due to 
over-harvest (PBSG , , ). However, in December , Nunavut increased its 
polar bear quota in DS from  to  bears based on Inuit reports that the population had 
increased since . In order to sustain this increased level of harvest, Nunavut estimated that 
the size of the DS population would have to be at least , bears; this is the population 
estimate currently used by Nunavut for management purposes. A mark-recapture study is 
currently underway to assess the size of the DS population. Within Canada, this population is 
harvested by Inuit from Nunavut, Quebec, and Labrador. The combined harvest by Canadian 
jurisdictions and Greenland (ca.  per year in Greenland during -, Born and Sonne 
) totalled  (Table ). Co-management discussions between Greenland and Canada are 
continuing (Lonstrup ). Greenland introduced polar bear quotas taking effect on  January 
. If the total  quota for those municipalities in West Greenland (i.e. Maniitsoq and 
Nuuk) that catch bears from the DS population is summed, a total of  polar bears can be taken 

 



 


in Greenland from the DS population. A population inventory began in summer of  to 
develop a scientific estimate of population numbers. Survival and recruitment rates used for risk 
assessment are based on the rates obtained for the adjacent BB population (Taylor et al. ). 

. Arctic Basin (AB) 

The AB population is a geographic catch-all to account for bears that may be resident in areas of 
the circumpolar Arctic that are not clearly part of other populations. Polar bears occur at very 
low densities in this region, and it is known that bears from other populations use the area 
(Durner and Amstrup ). As climate change continues, it is anticipated that this area may 
become more important for polar bears as a refugia but a large part of the area is over the deepest 
waters of the Arctic Ocean and biological productivity is thought to be low (Gosselin et al. 

). 


C. PBSG Status Summary 

Table  summarizes the current status for   populations (excluding the Arctic Basin) as: data 
deficient (); reduced (); severely reduced (); and not reduced (). The table summarizes 
observed or predicted trends for the populations as follows; data deficient (); increasing (); 
declining (); and stable (). The estimated risk for population declines due to harvest within the 
next  years was categorized as: no estimate (); very high (); higher (); lower (); and very 
low (). 

For six populations, data and information were insufficient to make assessments or prediction of 
status or trend. One of these populations, the Chukchi Sea, is thought to be in decline due in part 
to severe overharvest during the past - years. Accurate biological data to assess status, trend 
and risk to population was not available for six of the populations. Of the populations for which 
data are available to assess status and trend, only two are noted to be increasing, and both of 


 



 


these populations had been severely reduced in the past and are recovering under conservative 
harvest limits. The two populations that have long time series of data, Western Hudson Bay and 
Southern Beaufort Sea, are both declining. Due to large confidence intervals for the earlier SB 
abundance estimate a statistically significant measure of trend is, however, not possible. 

Anthropogenic and natural changes in Arctic environments, as well as recognition of the 
shortcomings of our knowledge of polar bear ecology, are increasing the uncertainties of polar 
bear management. Higher temperatures and erratic weather fluctuations, which are symptoms of 
global climate change, are increasing across the range of polar bears. Following the predictions 
of climate modellers, such changes have been most prevalent in Arctic regions (Stirling and 
Derocher , Stirling and Lunn , Stirling et al. , Derocher et al. ), and have 
already altered local and global sea-ice conditions (Gioersen and Campbell , Vinnikov et al. 

 , Serreze et al. , Parkinson and Cavalieri , Comiso a, , Holland and Bitz 
, Gough et al. ). Because changes in sea-ice are known to alter polar bear numbers and 
productivity (Stirling and Lunn , Stirling et al. , Derocher et al. ), effects of global 
climate change can only increase future uncertainty and may increase risks to the welfare of 
polar bear populations. 

Persistent organic pollutants, which reach Arctic regions via air and water currents, and their 
potential effects, also increase uncertainty for the welfare of polar bears. Although our 
understanding of polar bear population dynamics has greatly improved with increasing 
development of analysis methods (Lebreton et al. , Amstrup et al. , McDonald and 
Amstrup , Manly et al, , Taylor et al. , Taylor et al. ) a need for continued 
collection of accurate and timely population data in order to minimize uncertainty brought about 
by environmental change. 


V. Discussion of Listing Factors 

The Act identifies five factors to be considered in evaluating a species for listing: () The 

 



 


present or threatened destruction, modification, or curtailment of the species’ habitat or range; 

() overutilization for commercial, recreational, scientific, or educational purposes; () disease or 
predation; () the inadequacy of existing regulatory mechanisms; and () other natural or 
manmade factors affecting the species’ continued existence. 

In the context of the ESA, the term “threatened species” means any species (or subspecies) or, 
for vertebrates. Distinct Population Segment (DPS) that is likely to become an endangered 
species within the foreseeable future throughout all or a significant portion of its range. The 
term “endangered species” means any species that is in danger of extinction throughout all or a 
significant portion of its range. The principal considerations in the determination of whether or 
not a species warrants listing as a threatened or an endangered species under the ESA are the 
threats that now confront the species, and the probability that the species will persist in “the 
foreseeable future.” The ESA does not define the term “foreseeable future,” The lUCN/Polar 
Bear Specialist Group, in reassessing the status of polar bears globally in June , applied the 
criteria described in the lUCN/SSC Red List process and three generations as the time span. 
Generations, as defined by lUCN, are calculated as the age of sexual maturity ( years) plus % 
