U.S., have either passed or proposed legislation to ban penta-BDE and Octa-BDE. It is expected 
the global use of PBDEs will gradually decline in Canadian Arctic and U.S. although the large 
inventory of polyurethane foam may continue to be a source of PBDEs for some time to come. 

Currently there is not enough information to assess the temporal trends of PAHs or PCDD/Fs, 
and PFOS, and PFOA in the Arctic. The PAHs that are the most abundant in the atmosphere are 
primarily from the burring of fossil fuels to produce electricity and heat, vehicle exhausts, forest 
fires, fertilizer production and production of ferrous and non-ferrous metals (de Wit et al. ). 
The primary sources of PCDD/Ts include the burning of plastics and other materials that contain 
chlorines, exhaust from vehicles that burn leaded gasoline, pulp and paper mills, and 
metallurgical industries (de Wit et al. ). 

Overall the Arctic monitoring data suggests that the global circulation for most of the POPs is 
reaching equilibrium in the Arctic. The evidence for this comes from the lack of circumpolar 
variation in HCB, relatively uniform concentrations in chlordanes, and the narrowing of the 
differences between the PCB concentrations in polar bears the European and the Canadian 
Arctic. Many of the POPs in the Arctic, such as PCBs, DDT and DDE, and chlordanes, are 
declining or relatively flat. 

Despite the regulatory steps taken to decrease the production or emissions of toxic chemicals, 
increases in hexachlorobenzene (HCB) and relatively new compounds such as PBDEs and 
PFOSs, are cause for concern. PBDEs, which may have impacts similar to already regulated 


 



 


chemicals such as PCBs, have increased in the last decade (AMAP , Ikonomou et al. , 
Muir et al. ). PFCs remain the class of chemicals of most concern as we do not know how 
long it will take for voluntary phase-outs or bans to result in declines because of the widespread 
use of these compounds in consumer products. More information is needed on the specific 
biological effects of many of these contaminants on Arctic marine mammals in order to assess 
the potential impact on polar bears, and their primary prey, ringed and bearded seals. 

. Oil and gas exploration, development, and production 

a. Overview 

Each of the Parties to the Agreement on the Conservation of Polar Bears has developed detailed 
regulations pertaining to the extraction of oil and gas within their countries. The greatest level of 
oil and gas activity within polar bear habitat is currently occurring in the U.S. (Alaska). 
Exploration and production activities are also actively underway in Russia, Canada, Norway, and 
Denmark (Greenland) to varying degrees. In the U.S. all leasing and production activities are 
required to be consistent with the National Environmental Policy Act and a multitude of other 
statutes guide exploration, development and production. 

The greatest concern for future oil and gas development is for those activities that oecur in the 
marine environment due to the chance for oil spills to impact polar bears or their habitats. 
Another area of concern is for activities that occur in areas suitable for polar bear denning. 

NRC () concluded the following regarding cumulative effects of oil and gas development on 
polar bears and seals in Alaska: 

• “Industrial activity in the marine waters of the Beaufort Sea has been limited and 
sporadic and likely has not caused serious cumulative effects to ringed seals or 
polar bears. 

• Careful mitigation can help to reduce the effects of oil and gas development and 
their accumulation, especially if there is no major oil spill. However, the effects 

 



 


of full-scale industrial development of waters off the North Slope would 
accumulate through the displacement of polar bears and ringed seals from their 
habitats, increased mortality, and decreased reproductive success, 

• A major Beaufort Sea oil spill would have major effects on polar bears and ringed 
seals. 

• Climatic warming at predicted rates in the Beaufort Sea region is likely to have 
serious consequences for ringed seals and polar bears, and those effects will 
accumulate with the effects of oil and gas activities in the region. 

• Unless studies to address the potential accumulation of effects on North Slope 
polar bears or ringed seals are designed, funded, and conducted over long periods 
of time, it will be impossible to verify whether such effects occur, to measure 
them, or to explain their causes.” 

Historically, oil and gas activities have resulted in little direct mortality to polar bears. 

Future oil and gas activities are increasing as development continues to expand throughout the 
U.S. Arctic and internationally. Oil and gas exploration and development occur within the Arctic 
on land as well as offshore in the marine environment, although today the development of 
offshore production sites has been limited to Northstar and Endicott facilities located in the 
Beaufort Sea. Lentfer () stated that oil and gas exploration and development in the Arctic 
can impact polar bears in following ways: (I) damage or destruction of essential habitat; () 
contact with and ingestion of oil from acute and chronic oil spills; () contact with and ingestion 
of other contaminants; () attraction to or disturbance by industrial noise and harassment by 
aircraft, ships, and other vehicles; () death, injury, or harassment resulting from interactions 
with humans; () increased hunting pressures; and () potential mortality, injury, and stress 
resulting from capture, handling and interaction associated with studies to evaluate the previous 
concerns. 

Documented impacts on polar bears by the oil and gas industry in the United States during the 
past  years are minimal. Polar bears spend a limited amount of time on land, coming ashore to 
feed, den, or move to other areas. At times, fall storms deposit bears along the coastline where 

 



 


bears remain until the ice returns. For this reason, polar bears have mainly been encountered at 
or near most coastal and offshore production facilities, or along the roads and causways that link 
these facilities to the mainland. During those periods, the likelihood of interactions between 
polar bears and industry activities increases. We have found that the polar bear interaction 
planning and training requirements set forth in these regulations and required through the letters 
of authorization (LOA) process have increased polar bear awareness and minimized these 
encounters. LOA requirements have also increased our knowledge of polar bear activity in the 
developed areas. 

No lethal take associated with industry has occurred during the period covered by incidental take 
regulations. Prior to issuance of regulations, lethal takes by industry were rare. Since , 
there have been two documented cased of lethal take of polar bears associated with oil and gas 
activities. In both instances, the lethal take was reported to be in defense of human life. In the 
winter of  - , an industry employee shot and killed a polar bear. In , a female 
polar bear was killed at a drill site on the west side of Camden Bay. In contrast,  polar bears 
were killed in the Canadian Northwest Territories from   to   due to encounters with 
industry. Since the beginning of the incidental take program, which includes measures that 
minimize impacts to the species, no polar bears are known to have been killed due to encounters 
associated with the current industry activities on the North Slope of Alaska. 

To date, oil and gas exploration and development activities have been more extensive in Alaska 
than in other areas of the Arctic, but Canada, Norway, Russia and Greenland also are 
experiencing oil and gas exploration and development. 

b. Oil and gas development by Country 

. United States (Alaska) 


The most extensive active oil and gas activities in the Arctic occur on Alaska’s North Slope and 
in the adjacent Beaufort Sea. The footprint of oil and gas operations since initial development at 

 



 
