the polar bear really is a threatened species. 

And then I want to show you just two pictures of the many I 
have, but I culled it down to two, showing the polar bear, just 
needs that ice to be solid, that one. And then this next one. 

Global warming’s impacts on wildlife do not just affect individual 
species. They have a tremendous impact on our economy. And I 
think that is important, because people say, well, what is the cost 
of stopping global warming? Well, what is the cost of doing noth- 
ing? I think we have heard from the economists in the Stern Re- 
view that it is a huge cost, and that a dollar that we invest today 
will save $. in the future. 

My home State of California is one of the most biologically di- 
verse regions of the planet, because of the number of climates and 
ecosystems on its borders. From sports fishing on the north coast 
of California to big game viewing in the Sierra Nevada, this bio- 
diversity is one of the most valuable natural resources helping our 
fragile rural economies. 

In , more than . million people spent nearly $. billion 
on wildlife viewing, hunting and fishing in California, directly sup- 
porting , jobs. In short, biodiversity is big enjoyment for our 
families. It is also big business. 

So curbing global warming will save thousands of California jobs, 
maintain many important industries and maintain the quality of 
life for our families. I am very eager to hear the testimony of this 
distinguished panel, and I would say to my friends who are head- 
ing this committee. Senators Lieberman and Warner, thank you so 
much. There is a conflicting hearing on global warming in the Com- 
merce Committee on which I serve, so I may be running back and 
forth. But I am just so pleased that you took the time out of your 
hectic schedules to look at this issue. Thank you. 

Senator Lieberman. Thanks very much. Senator Boxer. 

Senator Inhofe, we appreciate your taking the time to be here 
this morning. 

OPENING STATEMENT OF THE HON. JAMES M. INHOFE, U.S. 

SENATOR FROM THE STATE OF OKLAHOMA 

Senator Inhofe. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I don’t 
have this as a part of my opening statement, but I want to respond 
to a couple of things that have been said in the opening state- 
ments. 

First of all, the IPCC report that is out, was out last Friday, is 
not the report, that is the summary for policy makers. It is not the 
scientists. That report comes out some time in May or June. 

Interestingly enough, even in the summary, they stated that in 
terms of the sea level rising, that has been reduced by  percent 
from  feet, I believe, to  feet. They also said that they have 
downgraded the contribution. Senator Boxer, of man’s contribution 
to global warming or to climate change by  percent. This comes 



 


from IPCC in just the summary for policy makers. And they also 
state that livestock now is producing more of the gases that would 
affect climate, if you were to buy into it, than human beings. 

And as far as the evangelistic organization goes, I am sure that 
neither of you are aware of this, but the Richard Cizik you refer 
to is on his own, and I am sure he is being well rewarded for doing 
it, he has been rejected by the National Association of Evangelicals. 
So I just wanted to mention those little corrections. 

I think it goes without saying that the earth has experienced cli- 
mate change that has affected species. The concern I continue to 
voice is the leap of faith that human beings are responsible for any 
variation in climate or that species will go extinct if we don’t regu- 
late greenhouse gases. Animals are fun and fuzzy and I love them 
and obviously they can be used to advance another agenda. 

The fact is that the relationship between species and climate is 
not clearly understood. Our growing knowledge about the planet is 
still in its infancy. For example, just last year we discovered for the 
first time a great discovery, and that was that trees emit methane. 
Methane is a form of greenhouse gas. This was never thought of 
before and it never entered into any of the models that have been 
used. 

Our lack of understanding doesn’t stop some from trying to force 
linkages between climate change and species, as is the case with 
the proposal to list the polar bear under the Endangered Species 
Act. Based on the scientific literature, I don’t believe we have a 
firm understanding of what is actually occurring in the Arctic. Sea 
ice data is incomplete for one of the most important Arctic climate 
variables, precipitation and evaporation. 

The Arctic climate impact assessment found, and I am quoting 
now from the Arctic climate impact assessment, uncertainties con- 
cerning even the present day distribution of precipitation and evap- 
oration are sufficiently large that evaluations of recent variations 
in trends are problematic. So how can we predict future trends and 
their impact on polar bears if we don’t — they just handed me this. 
We were talking about Richard Cizik a minute ago, and the fact 
that he has been discredited. If you don’t believe this, read the re- 
cent article that just came out on him called Feeling the Heat. 

Anyway, as far as the polar bear data, this is kind of interesting, 
Mr. Chairman, because there are  populations of polar bears 
around. I think we all understand that. Of the  populations,  
are either stable or are increasing. There is no evidence of decline 
in those. 

Now, overall, and this is very significant, I say to my good friend, 
and she is a good friend. Senator Boxer, is that since the s and 
s, the polar bear population has more than doubled. It has 
gone up from , to ,. The Fish and Wildlife Service base 
their listings on entire polar bear populations on data from a single 
population. This happens to be in western Hudson Bay. The popu- 
lation has declined some  percent, they are saying, in the past 
 years. 

However, hunting is accountable for  of the bears. Now, that 
is based on a -year average. So if you take that, that amount is 
equal or more than equal to the decline in population over a - 



 


year period. So that has to he something that is one of the consid- 
erations. 

I believe the proposal to list the polar bear, and more broadly, 
to link climate changes and species is part of an effort to alter en- 
ergy policy and shut down development, not just in Alaska, but 
across the Nation. This agenda was made clear just last week when 
the Center for Biological Diversity filed a petition asking seven 
Federal agencies, including the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, and 
the National Marine Fisheries Service, to consider the potential ef- 
fects of global warming on species when undertaking any major ac- 
tion, such as highway construction or energy permitting. It is clear 
that environmentalists are seeking to use America’s love for wild- 
life as a way to bring about climate changes that they can’t get 
through science alone. 

You know, I think it is very important to understand also that 
those of us who are, who question, in fact, right now, more of the 
