. A good guideline for evaluating contrary “expert” opinions is whether they use 
the IPCC science as a point of departure for their own analysis. In effect, if we dis- 
agree scientifically with IPCC, we should explain why. Without such discipline, con- 
trary arguments are not likely to be scientifically sound. 


 The greenhouse effect for CO  was first calculated over  years ago by S. Arrhenius, The 
London, Edinburgh and Dublin Philosophical Magazine and Journal of Science ,  (). 

 Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, Climate Change, the IPCC Scientific Assess- 
ment, J. T. Houghton et al., Eds. (Cambridge Univ. Press, Cambridge, ). 

 Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, Climate Change , The Science of Climate 
Change, J. T. Houghton et al., Eds. (Cambridge Univ. Press, Cambridge, ). 

 Climate models are mathematically based models that attempt to calculate the climate, its 
variability, and its systematic changes on a first-principles basis. The fundamental equations 
solved are the conservation of mass, momentum, and energy. The interactions among the atmos- 
phere, ocean, ice, and land surface systems are calculated on rather widely separated computa- 
tional points on Earth (typical spacings are  to  km in the horizontal and  to  km in 
the vertical). 


(  ) 



 


Virtually Certain “Facts” 

These key aspects of our knowledge of the climate system do not depend directly 
on the skill of climate model simulations and projections: 

• Atmospheric abundances of greenhouse gases are increasing because of human 
activities. 

• Greenhouse gases absorb and re-radiate infrared radiation efficiently. This 
property acts directly to heat the planet. 

• Altered amounts of greenhouse gases affect the climate for many centuries. The 
major greenhouse gases remain in the atmosphere for periods ranging from a 
decade to centuries. Also, the climate itself has considerable inertia, mainly be- 
cause of the high heat capacity of the world ocean. 

• Changes in other radiatively active substances offset somewhat the warming ef- 
fect of increased greenhouse gases. Observed decreases in lower stratospheric 
ozone and increases in sulfate particles both produce cooling effects. The cooling 
effect of sulfate particles remains insufficiently quantified. 

• Human-caused CO  increases and ozone decreases in the stratosphere have al- 
ready produced more than a °C global average cooling there. This stratospheric 
cooling is generally consistent with model predictions. 

• Over the past century, Earth’s surface has warmed by about .°C (±.°C). 

• The natural variability of climate adds confusion to the effort to diagnose 
human-induced climate changes. Apparent long-term trends can be artificially 
amplified or damped by the contaminating effects of undiagnosed natural vari- 
ations. 

• Significant reduction of key uncertainties will require a decade or more. The un- 
certainties concerning the responses of clouds, water vapor, ice, ocean currents, 
and specific regions to increased greenhouse gases remain formidable. 

I further illustrate these climate uncertainties using two extrapolations of the 
IPCC idealized scenarios of increases of % equivalent atmospheric CO  concentra- 
tion per year.  The first case levels off at a CO  doubling after  years; the second 
levels off at a CO  quadrupling after  years. Both correspond to simple extrapo- 
lations of current trends in greenhouse gas emissions. Considering the long resi- 
dence time of CO  at such large concentrations, these leveled-off scenarios are phys- 
ically plausible but are presented as illustrations, not as social predictions. 

Virtually Certain Projections 

These projections have a greater than  out of  chance of being true within 
the predicted range:  

• The stratosphere will continue to cool significantly as CO  increases. If ozone 
continues to decrease, the cooling will be magnified. There is no known mecha- 
nism to prevent the global mean cooling of the stratosphere under these sce- 
narios. 

• Global mean amounts of water vapor will increase in the lower troposphere ( 
to  km) in approximately exponential proportion (roughly % per °C of warm- 
ing) to the global mean temperature change. The typical relative humidities 
would probably change substantially less, in percentage terms, than would 
water vapor concentrations. 

Very Probable Projections 

These projections have a greater than  out of  chance of being true within the 
predicted range: 

• The global warming observed over the past century is generally consistent with 
a posteriori model projections of expected greenhouse warming, if a reasonable 
sulfate particle offset is included. It is difficult, but not impossible, to construct 
conceivable alternate hypotheses to explain this observed warming. Using vari- 


SS. Manabe and R. J. Stauffer, Nature ,  (); J. Clim. ,  (). 

 The approach used here was tested and challenged in E. Barron, Forum on Global Change 
Modeling, U.S. Global Change Research Program Report - (U.S. Global Change Research 
Program, Washington, DC, ). Earlier evaluations were published in J. D. Mahlman, Climate 
Change and Energy Policy, L. Rosen and R. Glasser, Eds. (American Institute of Physics, Los 
Alamos National Laboratory LA-UR--, New York, ) and in J. D. Mahlman, U.S. Con- 
gressional Record,  November , House Science Committee Hearing on Climate Models 
and Projections of Potential Impacts on Global Climate Change ( ). 



 


ations in solar output or in natural climate to explain the observed warming 
can be appealing, but both have serious logical inconsistencies. 

• A doubling of atmospheric CO  over preindustrial levels is projected to lead to 
an equilibrium global warming in the range of .° to .°C. These generous un- 
certainty brackets reflect remaining limitations in modeling the radiative 
feedbacks of clouds, details of the changed amounts of water vapor in the upper 
troposphere ( to  km), and responses of sea ice. In effect, this means that 
there is roughly a % chance that the actual equilibrium warming caused by 
doubled atmospheric CO  levels could be lower than .°C or higher than .°C. 
For the answer to lie outside these bounds, we would have to discover a sub- 
stantial surprise beyond our current understanding. 

• Essentially all climate models predict equilibrium global temperature increases 
that are nearly linear in the logarithm of CO  changes. This effect is mainly 
due to increasing saturation of many of the infrared absorption bands of CO  . 
That is, a quadrupling of CO  levels generally produces projected warmings that 
are about twice as large as those for doubled CO  . 

• Models predict that by the year , global mean surface temperature changes 
under these two idealized scenarios would be .° to °C. 

• Sea level rise could be substantial. The projections of  ±  cm by the year 
, caused mainly by the thermal expansion of sea water, are below the equi- 
librium sea level rise that would ultimately be expected. After  years at 
quadrupled CO  levels, the sea level rise expected due to thermal expansion 
alone is roughly  ±  m. Long-term melting of landlocked ice carries the poten- 
tial for considerably higher values but with less certainty. 

• As the climate warms, the rate of evaporation must increase, leading to an in- 
crease in global mean precipitation of about  ± .% per °C of global warming. 

• By  or so, the higher latitudes of the Northern Hemisphere are also ex- 
pected to experience temperature increases well in excess of the global average 
