
But it is important to know that even the lowest would be far 
beyond the range of temperatures in the last , years. If these 



 


estimates are even close to being correct, we are heading into un- 
charted waters relative to the climate over the last , years. 

Should we be concerned that the climate may change signifi- 
cantly in the future? I have focused exclusively here in the changes 
of temperature. The temperature change is only one component of 
our overall climate system. 

Changes in temperature are associated with variations in rain- 
fall, the amount of snow, frequency of floods and droughts, El Nino, 
or El Ninos events, shifts in storm tracks and hurricanes, et cetera. 

Our economy and way of life has become highly dependent on 
certain expectations regarding climate. Much of our infrastructure 
for water supply, for agriculture, and transportation, was built on 
the assumption that climate would operate in the future pretty 
much as it has in the past. 

A relatively small shift in average global or hemispheric tem- 
perature when it is associated with the atmospheric circulation, 
rainfall patterns, et cetera, can be highly disruptive to society. We 
have seen many examples of such in recent decades, yet tempera- 
tures that were warm were nowhere near the levels that may be 
reached later on in this century. 

Now, these include extremes of rainfall leading to catastrophic 
flooding in some areas, droughts, exceptional wildfires, historically 
low lake levels elsewhere, as well as an increase in windstorms and 
other weather related disasters. Unusual weather events are be- 
coming less uncommon, in fact with agriculture, transportation, 
and commercial activity, a fact noted with concern by major inter- 
national property insurance agencies. 

Can we be certain that future climate will involve unprecedented 
risks? Can we be certain? Some argue the processes within the cli- 
mate system will act to compensate for the effects of high green- 
house gas levels, some call negative feedback events. 

According to this scenario, these feedbacks will help maintain the 
climatic status quo, enabling us to continue to contaminate the at- 
mosphere with greenhouse gases. 

There is a small chance that such critics are right in which case 
it would be safe to do nothing. But they may be completely wrong 
and, indeed, the scientific consensus is that they are wrong. 

Political decisions, as you well know, inevitably involve assessing 
risk and weighing the consequences of action versus inaction. Con- 
gress must decide and must weigh the potentially catastrophic en- 
vironmental and commercial consequences of future global warm- 
ing against the costs of limiting fossil fuel consumption to reduce 
these risks. 

Given that it will take many decades to stabilize greenhouse gas 
levels in the atmosphere, even if strong action was taken today, as 
Senator Kerry pointed out, to limit fossil fuel consumption, the 
issue is urgent and demands our attention. 

Scientists cannot provide Congress with a certain forecast of the 
future. As our research on global warming continues, our under- 
standing will undoubtedly change. But the picture at present, is 
that we are indeed living in climatically unusual times, and that 
the future is likely to be even more unusual. And I believe we ig- 
nore this prospect at our peril. 

Thank you. 



 


The Chairman. Thank you very much. 

[The prepared statement of Dr. Bradley follows:] 

Prepared Statement of Dr. Ray Bradley, Department Chair, Department of 
Geosciences, University of Massachusetts 

climate in perspective: 

HOW DOES PRESENT DAY CLIMATE DIFFER FROM CLIMATES IN THE PAST? 

Introduction 

My name is Raymond Bradley. I am the Head of the Department of Geosciences, 
and Director of the Climate System Research Center, at the University of Massa- 
chusetts, Amherst. My research interests are in climate variations during the last 
century and how these compare with variations over longer periods. This involves 
studying both instrumental records of climate, and paleo-records — natural phe- 
nomena that have in some way registered past changes of climate in their structure 
(for example, tree rings, ice cores, lake sediments, banded corals etc). Using such 
“proxies” of climate enables the short instrumental record to be extended back in 
time, so it can be placed in a longer-term perspective. Like other witnesses here, 
I have served on many national and international committees related to climate var- 
iability. Most recently I was Chairman of the Past Global Changes Project of the 
International Geosphere Biosphere Programme (IGBP-PAGES), a member of the 
National Research Council Panel on Climate Variability on Decade-to-Century Time 
Scales, and I have been contributing author to all of the Intergovernmental Panel 
on Climate Change (IPCC) scientific assessment activities. I have written or edited 
 books and numerous articles on climatic change. 

We are living in unusual times. The climate of the twentieth century climate 
was dominated by universal warming; almost all parts of the earth had tempera- 
tures at the end of the century that were higher than when it began. At the same 
time, the concentration of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere increased to levels 
that were higher than at any time in at least the last , years. These obser- 
vations are incontrovertible. Global warming is real and the levels of greenhouse 
gases (such as carbon dioxide) are now -% higher than they were in the middle 
of the th century. This change in greenhouse gas concentration is largely the re- 
sult of fossil fuel combustion. What is less certain is whether the observed global 
warming is due entirely to the build-up of greenhouse gases, or to other “natural” 
factors, or to a combination of both. Here I provide a longer-term perspective on the 
issue by focusing on the evolution of climate in the centuries and millennia leading 
up to the th century. Such a perspective encompasses the period before large-scale 
contamination of the global atmosphere and global-scale changes in land-surface 
conditions. By studying both the record of past climate variability and factors that 
may have caused climate to change (“forcing factors”), we can establish how the cli- 
mate system varied under “natural” conditions, before human effects became signifi- 
cant on a global scale. Although there is considerable uncertainty about the rate and 
magnitude of any future warming which may occur as a result of human activities, 
one thing is not in dispute: any human-induced changes in climate will be super- 
imposed on a background of natural climatic variations. Hence, in order to under- 
stand future climatic changes, it is necessary to have an understanding of how and 
why climates have varied in the past. Of particular relevance are climatic variations 
of the last few centuries leading up to the recent warming trends observed in instru- 
mental records. 

For most parts of the world, instrumental records of climate rarely span more 
than a century. We thus have a very limited perspective on climate variability and 
its relationship to potentially important forcing factors. To obtain a longer perspec- 
tive requires reliance on climate-dependent natural phenomena that have preserved, 
in some way, a record of past climate. The most important of these are tree rings, 
ice cores, banded corals, varved lake and marine sediments, as well as historical 
records of past weather conditions (see Appendix ). In recent studies we have as- 
sembled the best of these records to produce a global picture of how temperature 
has changed over the last  years (Figure ). It is worth noting that it is not 
sufficient to select one or two records; an extensive network is needed to obtain a 
global assessment. Just as listening to one instrument would not capture the full 
beauty of a symphony, so one can not hope to say anything meaningful about global 
climatic change by using data from only one site. 
