
According to last week’s IPCC report, global warming and associated sea level 
rise will continue for centuries due to the timescales associated with climate processes 
and feedbacks, even if greenhouse gas concentrations are stabilized now or in the very 
near future. Thus, even if we act now, as we must, to cap and reduce greenhouse gas 



 


emissions, wildlife will continue to feel the effects of global warming for at least the next 
 years. In other words, there is a century-long bottleneck that we must help wildlife 
navigate, so that it can survive to reap the benefits from reductions in greenhouse gas 
emissions undertaken now. Consequently, our national strategy for combating global 
warming must consist of two parts. First, we must take immediate steps to reduce 
greenhouse gas emissions, to address the root cause of climate change. Second, we must 
also craft responses and mechanisms now to help wildlife navigate the looming bottleneck 
of complex threats caused by global warming. Some ways to do this are suggested in the 
following pages of my testimony. 

A Coordinated, Interagency Response is Essential 

Federal agencies must use their existing authorities and be given additional 
direction to consider the impacts of global wmming on wildlife in program planning, land 
management, and environmental analysis pursuant to the National Environmental Policy 
Act, the Endangered Species Act, and other relevant laws. Though the brunt of some global 
warming impacts may not be fully felt for a number of years, planning to address and 
ameliorate those impacts on wildlife and wildlife habitat must begin now. 

Equally important, new governmental processes and structures need to be 
explored that will themselves be resilient and adaptive to the threats from global 
warming. While it is important for each federal agency to develop measures for 
protecting wildlife from the effects of global warming, it is insufficient for individual 
agencies, or even individual federal land units, to contemplate and plan strategies purely on 
their own. The problem is simply too complex. 



 


One option is to establish an interagency planning and coordinating mechanism, a 
National Coimcil on Global Warming and Wildlife. Modeled after the National 
Interagency Fire Center and the National Invasive Species Council, the National Council 
on Global Warming and Wildlife would develop a national strategy for addressing the 
impact of global warming on wildlife, with the express purpose of helping wildlife 
navigate the bottleneck of global warming impacts over the next century. This strategy 
should examine management issues common to geographic areas and threat type (e.g. sea 
level rise, increased hurricane frequency and intensity). Individual agencies and land 
management units could then coordinate their management activities with these national 
and regional goals and strategies. State strategies, particularly those set forth in state 
wildlife action plans, should address global warming impacts on wildlife and also be 
coordinated with the national strategy. 

Scientific Capacity Should be Enhanced 

Building more robust scientific, inventory and monitoring programs is essential to 
managing wildlife and federal lands in a world changed by global warming. The scientific 
capacity of federal agencies, however, is woefully inadequate. No federal land system has 
a comprehensive biological inventory of their lands. The National Park Service has 
completed inventories on individual units, but other federal land systems, including the 
National Wildlife Refuge System, do not have comprehensive biological inventories. How 
are agencies to know how ecological systems are changing as a result of global warming, 
and subsequently what adaptive responses may be necessary, if they do not even know 
what is there? Building applied research, inventory and monitoring 



 


capacity across the agencies is essential. 

One particularly important need is the development of simulation maps of 
expected vegetation changes in response to global warming. These will have to be 
refined as our understanding grows of how habitats are responding to changing climatic 
conditions. This tool is extremely important for helping managers plan land and 
conservation programs. 

A coordinated science arm of a national strategy for addressing the impacts of 
global warming on wildlife will also be essential in developing and determining the 
efficacy of specific measures to address those impacts. A number of different types of 
responses have already been proposed by the scientific community including the protection 
and restoration of habitat corridors to assist species in shifting their ranges and the protection 
of climate “refugia” - areas that are not as vulnerable to the whims of a changing climate 
and are better able to preserve biodiversity through the climate bottleneck. These and other 
strategies will need to be further developed and tested. 

Building Resilience to Climate Change 

Many species and ecological systems have the ability to tolerate and adapt to some 
degree of ecological and climate changes. If global warming was the only stress on 
wildlife, more species might be able to weather it. Unfortunately though, most ecosystems 
throughout the globe have been impacted in some measure by human-caused stressors, 
inhibiting the ability of species and ecosystems to adapt to global warming. All of the 
threats to natural systems that have been the center of attention for decades, including 
habitat loss, pollution, invasive species, and overexploitation, are heightened in 



 


the face of global warming. Thus, reducing other stressors on wildlife is key to helping 
wildlife navigate the bottleneck of global wanning impacts. 

For example, at the Silvio O. Conte National Wildlife Refuge, warmer temperatures 
will reduce the snow pack of New England’s mountains and cause earlier spring melting. 
This will reduce the late summer flows of the Connecticut River. Low flows and warmer 
temperatures reduce the dissolved oxygen in the water, starving fish, including the 
endangered shortnose sturgeon, of oxygen. Anticipating this, strategies to reduce other 
causes of lowered dissolved oxygen levels, including strategies to reduce the runoff of 
fertilizers and other nutrients into the river, should be accelerated. This will build resilience 
in the system to assist species in navigating the global warming bottleneck. 

Another example is the tremendous loss of coastal wetlands in Louisiana. Louisiana 
loses up to  square miles of coastal marshes per year, driven by many factors including the 
diversion and chaimelization of the Mississippi River, which has starved these wetlands of 
essential marsh-building sediment, and saltwater intrusion caused by canals carved into 
coastal marshes, which kills off erosion-controlling wetland vegetation. These were threats 
to Louisiana and a large proportion of the nation’s migratory birds and commercial 
fisheries before we recognized the problem of global warming - now they are crippling 
these marshes’ resilience to rising sea levels. Restoring these wetlands to their natural 
functioning will help them adapt to global warming and maintain migratory bird and 
fisheries habitat, and equally important, will buffer the coast from future devastating 
hurricane storm surges. 



 


Providing Funding to Address Global Warming’s Impacts on Wildlife 

Development and implementation of a national strategy to address global 
warming’s impacts on wildlife, providing the necessary science to underpin that strategy, 
and taking action to reduce other stressors on wildlife will require substantially more 
money than is currently provided to conservation. As Congress develops legislation to cap 
greenhouse gas emissions, it is likely to create a system of emissions credits that can be 
traded. In the process, there is an opportunity to auction some of these credits, producing 
substantial revenue for the federal Treasury. A portion of that revenue should be dedicated 
to programs to offset the impacts of global warming on wildlife with special emphasis on 
providing funding to address federal responsibilities for wildlife and land conservation in 
the face of global warming. Defenders of Wildlife looks forward to working with this 
subcommittee and others in Congress to develop a program that will result in effective 
measures to help wildlife navigate the global warming bottleneck so that our children and 
grandchildren will be able to enjoy the wealth of wildlife and its habitat that we have 
enjoyed. 

