
 

 

- 

Subtotal 

 

 

 

- 

Total !.. 

, 

, 

, 

+ 


*less than $,. 

 Total may not add due to rounding. 

 FY  does not include $ million in DOE Small Business Innovative Research funding. 
 FY  and FY  does not include $ million in DOI Data Management funding. 






 


The Chairman. We will proceed during this hearing, at least as 
far as this member is concerned, on the premise that there is no 
such thing as a dumb question. This is an area where I admitted 
in my opening statement that I have a very steep learning curve. 
And as I also mentioned, this will be the first, of what I hope to 
be a number of hearings, that we can have on this issue. 

First of all, what changed between the  IPCC report and 
today that has shifted the debate from “Are we warming the 
Earth?” to “How much are we warming the Earth?” 

Dr. Lane. Senator, I think the simple answer is just that more 
science got done, and became available, and then could be analyzed 
by this international peer review process. 

The Chairman. That is an important change, do you not think? 

Dr. Lane. I think the change is important. It is — particularly in 
the Academy report that was referred to — very clear that there 
really is not any remaining debate about whether the Earth is 
warming or not. It is quite clear that the Earth is warming, and 
there is significant consensus that the human activity is a part of 
that warming. 

So I think it is time to focus on what that means in terms of lives 
of people and nations. And that also involves significant research 
questions, and that in part, what the Global Change Research Pro- 
gram is all about. 

It does not mean there are not still important questions about 
the physics and the chemistry of climate change. And we will con- 
tinue to support those research activities to further deepen our 
knowledge in those areas, but I think it is quite clear that the larg- 
er questions have shifted. And it is important the research program 
respond. 

The Chairman. Do you believe that the upcoming report will 
alter the current debate among scientists? 

Dr. Lane. Senator, I think that many of these questions have 
been subject to scientific debate, and that is how the scientific proc- 
ess works. I would expect that increasingly researchers will turn 
their attention to some of these more complex questions, and we 
will see more attention in the scientific arena to this research. 

The Chairman. Are other nations devoting anywhere near the 
time and assets and scientific effort that the United States is? 

Dr. Lane. I can submit budget numbers to the Committee for the 
record. I do not have them fresh in my mind. 

The Chairman. Just your overall impression about that. 

Dr. Lane. I would emphasize that, yes, the Global Change Re- 
search Program, the U.S. program, is part of a much larger inter- 
national effort. And it, in my view, is one of the best examples 
among several very good ones, of international cooperation and 
science. The IPCC process involves hundreds of experts in all as- 
pects of climate change, the social sciences, the economic sciences, 
as well as the physics 

The Chairman. Well, I do not mean to interrupt, but my ques- 
tion is: Are other nations devoting the time and assets — I under- 
stand we have a budget request for $. billion. Are other nations 
involving themselves with the degree of commitment that we are? 

Dr. Lane. My sense is that the degree of commitment on the part 
of many nations of the world is very substantial, and in the re- 



 


search area, which I think is what you would like for me to ad- 
dress, the area of climate modeling is one in which, in some sense, 
other countries are ahead of us. And that is an issue for us to be 
concerned about. 

We asked the Academy to study this question, give us a report. 
And the Academy concluded that in the case of climate modeling, 
the United States may be losing leadership to researchers in other 
countries. So I would say in a case like that, it is very clear that 
the commitment is quite strong. 

The Chairman. A lot of our concerns here are anecdotal obvi- 
ously. We read where a huge piece of ice broke off from the Ant- 
arctic. Does that mean anything to you? 

Dr. Lane. I found that an extremely interesting story, as well, 
and it is a true story. And I have been to the Antarctic several 
times in my role as Director of the National Science Foundation 
since National Science Foundation runs the U.S. program down 
there. That was an extraordinary event. 

One cannot really connect single events of that kind with the 
larger issue of global climate change, and I think it would be a mis- 
take to do that. But there are many other examples such as the 
receding of the glaciers and high country around the world over the 
last several decades. 

There is the fairly recent observation that the ice in the Arctic 
region is less in extent and also thinner than we anticipated. All 
those are very significant research questions that do have a rela- 
tionship with the Global Change Research Program. 

The Chairman. What about the disappearance of species of fish? 
