Gissing, D. . p  (In) Conservation Hunting: People and Wildlife in Canada’s North. 
Milton Freeman, Bob Hudson and Lee Foote (Eds). Canadian Circumpolar Institute Occas. Pub- 
lication No. . 

 Dyck, MG and RK Baydak. . Human Dimensions of Wildlife :-. 
i^Dr. Martina Tyrell — Unpublished Document 

i^Foote, AL and G Wenzel — Reciprocal benefits of polar bear hunting (In Press). 



 


when other jobs are scarce or non-existent^®. Conservation hunts by foreign sports- 
men do not increase the harvested numbers of bears; rather, foreign hunters pur- 
chase a small percentage of the harvest quota from participating communities. Re- 
ducing the number of U.S. sportsmen legally hunting polar bears would not result 
in fewer bears being killed as local hunters will, in every case, fully utilize the allot- 
ted tag numbers^^. The loss of revenue from conservation hunts may actually in- 
crease demand for a larger Inuit subsistence quota to help offset the loss of needed 
revenue that visiting hunters brought into the community. The willingness to kill 
nuisance bears that approach remote villages is currently thwarted by the commu- 
nity’s recognition of the very high economic and social values seen in polar bears. 
In the absence of a lucrative hunting arrangement, the value of polar bears is likely 
to be reduced and bears near villages are more likely to be viewed as a nuisance 
than a valued resource. 

The polar bear technical committee (meeting in Edmonton - Feb ) represents 
a very knowledgeable group with great expertise which will help lead the data col- 
lection and management of polar bear populations. Their collected wisdom is pivotal 
to our biological and distributional understanding. Native groups’ observations may 
strongly supplement this understanding through hypothesis formulation, mecha- 
nism of population change, and bear behaviors within a smaller geographic range. 
These cross-linkages have started and need to be encouraged^®. 

Continued debate is essential for allocation of polar bear kills. This specific mor- 
tality factor is not considered a singular risk in the proposed ESA petition; there- 
fore, if polar bears are re-classified as endangered, exemptions for managed harvest 
and importation are important considerations for the act. 


Statement of Brendan P. Kelly, Associate Vice President for Research, 
University of Alaska 

Senator Lieberman and members of the subcommittee, thank you for the oppor- 
tunity to testify today on the impacts of climate change on Arctic wildlife. For the 
past  years, I have studied Arctic wildlife, primarily ice-associated marine mam- 
mals (whales, seals, and walruses). My studies have benefited by collaboration with 
colleagues in the scientific community and with Yupik and Inupiaq Eskimos who 
generously shared their knowledge and observations. Over millennia, Eskimo people 
evolved a rich culture around the seasonal sea ice and the plant and animal life 
that, in turn, had adapted to sea ice. 

In the late s, immediately following the decimation of bowhead whale and 
walrus populations by commercial whalers, approximately  percent of the Eskimo 
population in the Bering Strait region starved to death. One hundred years later, 
I began learning about ice-associated animals from Native hunters such as Mr. Alex 
Akeya, a descendant of the survivors of the famine. By that time, the walrus popu- 
lation had recovered, the whales were recovering, but the Eskimo population re- 
mained below its historical size. 

The plants and animals that Alex and his kin depend on exist, of course, not in 
isolation but as part of an ecosystem. This particular ecosystem is dominated by 
seasonal sea ice which strongly influences the climate, oceanography, and biology 
of the Arctic Ocean and surrounding lands. 

Sea ice influences not only Arctic climate but, in fact, global climate in several 
ways, most notably through a mechanism first described to me by Mr. Akeya. He 
told me, as we traveled around St. Lawrence Island in his walrus skin boat, that 
in his language (Siberian Yupik) the island is named Savouqaq, a reference to the 
shape of the island. The island looks like something that has Been wrung out like 
a wet rag. A Yupik creation story described raven diving to the bottom of the Bering 
Sea, taking mud in its beak, and, back at the surface, wringing out the mud to form 
the island. How, I asked Mr. Akeya, did his ancestors know that shape of this large 
island without benefit of an aerial view? His answer was that in the autumn, when 
the island is snow covered and the surrounding sea is not yet ice covered, an image 


i®Keith, D. . Inuit Qujimaningit Nanurnut; Inuit knowledge of polar bears. Canadian Cir- 
cumpolar Institute Press. 

I'^Wenzel G. and M Dowsley p- (In) Conservation Hunting: People and Wildlife in Can- 
ada’s North. M Freeman, B Hudson and L Foote (Eds). Canadian Circumpolar Institute Occa- 
sional Publ. No. . 

i®Pokiak, F. p  (In) Conservation Hunting: People and Wildlife in Canada’s North. M Free- 
man, B Hudson and L Foote (Eds). Canadian Circumpolar Institute Occasional Publication No. 
. 

i®Diduck, A, N Banks, D Clark, and D Armitage. . Pp - in Breaking Ice, Berkes 
et al. (Eds). University of Calgary Press. 



 


of the island occasionally is reflected up on to the cloud cover due to the high reflec- 
tivity of the snow in contrast to the low reflectivity of the water. Indeed, it is now 
known scientifically that sun and ice reflect over  percent of the incoming sun- 
light, while sea water absorbs over  percent of the sunlight. That differential re- 
flection explains not only how ancient Yupiks knew the shape of Savouqaq, but it 
also contributes strongly to the faster rate of climate change experienced today in 
polar regions. One consequence of our warming climate is the melting of sea ice. 
Once that melt begins, it is accelerated by the resulting change in reflectivity. As 
the ice changes to water, the reflectivity of the surface goes from more than  per- 
cent to less than  percent resulting in further warming, more ice melt, and yet 
a further decrease in reflectivity. The importance of this polar amplification effect 
to global climate can be appreciated when the surface area of the polar seas — as 
much as ,, km in the recent past — is taken into account. 

Sea ice strongly influences winds and water temperature, both of which are key 
determinants of upwelling, the oceanographic phenomenon whereby nutrient rich 
water is brought up to depths at which there is sufficient sunlight for phytoplankton 
to make use of those nutrients. 

The Bering Sea produces our Nation’s largest commercial fish harvests as well as 
supporting subsistence economies of Alaskan Natives. Ultimately, the fish popu- 
lations depend on plankton blooms controlled by the extent and location of the ice 
edge in spring. Naturally, many other organisms, such as seabirds, seals, walruses, 
and whales, depend on primary production, mainly in the form of those plankton 
blooms. As Arctic sea ice continues to diminish, the location, timing, and species 
make-up of the blooms is changing in ways that appear to favor a different kind 
of ecosystem. While much of Bering Sea’s production ends up in a bottom-dwelling 
community of clams, crabs, and other organisms favored by walruses, gray whales, 
bearded seals, and eider ducks, the altered ecosystem may instead favor organisms 
living in the water column. The result would be a radically altered community of 
organism favoring a different suite of upper level consumers. The subsistence and 
commercial harvests of fish could be altered radically. 

Ecosystem changes, of course, will be profound and effect more components than 
the fish. Many changes already have been observed and are predicted to accelerate 
along with the rates of climate change. The changes to the Arctic sea ice ecosystem 
will be especially rapid and profound. In my  years studying that system, we al- 
ready have lost over  percent of the summer ice cover. 

My colleagues in the scientific community are working diligently to understand 
the manifold impacts of our changing climate. There is a real sense of urgency given 
the pace of change and the tremendous economic and social impacts that will ensue. 
Many of the changes will not be obvious or, seemingly, even counterintuitive. Two 
examples involving marine mammal species may be illustrative. 

Walruses feed on clams and other bottom-dwelling organisms. Over a nursing pe- 
riod of two or more years, the females alternate their time between attending a calf 
on the ice and diving to the bottom to feed themselves. The record ice retreats ob- 
served in recent summers increasing are extending beyond the continental shelf 
such that the ice is over water too deep for the female walruses to feed. Thus, the 
habitat suitable for adult feeding is becoming disconnected from the suitable nurs- 
ing habitat. The prediction is for walrus populations to once again decline. 
