
Projected temperature and sea level changes . The IPCC report states that the “global average 
temperature and sea level are projected to rise under all IPCC SRES scenarios.” The globally 
averaged surface temperature is projected to increase by somewhere between  . and .° C over 
the period  to  depending on model parameters and the assumptions made on future 
CO  emissions. The projected rate of warming is much larger than the observed changes during 
the th century and is very likely to be without precedent during at least the last , years. 
Specifically for the Arctic, models suggest that global warming is amplified in high northern 
latitudes (Holland and Bitz ). A comparison of results from  models has shown that the 
range of simulated polar warming in the Arctic is from  . to . times the global mean warming 
(Holland and Bitz ). Furthermore, the IPCC reports says “There is new and stronger 
evidence that most of the warming observed over the last  years is attributable to human 
activities” and “human influences will continue to change atmospheric composition throughout 

 



 


the “ century”. Hansen et al. () suggest that the warming trend would change 
considerably if actions were taken soon enough to keep the atmospheric gases from increasing. 

Projected changes in sea ice cover . For the future, ail evidence points to the likelihood of 
continued Arctic warming and continued decreases in the Arctic sea ice cover in the “ century 
(Comiso ), due to increasing global temperatures despite a large degree of uncertainty of the 
actual increase. The anthropogenic climate change impact on sea ice cover is implicated in 
Vinnikov et at. () and Johannessen et al. () who have shown that the observed decrease 
in Arctic sea ice extent cannot be explained by natural climate variations. Although there is a 
large degree of uncertainty regarding the actual increase in global temperature, because of the 
long residence time of CO  in the atmosphere, even a rapid reduction in CO  emissions would 
not stop an increase in global temperature unless the countering cooling effects of aerosols or 
other factors are stronger than currently thought. Extrapolation of linear trends into the future 
and different model assumptions, results in large uncertainties about the future of the Arctic sea 
ice. Gregory et al. () used four IPCC Special Report on Emission Scenarios (SRES) to 
model the future of the Arctic sea ice, including extreme scenarios for global temperatures 
increases of (a) .K and (b) .K between  and . For scenario (a) the September sea 
ice area is projected to decrease from its current value of  million sq km in September to less 
than  million sq km by . For scenario (b), however, the Arctic is projected to be sea ice free 
in summer by . Using results from  IPCC "’ Assessment models, the analysis of Zhang 
and Walsh () projects a transition towards a seasonal sea ice cover particularly in SRES 
scenarios. They also note that natural variability does not appear to have a significant impact on 
the trends. With the amplification of global warming in the Arctic region, there is a strong 
likelihood of no sea ice cover during summer in the Arctic Ocean by the end of the  st century 
(Johannessen et al. ). During the satellite era, the Arctic winter ice maximum had been 
basically stable with the trend in extent being negative but only about -.% per decade. Such 
modest trend compared to the trend during the summer minima of about -.% per decade was 
puzzling since the effect of greenhouse warming was projected by models to be pronounced 
during the winter when the region is in darkness and long wave radiation is dominant. This may 
change soon with the observation of record low extents during winter maxima in  and also 

 



 


in  (Comiso, in press). The winter maximum extent in  and  were both about % 
lower than average values indicating significant decline in the winter ice cover, in both cases, 
the observed surface temperatures were also significantly warmer and the onset of freeze-up was 
later than normal. In both years, onset of melt also happened early. A continued decline would 
mean an advance to the north of the “C isotherm and a warmer ocean in the peripheral seas of 
the Arctic. This in turn would cause further decline in the winter ice cover. More abrupt and 
earlier change in sea ice extant has also been shown by Holland el. al. (), whose modeling 
studies indicate possible significant and abrupt changes to Arctic sea ice cover by as early as 
mid-f century. The research team indicated that heat absorption in open ice-free waters was 
operating to accelerate the rate of warming and loss of additional ice. The research indicated that 
future changes in sea ice may more dramatic than any changes observed to date. The modeling 
effort involved simulation tests to validate observed patterns of changes in sea-ice. 

Land- fast ice . Fast ice is not explicitly included in climate model scenarios (ACIA ). 
Although reductions in the extent, thickness, and stability of fast ice are likely to occur, the 
implications of climate change for fast ice is recognized as a gap in knowledge. Many potential 
impacts of climate change will be mediated through land-fast ice (ACIA ). It protects 
unstable coastlines and coastal communities from wave damage, flooding by surges, and ice 
ride-up. It creates a unique and perhaps necessary habitat for northern species such as the ringed 
seal. It blocks channels, facilitating the formation of polynyas important to northern ecosystems 
in some areas (ACIA ). 

Polvnvas . Polynyas such as the North Water Polynya in northern Baffin Bay, owe their 
existence, at least in part, to winds that move sea ice from the area of its formation southward, so 
maintaining the area as open water even in the middle of winter. If the winds change in direction 
or intensity, the number and size of polynyas are also likely to change (ACIA ). The ACIA 
() report discusses possible changes to specific polynya (e.g. St. Lawrence Island polynya 
region), and the potential implications of those changes to marine flora and fauna. 

Other Predicted Changes in Arctic Climate 

 



 


Predicted trends for various snow and ice parameters of the Arctic cryosphere (taken largely 
from Table  . of ACIA ) are briefly summarized as follows: 


Snow cover 


Glaciers 


Permafrost 


Although increased evaporation (from warming) is likely to lead to 
some local increases in snow, snow-cover extent as a whole is 
projected to decrease by about % by - under the 
projected increase in mean annual temperature of about  °C. The 
projected reduction is greater in spring. Owing to warmer 
conditions, some winter precipitation in the form of rain is likely to 
increase the probability of ice layers over terrestrial vegetation. 

The loss of glacial mass through melting is very likely 
to accelerate throughout the Arctic, including the Greenland Ice 
Sheet. These changes will increase the rate of sea-level rise. 

Over the st century, permafrost degradation is likely to occur 
over   to % of the present permafrost area, and the southern 
limit of permafrost is likely to move northward by several hundred 
kilometers. 


River discharge Models project that total river discharge is likely to increase by an 

additional  to % by the late  si century. 

Breakup and freeze-uo The trend toward earlier breakup and later freeze-up of rivers and 
lakes is very likely to continue, consistent with increasing 
temperature. Breakup flooding is likely to be less severe. 

Sea-level rise Models project that glacier contributions to sea level rise will 

accelerate in the st century. Combined with the effects of 
thermal expansion, sea level is likely to rise by  to  cm (an 
average of  to  mm/year) by the end of the st century. 

The ACIA () report presents the following summary of general features of projected 
changes in the arctic atmosphere relevant to marine processes (Table . from ACIA ), and 
the most likely scenarios for changes in oceanographic conditions within the ACIA region by 
, , and  (Table . from ACIA ). 


 

