and wildlife biologists have been warning us about for years. Snowpacks, so crucial 
in the arid West for supplying water to our rivers and streams, are rapidly declin- 
ing. Diminished water flows makes for shallower, warmer streams, with less oxygen, 
making it more difficult for coldwater fish such as trout to survive. Increasingly, the 
Montana Department of Fish, Wildlife and Parks are implementing summer clo- 
sures of rivers to fishing to protect trout overly-stressed from hot, dry conditions. 
On my journey, I also saw large chunks of forest impacted by increased occurrence 
of mountain pine beetle, which scientists are linking to trees being less resistant 
to insect and disease because of drier, more stressful conditions, and was particu- 
larly concerned by the rapid death of most white bark pines, which provides an im- 
portant food source for grizzlies and other wildlife. I also walked through large ex- 
panses of charred forests burned by recent wildfires. Our western forests evolved 
with, and are adapted well to fire. However, drier conditions, combined with an in- 
crease in dead trees from beetle infestations, are resulting in more frequent, more 
damaging fires than what historically and naturally occurred, with serious implica- 
tions for wildlife. Towards the end of my adventure, while hiking through Glacier 
National Park, I could visible notice a profound decline in the size of glaciers I have 
visited in past trips. Many scientists are predicting the glaciers in the park will be 
gone within  years. 

I work with and speak to hunters, anglers, outfitters, guides, ranchers, county 
commissioners, tribal leaders and others throughout Montana and the West, and I 
hear similar reports and concerns from them about changes on the landscape, and 
its impacts to water, fish, wildlife and our western way of life. What I hear from 
fellow hunters and anglers is consistent with a recent survey commissioned by the 
National Wildlife Federation, examining the attitude of hunters and anglers regard- 
ing Global Warming; We hunters and anglers are witnessing the effects of global 
warming and believe immediate action is necessary to address it. Eighty five per- 
cent of us believe we have a moral responsibility to confront global warming, and 
eighty percent of us believe our Nation should be a world leader in addressing this 
issue. I am definitely among the  percent of hunters and anglers who agree that 
Congress should pass legislation that sets a clear national goal for reducing global 
warming pollution with mandatory timelines. 

Others can speak more authoritatively about the importance of these wild places, 
wildlife, and associated hunting, fishing and other recreational opportunities to the 
economy of Montana and the West. And it’s true. In Montana alone, more than one 
million people enjoy our State’s abundant wildlife each year, contributing more than 
$ million to our State’s economy. But more importantly, our Nation’s wildlife and 
wild lands — along with related hunting, fishing and other outdoor recreational pur- 
suits — provide unique cultural, social and even spiritual values not only for us Mon- 
tanans, but for all Americans. This is why great American leaders such as Theodore 
Roosevelt fought so long and hard to protect what remained, in his day, of our Na- 
tion’s wildlife and wild places. Today, our wildlife and wildlands face threats that 
Roosevelt probably could never have fathomed. But I am confident he would not 
have shied away from the challenge. Neither should we. 

This is not, nor should be, a partisan issue. In Montana, I know Republicans, 
Democrats and Independents who all share a concern about global warming, and a 
desire to see something done about it. Thank you to those Senators and Congress- 



 


men who are boldly taking steps to confront this issue. For those who are still not 
on board: I urge you to take a closer look at the scientific evidence and consensus, 
to listen to us citizens who are witnessing the impacts first hand, set aside partisan 
politics and various industrial and corporate pressures, and tackle this issue with 
the sense of urgency and immediacy required. We do, indeed, have a moral obliga- 
tion to do what we can and as quickly as possible. 

I urge you to take immediate steps to curtail green house gas emissions; develop 
more conservative, responsible energy policies that include alternative and renew- 
able sources of energy, more efficient ways of using energy, and reduce our need 
to burn fossil fuels. Even with immediate, yet important reductions in greenhouse 
gas emissions, changes will continue with negative impacts to fish, wildlife and wild 
places. Therefore, I also urge you to include, in legislation regarding climate change, 
funding specifically dedicated to help protect and restore fish and wildlife habitat 
through the Wildlife Conservation and Restoration account of the Pittman-Robert- 
son Wildlife Restoration Act. 

As for my part, I will continue to do my best to help persuade and rally citizens 
to support your worthy efforts. I know that a majority of my fellow hunters and an- 
glers in Montana, and elsewhere in our country, are already sending a message loud 
and clear: The time for action is now. 

Thank you, again, for this opportunity. 


Statement of A. Lee Foote, Associate Professor, University of Alberta 

INTRODUCTION 

I speak today as an individual on the faculty of the University of Alberta and as 
a scientist with a circumspect overview of renewable and sustainable resource use. 
I have paid my way here from my private funds with no other donations or source 
of support. I am a citizen of both the US and Canada. 

Rationale for comments: 

() It is a unique opportunity to broaden the discussion of appropriate resource 
use which is the core of my professional life activities. 

() My southern country (USA) is poised to exert a pivotal influence on the liveli- 
hoods of Inuit citizens of my northern country (Canada) without full consideration 
of the implications. A “crack-the-whip effect” is developing whereby climate change 
may affect sea ice persistence which affects some polar bear habitats, which sparks 
endangered species policy which affects rural Inuit livelihood. There is approxi- 
mately the same number of rural people as there are polar bears living in the polar 
bear’s range. I believe the culture and welfare of these Inuit, Inuvialuit, Green- 
landers and Siberian subsistence users have received insufficient consideration in 
relation to polar bear management, particularly their role in resource management. 

() I remain concerned about possible misuse of science and logic in arguments 
around the polar bear/climate change debate. 

My history with sustainable use comes from participation, research and publica- 
tion on community based natural resource management on three continents, and an 
advisory role in arctic research programs. From the  IPCC projections^ I recog- 
nize and accept that climate has rapidly changed in the north. Finally, I am not 
a climatologist or a polar bear researcher and I have never sought or received grants 
or support for either of these topics. 

Errors in the application of climate change information to polar bear management 

Conservation connotes use of resources; otherwise, protection efforts are better 
classified as preservation^. Sustainable use principles are an appropriate framework 
for considering extractive use (hunting)^ of polar bears in light of concerns over 
habitat-driven changes in their habitats. The conditions that permit the carefully 
managed conservation hunting of polar bears are highly relevant in demonstrating 
sustainability’^ as discussion proceeds with the U. S. Fish and Wildlife Service’s 


ihttp://ipcc- wgl.ucar.edu/wgl/docsAVGlAR — SPM — PlenaryApproved.pdf 
^Foote, A. L. . Pp - (In) Conservation Hunting: People and Wildlife in Canada’s 
North. M Freeman, B Hudson and L Foote (Eds). Canadian Circumpolar Institute Occasional 
Publ No. . 

^Adams, WM. . Against extinction. Earthscan Press 

’^Wenzel G. and M Dowsley p- (In) Conservation Hunting: People and Wildlife in Can- 
ada’s North. M Freeman, B Hudson and L Foote (Eds). Canadian Circumpolar Institute Occas 
Publ. No. . 



 


comment period on re-classifying the polar bear as an endangered species®. To add 
to this comment period it is important to consider error sources in the interpretation 
of risks to polar bears. 

Polar bear data is at risk of being misused in the following six ways, thus rep- 
resenting a rationale for not listing polar bears as endangered until better and more 
objective policy consideration has been completed. 

. Errors of logic. Polar bears are being used as an icon of global climate change, 
