and Atmospheric Administration; Dr. Kevin Trenberth, Director of 
the Climate Analysis Section of the National Center for Atmos- 
pheric Research; Dr. Robert Watson, Chairman of the Intergovern- 



 


mental Panel on Climate Changes here in Washington, D.C. Thank 
you. 

Dr. Bradley, please, we will begin with you. 

STATEMENT OF DR. RAY BRADLEY, DEPARTMENT CHAIR, DE- 
PARTMENT OF GEOSCIENCES, UNIVERSITY OF MASSACHU- 
SETTS 

Dr. Bradley. Thank you, Senator. I would like to thank you for 
holding this hearing on a very important issue. 

Studies of instrumental temperature measurements from around 
the world show that the climate of the th Century was domi- 
nated by universal warming. At the end of the th Century, al- 
most all parts of the Earth had temperatures that were higher 
than when the century began. 

This conclusion is supported by numerous lines of environmental 
evidence, melting of glaciers, retreat of sea ice, changes in vegeta- 
tion, rising of sea level, et cetera. At the same time, concentration 
of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere increased to levels that 
were higher than at any time in the last , years. Carbon di- 
oxide levels are now  to  percent higher than they were in the 
middle of the th Century. This change is largely the result of fos- 
sil fuel combustion. 

I do not believe that the evidence for th Century warming, or 
for these extraordinarily high levels of greenhouse gases can be se- 
riously challenged. However, the big question as you mentioned is: 
What has caused the warming? Is it just a natural change in cli- 
mate, and does it have anything to do with these increased levels 
of greenhouse gases? 

With only  or  years of globally extensive instrumentally 
recorded climate data, we have quite a limited perspective on nat- 
ural climate variability and its relation to the phenomena that 
might have caused climate to change such things as we call our 
forcing factors. 

To obtain a longer perspective requires that we examine climate 
dependant natural phenomena that in some way have preserved a 
record of past climate. The most important of these are tree rings, 
ice cores, banded corals, these laminated lake and marine sedi- 
ments, as well as historical records of past weather conditions. 

In recent studies, we have assembled the best of these records 
to produce a global picture of how temperatures changed over the 
last , years as shown in this figure. 

[Slide.] 

Dr. Bradley. In spite of the uncertainties that such a reconstruc- 
tion entails — and that is — the uncertainty is demonstrated here by 
the yellow shading. 

[Indicating] 

The record shown here of mean annual temperature for the 
Northern Hemisphere, shows the temperature slowly decline over 
the millennium. However, this downward trend changed abruptly 
to a strong warming trend in the — early in the th Century. 

And this rate of warming was unprecedented in the last , 
years. The warming continued through the ’s making that dec- 
ade the warmest in at least , years. Indeed,  was arguably 



 


the warmest year of the millennium, and  was only slightly 
cooler. 

What can this one perspective on temperature tells us about nat- 
ural climate warming? By comparing it with the records of various 
factors that may have affected the temperature. 

It is a pattern of variations in the amount of energy emitted by 
the sun, major explosive volcanic eruptions, and perhaps slight 
changes in the position of the earth in relation to the sun, were re- 
sponsible for much of the variability of temperatures leading up to 
the th Century. 

However, these natural effects were completely overwhelmed in 
the th Century by the increasing effective greenhouse gases. 

[Slide.] 

Dr. Bradley. Human effects on the climate system variations 
now appear to dominate over natural factors. If the variations of 
these natural factors continue into the future and are similar to 
those of the last , years, it is unlikely that they will be of great 
importance since the climatic changes will be mainly affected by 
human-induced changes in greenhouse gases. 

Earlier I noted that the levels of two important greenhouse 
gases, carbon dioxide and methane, were now higher than at any 
time in the last , years. 

[Slide.] 

Dr. Bradley. Carbon dioxide levels have risen from fairly steady 
background levels to present day levels in a little over a century; 
on this time scale, almost instantaneously. 

This rate of change has no parallel in historical past, just as tem- 
peratures recorded in the late th Century were unprecedented. 

Most of the change in carbon dioxide and the greenhouse gases 
resulted from the growth of world population and the insatiable de- 
mand for fossil-fuel based energy. 

Given that the world population will almost certainly double 
from the present level of  billion within the lifetime of those who 
are currently in kindergarten, unless something is done to curb the 
use of fossil fuel consumption, it seems very likely that significant 
change in climate will occur in the near future. 

Consider again the record of temperature over the last , 
years. 

[Slide.] 

Dr. Bradley. An important conclusion of my long term climate 
studies is that until the second half of the th Century, tempera- 
tures generally remained within a half degree Celsius, one degree 
Fahrenheit of the average for the baseline which we use, which is 
 to . 

The latest IPCC long phased projection of future climate point to 
a temperature a temperature rise of . to . Celsius,  to  Fahr- 
enheit above  levels by . I think this graph puts it all into 
perspective. 

[Slide.] 

Dr. Bradley. Clearly, these estimates have pretty large uncer- 
tainties. This shaded area to the right is the model based estimates 
of future change. 
