missioned a survey looking at attitudes of hunters and anglers 
which I find pretty consistent with what I am seeing on the 
ground. Some of the highlights are  percent of us do believe we 
have a moral responsibility to do something about this issue;  
percent of us believe the United States should be a leader in this 
issue; and  percent of us think Congress should take immediate 
action to do something about it. 



 


Hunters tend to be a pretty stubborn and conservative bunch. A 
lot of them are Republicans and Democrats and Independents. This 
is not and should not be a partisan issue. All the people I talk to, 
we may have our differences, but we all have a common concern 
there in Montana about what we are seeing on the land and how 
it is going to affect the thing we really cherish. 

So I join them in urging you to take some immediate steps in ad- 
dressing this issue. I urge you to pass legislation that starts reduc- 
ing greenhouse gas emissions and start helping us develop more re- 
sponsible energy policies in this country that look at renewable 
sources of energy, alternative sources of energy, and more efficient 
ways of using energy that not only will help reduce greenhouse 
gases, but could help protect some of these wild places that we 
have also seen threatened by increased gas and oil development in 
the last  or  years. 

Also I think we need to take immediate steps to reconnect and 
restore and protect some of this critical wildlife habitat I am talk- 
ing about. At Trout Unlimited we use our hand and fingers to illus- 
trate some of this, particularly with rate and threatened species 
like bull trout. If this was a main stretch of a river going up to the 
little tributaries, which would be my fingers, up in the mountains, 
we have confined species like bull trout and west slope cutthroat 
to just some of these tributaries. They are already rare and threat- 
ened species. And with global warming, and we are seeing the re- 
duction of water and increased flooding and things like that, they 
are going to be even more threatened. 

So we have to protect those tributaries, protect the habitat, re- 
connect that habitat with where they historically used to roam, 
then restore parts of that habitat so these wildlife are better able 
to adapt to the changes we are seeing on the ground. Therefore, I 
think any legislation, and I urge you that any legislation you do 
put forth includes funding for the State wildlife agencies to help us 
protect, conserve, restore and reconnect that habitat. 

Thank you for this opportunity. 

Senator Lieberman. Thanks, Mr. Stalling. Excellent testimony. I 
must say, hearing about some of the things you do makes me won- 
der whether I made the right career choice. 

[Laughter.] 

Senator Lieberman. The next witness is Dr. Lee Foote, an Asso- 
ciate Professor in the Department of Renewable Resources at the 
University of Alberta. He also serves as Chair of the World Con- 
servation Union’s North America Sustainable Use Specialist Group. 
Dr. Foote’s work focuses on wildlife habitat creation, especially wa- 
terfowl disturbance and reclamation. It is a pleasure to have you 
here, and we look forward to your testimony now. 

STATEMENT OF A. LEE FOOTE, ASSOCIATE PROFESSOR, 
UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA 

Mr. Foote. Thank you. Senator. I too thank you for the oppor- 
tunity to speak to this group. 

I am speaking today as an individual and a professor at the Uni- 
versity of Alberta. I am not a climatologist or a polar bear re- 
searcher. I spent  years working as a research ecologist for the 
U.S. Geological Survey, though. I am currently a dual citizen of 



 


Canada and the U.S. So it is germane to talk about climate change 
and polar bears, given the endangered species legislation that 
seems to be looming. 

In my  minutes, I would like to talk about three main points. 
First, there are limits to our ability to understand and predict pop- 
ulation responses of polar bears in response to climate change. It 
is important that we not ask more of science than science can de- 
liver. Dr. Lovejoy has pointed out very clearly that there are great 
uncertainties in this. 

Second, I would like to talk about the results of the U.S. policies 
and Endangered Species Act and to point out that there are very 
real costs to people that live in proximity to these polar bears, es- 
pecially in Canada’s north. These compound insults from climate 
change. 

Finally, hope to make some suggestions. Uncertainty. Predicting 
future population levels of any organism, especially mammals, with 
reasonable precision, is somewhere between difficult and impos- 
sible. I would like to quote from two peer-reviewed papers in the 
Journal Climate Research. They are written by a couple of Can- 
ada’s top ecologists. Dr. Charles Krebs, the author of the top ecol- 
ogy textbook in Canada, and Dr. Dominique Berteaux, who is a 
Canada research chair, similar to our NSF research chairs. The ti- 
tles are Problems and Pitfalls in Relating Climate Variability to 
Population Dynamics and the second paper is Constraints to Pro- 
jecting the Effects of Climate Change on Mammals. 

I would like to quote from this  issue: “Our best short- term 
strategy is to measure and try to understand the observed small 
scale changes in population parameters without pretending to be 
able to predict long-term consequences.” The second quote: “Com- 
plex hypotheses with predictions tens of years ahead are fairy 
tales. There is no limit to an ecologist’s ability to explain events 
after the fact, and without rigorous scientific constraints, we will 
be little more than storytellers.” 

Reading the polar bear literature, it shows that it is both art, 
science, traditional knowledge and in the absence of data on many 
ranges of polar bears, it is a lot of necessity guesswork. Several 
well-studied populations are declining. Several lightly studied sub- 
populations are stable, and too many of our sub-populations, the  
mentioned by Senator Inhofe, are poorly known or completely 
unsurveyed. When one considers the variability in climate pre- 
dictions, ice responses, ringed seal distributions, polar bear adapt- 
ability and movement and human interactions, the probabilities 
are cumulative. I liken this to trying to stack four bowling balls on 
top of each other, let them fall and make some prediction which di- 
rection the top bowling ball will actually go. It won’t be the same 
direction any two times. 

My second point today is a bit of a deviation. It relates to human 
welfare. Very roughly, there are approximately the same number 
of rural Inuit people living in Canada’s polar bear ranges as there 
are polar bears, about ,, once you remove the larger towns. 
This is spread out over an area roughly the size of the sub-con- 
tinent of India. In our media, we hear a lot about bears, but little 
about the Inuit. The bear is indeed an icon. In a book I edited  
years ago called Conservation Hunting, we used a polar bear on the 



 


cover. It is used in soft drink advertisements and candy bar wrap- 
pers. And the media loves this imagery. 
