lems for the many migratory birds that pass through the region. Virginia’s Depart- 
ment of Forestry closely monitors this situation. 

• Managed agricultural land in Virginia is richly used by wildlife. It is possible 
that climate and water conditions will help some commercial crops in the short run, 
but it is also likely that climate changes will lead to lower yields and many impor- 
tant food crops would be less nutritious. Maintenance of productivity on Virginia 
farms lands is a constant adaptive response to rainfall, temperature, and the vagar- 
ies of pests, parasites and weed species, many of which are invasive. A general in- 
crease in temperature will drive out native animals and encourage the spread of po- 
tentially destructive tropical plant and insect invasive species, such as, tropical soda 
apple (Solanum viarum), cogongrass (Imperata cylindrical), water hyacinth 
(Eichhornia crassipes), and pink hibiscus mealybug (Maconellicoccus hirsutus). The 
vigilance of Virginia’s Department of Agriculture and Consumer Services insures 
rapid response to local threats. 

• Invasive plants such as the common reed Phragmites australis threaten 
stressed freshwater marsh habitat resulting in significant change in community 
structure and opportunities for native wildlife. 

• Temperature and rainfall both drive in-stream river flow and water quality pa- 
rameters that are central to successful growth and reproduction of freshwater fishes 
in Virginia rivers. 

• Divergence of long-term temperature and day length synchrony could impact 
food chains supporting resident fishes in rivers and streams. Studies in Seattle’s 
Lake Washington have demonstrated an advance in the timing of the spring plank- 
ton bloom with warming temperature; however, key zooplankton species (on which 
fish feed) that typically graze on the bloom have not changed their seasonal activity 
and now miss the optimal grazing period. Fish go hungry. 

• Estuaries are enormously complicated ecosystems, changing over time and 
across spatial scales. The Chesapeake Bay is the largest estuary in the Nation, with 
a watershed covering  square kilometers,  percent of which are forested, and 
a resident population of over  million people. This water body is a national treas- 
ure in terms of its recreational, commercial and societal value. Oxygen solubility in 
seawater decreases as temperature increases creating an increasingly stressful envi- 
ronment for resident species living in shallow waters, but it can and does get worse 



 


in deeper water. Each summer part of the main stem of the Bay stratifies as warm- 
er, fresher water layers above denser, saltier water. The deep layers do not mix and 
their oxygen content is depleted — hypoxia (low oxygen) and eventually anoxia (no 
oxygen) dominate. Such deep regions have been described as dead zones. We know 
the dead zone is getting bigger each year and all the projections associated with 
global warming scenarios predict an increase in its size. 

• Dead zones force species that typically seek refuge in deeper, colder water into 
warmer shallower water where they suffer physiological stress. A prime example is 
the striped bass (Morone saxatilis). Ecologically important, recreationally and com- 
mercially valuable — a magnificent fish. We know that  percent of the striped bass 
in the Bay are infected with a disease called Mycobacteriois, but this is manifested 
predominantly in stressed fish. Warmer waters, we suspect, bring increases in the 
numbers of fish characterized by large skin lesions. 

• Submerged aquatic vegetation (SAV) in the shallow waters of the bay form com- 
plex shallow water habitats that are critical for small crabs and fish. Bay SAV popu- 
lations are under stress. The single dominant native SAV species, eelgrass (Zostera 
marina), is already at the southern end of its range and increased temperature con- 
tributes to its local instability. Indeed, a significant die off in eelgrass in  has 
been related to local high water temperature. The prospect for displacement of the 
native eel grass by the more temperature tolerant widgeon grass (Ruppia maritima) 
is not comforting in that widgeon grass is more ephemeral in nature. 

• Oyster (Crassostrea Virginia) populations in the Bay have been ravaged over 
the past  decades by two diseases, commonly termed MSX (Haplosporidium 
nelsoni) and Dermo (Perkinsus marinus), whose activity is temperature dependent. 
Indeed increasing water temperature has been identified as the primary agent al- 
lowing the range extension of Dermo, with its deleterious impacts, from the Chesa- 
peake Bay northwards to the Delaware Bay and Long Island Sound over the past 
two decades. Very large investments have and are being made to restore the Bay’s 
oyster resource and the industry that it supports. The added challenge of increased 
disease prevalence and intensity makes this task yet more difficult. 

• The Eastern Shore of Virginia is a critical feeding station on the Atlantic flight 
path for migratory birds. As food species are stressed, consider for example the 
value of horseshoe crab (Limulus polyphemus) eggs during breeding events between 
the tide lines, these bird populations face literal life and death situations. 

• On the inner continental shelf the bottom dwelling dominant species, the surf 
clam (Spisula solidissima, also a notable fishery resource) is changing in distribu- 
tion. Forty years ago this species was abundant between the Virginia Capes and 
Cape Hatteras in North Carolina. Now, they are virtually absent south of the mouth 
of the Chesapeake Bay. The populations are increasingly being limited to more 
northerly and deeper waters by increasing summer water temperatures. We suspect 
this offshore migration describes the distribution of many Mid-Atlantic species. 

The addition of climate change to the mix of stressors already affecting valued 
habitats and endangered species will present a major challenge to future conserva- 
tion of U.S. ecological resources. Across Virginia, from the Appalachians to the inner 
continental shelf, we are observing changes in natural populations of endemic plants 
and animals that can arguably be linked to global warming, and we expect trends 
to continue. As biologists we are concerned. As custodians of this rich natural re- 
source we should all be concerned. 


Statement of David H. Stalling, Western Eield Coordinator, 

Trout Unlimited 

Thank you for this opportunity to submit testimony regarding global warming and 
wildlife. More importantly, thank you for boldly taking on this vital, often controver- 
sial issue, and seeking solutions to the greatest challenge of our time. 

My name is David Stalling, and I live in Missoula, Montana. I am not a scientist 
or a wildlife biologist. However, I am an avid hunter, fisherman, backpacker, hiker, 
mountain biker, back country skier and snow boarder who deeply cherishes the 
wildlife and wildlands surrounding my home. That is what brought me to Montana 
when I was honorably discharged from the Marine Corps in , and it’s what 
keeps me here. It’s my passion and love for wildlife and wild places — inspired by 
my hunting and fishing — that keeps me fighting for the conservation and protection 
of fish and wildlife habitat and the wild places that sustains them. Currently, I 
work as a grassroots organizer for Trout Unlimited, a national nonprofit dedicated 
to the protection of coldwater fisheries and watersheds. Prior to that, I worked for 
the Rocky Mountain Elk Eoundation, another nonprofit dedicated to the protection 
of critical habitat for elk and other wildlife. I have also served two terms as Presi- 



 


dent of the Montana Wildlife Federation, Montana’s oldest and largest hunting, fish- 
ing and conservation organization, and often volunteer for the National Wildlife 
Federation. In addition, I write about wildlife, conservation and natural history for 
a variety of national magazines, helping people develop a better understanding of 
science and policy in regards to wildlife and wild places. 

The scientific evidence regarding climate change, and the consequences of human- 
caused release of global warming pollution, is conclusive and overwhelming, with 
even stronger evidence seeming to come forth every week. Those of us who are close 
to the land, and spend time among wildlife in wild places, are seeing much of this 
evidence first hand. 

Two summers ago, I hiked from my front porch in Missoula to Waterton, Alberta. 
During this eight-week, -mile backpack trip, mostly off trail, I only crossed three 
roads, traveling through the Rattlesnake, Mission Mountains, Bob Marshall, Great 
Bear and Scapegoat Wilderness Areas, and Glacier National Park. This is some of 
the wildest, most unique and precious country left in the United States, providing 
the last strongholds for rare, threatened and endangered species such as grizzly 
bears, wolves, mountain lions, lynx, wolverines and pure strains of Westslope cut- 
throat trout and bull trout. With strong populations of elk, mule deer, bighorn 
sheep, mountain goats, moose and other wildlife, these places also provide some of 
the best hunting and fishing left in the Nation. 

But even here, in such remote, wild places, I witnessed evidence of what scientists 
