. Reproductive maturity and senescence. 

Age of maturation in mammals is often associated with attainment of a threshold body mass 
(Sadleir ), which could be more difficult to attain as competition for resources increases or 
resources diminish or become less accessible. Historically the average age for first reproduction 
in adult female polar bears is  to  years (Lentfer et al. , Amstrup and Durner , Wiig 
). Craighead and Mitchell () reported that in grizzly bears “reproductive longevity 
approximates physical longevity.” Until recently, data from long-term monitoring regarding 
reproductive senescence of individual polar bears was unavailable or had not been analyzed. 
Richardson et al. (a) analyzed data from Western Hudson Bay and found that reproductive 
senescence in female began with the onset of survival senescence at about  years of age. 
Reproductive senescence in male polar bears was determined from paternity assignments using 
 microsatellite loci and occurred at about  years of age (Richardson et al. a). 
Senescence in females resulted in reductions in litter size, cub mass, and the proportion of 
females with young. 

H. Survival 


 



 


Polar bears are long-lived mammals in large part not known to be susceptible to disease, 
parasites, or injury. The oldest known female polar bear in the wild was  years of age and the 
oldest known male was , though few polar bears in the wild live to be older than  (Stirling 
). The longest lived captive bear in a zoo in London lived to be  years old (Stirling ). 
Due to extremely low reproductive rates polar bears require a high rate of survival to maintain 
population levels. Taylor et al. (unpubl. data) describes survival rates that vary by age class and 
population which range from -% for cubs-of-the-year, -% for - year old bears, - 
% for adults age -, and -% for adults greater than  years of age (Table ). High 
survival rates are required for population growth or stability for a species with inherently low 
productivity potential. 

In general, survival rates increase with age up to approximatly  years of age. Cubs-of-the-year 
have the lowest survival rates. Survival of cubs is dependent on their weight when they exit dens 
(Derocher and Stirling ). Most cub mortality occurred early in the period after emergence 
from the den (Amstrup and Dumer , Derocher and Stirling ). In the Hudson Bay region 
during the s, the survival rate of more than  cubs from spring through the ice-free period 
of autumn was % (Derocher and Stirling ). In the Beaufort Sea, survival of cubs was 
approximately % from den exit to the end of their first year of life. Survival of Hudson Bay 
cubs from their first to their second autumn was % (Derocher and Stirling ). Annual 
survival of yearlings ranged from % to %. Survival rates during the second year of life 
improved with % surviving to weaning (Amstrup and Durner ). Derocher and Stirling 
() suggested that a heavy harvest accounted for much of the yearling mortality in Hudson 
Bay. Elsewhere, early age mortality is thought to be associated with starvation (Derocher and 
Stirling ). 

Survival of cubs to weaning stage, generally - months, is estimated to range from  % to 
% of births. In one Hudson Bay study only % of the cubs bom survived through their 
second autumn. This differs from a % survival from birth to weaning of cubs in the Beaufort 
Sea. Even at the higher survival rates approximately % of the cubs do not survive to the sub- 

 



 


adult stage. Survival rates for sub-adults are poorly understood because collars cannot be used 
on rapidly growing individuals and measuring survival by other means is problematic. 

Population age structure data indicate that subadults aged - years survive at lower rates than 
adults (Amstrup ), probably because their hunting and survival skills are not fully developed 
(Stirling and Latour  ). Eberhardt () hypothesized that the survival of adult marine 
mammals must be in the upper % range to sustain polar bear populations. Survival estimates 
derived from Hudson Bay, where the intensity of marking exceeds all other study areas, have 
ranged between . and . (Derocher and Stirling a, Lunn et al. ). Recent studies 
using telemetry monitoring of individual animals estimated that survival of adult females in 
prime age groups may exceed % (Amstrup and Durner ), and survival estimates are a 
reflection of the characteristics and qualities of an ecosystem to maintain the health of individual 
bears. 

Polar bears that avoid serious injury may become too old and feeble to catch food, and most are 
generally believed to die of old age. Local and widespread climatic phenomena that make seals 
less abundant or less available also can significantly affect polar bear populations through 
survival or production (Kingsley , DeMaster et al. , Amstrup et al. , Stirling ). 

Injuries sustained in fights over mates or in predation attempts can lead to mortalities of polar 
bears (Amstrup et al. b). In an extensive review of ursid parasites, Rogers and Rogers 
() found that seven endoparasites had been reported in polar bears. Only Trichinella spp., 
however, had been observed in wild polar bears. Certain species of nematodes and cestodes 
reported in captive polar bears have not occurred in the wild. Trichinella can be quite common in 
polar bears and has been observed throughout their range. Concentrations of this parasite in some 
tissues can be high, but infections are not normally fatal (Rausch , Dick and Belosevic , 
Larsen and Kjos-Hanssen , Taylor et al. ). 

III. HABITAT CHARACTERISTICS 


 



 


A. SEA ICE 

Sea ice is the defining characteristic of the marine Arctic. “Approximately two-thirds of the 
Arctic is ocean, including the Arctic Ocean and its shelf seas plus the Nordic, Labrador, and 
Bering seas” (ACIA ). The two primary forms of sea ice are seasonal (or first year) ice and 
perennial (or multi-year) ice. Seasonal or first-year ice is in its first winter of growth or first 
summer of melt. Its thickness in undeformed floes ranges from a few tenths of a meter near the 
southern margin of the ice extent to . m in the high Arctic at the end of winter. Some first-year 
ice survives the summer and becomes multi-year ice. This ice develops its distinctive hummocky 
appearance through thermal weathering, becoming harder and almost salt-free over several years. 
In the present climate, old multi-year ice floes that have not been deformed by pressure ridges 
are about  m thick at the end of winter. The extent area of sea ice decreases from roughly   
million km^ in March to  million km^ in September, as much of the first-year ice melts during 
the summer (Cavalieri et al. , Parkinson et al. ). The area of multi-year sea ice, mostly 
over the Arctic Ocean basins, the East Siberian Sea, and the Canadian polar shelf, is about  
million km^ (Johannessen et al. ). Land-fast ice (or fast ice) may be present in some areas 
for up to  months each year depending on coastal geometry or persistence of grounded ice 
ridges (stamukhi). Within the Canadian Archipelago in late winter, land-fast ice covers channels 
up to  km wide and covers an area of  million km^. Some of this ice is trapped for decades 
as multi-year land-fast ice (Reimnitz et al. ). Land-fast ice may create habitat for some 
species (e.g. ringed seal birth lairs, migrating fish species in brackish under-ice waters); may 
facilitate the formation of polynyas (predictable areas of open water surrounded by sea ice in 
winter) in some areas; and may impede navigation in others (e.g. the Northwest Passage). 

Sea ice is an important component of the climate system. It provides insulation between the 
ocean and atmosphere and reflects back toward space most of the solar radiation reaching it. Its 
impacts extend far south of the Arctic, perhaps globally, e.g., through impacting deepwater 
formation that influences global ocean circulation. Ice flow in the Arctic often includes a 
clockwise circulation of sea ice within the Canada Basin and a transpolar drift stream that carries 


 



 


sea ice from the Siberian shelves to the Barents Sea and Fram Strait. The European-most portion 
of the clockwise circulation merges with the Arctic portion of the transpolar drift stream. On 
average, % of Arctic sea ice exits through Fram Strait each year. Sea ice also leaves the Arctic 
via the Canadian Archipelago, from whence it flows into Baffin Bay, joining in situ seasonal sea 
ice in Baffin Bay and drifting south along the Labrador coast. The remnants reach Newfoundland 
in March. At the ice edge in this location, the supply of sea ice from the north balances the loss 
by melt in the warm ocean waters. Similar “conveyor belt” sea-ice regimes also exist in the 
Barents and Bering Seas, where northern regions of growth export ice to temperate waters. A 
small amount of ice exits the Arctic through the narrow Bering Strait. 

Arctic marine ecosystems are unique in having a very high proportion of shallow water and 
