that - tons of mercury are transported to the Arctic annually through long-range 
atmospheric, oceanic, and riverine import. The primary source of mercury in polar bears is from 
their diet of phocid seals. Although mercury concentrations generally decrease in the order of 
liver > kidney > muscle in most marine mammals, the highest observed concentrations occur in 
the kidney in polar bears, followed by liver and muscle tissue. 

Geographic and temporal trends in mercury concentrations in polar bears and their 
habitat 


 



 


Polar bears from the western Canadian Arctic and southwest Melville Island, Canada (Braune et 
al. , Norstrom et al. ), and ringed seals from the western Canadian Arctic (Wagemann 
et al. , Deitz et al. , Dehn et al. , Riget et al. ), have some of the highest 
known mercury concentrations. Wagemann et al. () observed an increase in mercury from 
eastern to western Canadian ringed seal populations and attributed this pattern to a geologic 
gradient in natural mercury deposits. 

Assessment of temporal trends is limited by lack of long-term data sets, poor or limited 
geographical coverage, and datasets that use varying analytical methods, statistical analyses, and 
sampling protocols. Analysis of mercury concentrations in sediments, peat bogs, and ice 
(Braune et al. ), beluga teeth from the Mackenzie Delta (Outridge et al. ), and polar 
bear hair from Greenland (Wheatley and Wheatley , Dietz et al. ) all indicate that 
mercury concentrations have increased from the pre-industrial era to the present. Despite 
reductions in mercury emissions in North America and Western Europe, global emissions may 
be increasing (AMAP ). Asia accounted for the majority of the mercury emissions in  
(AMAP ) Recent trends from short-term data sets are variable, with mercury levels 
declining (East Greenland, Dietz et al. ), remaining stable (European Arctic, Braune et. al. 

) , or increasing (Pond Inlet, Canada: Wagemann et al. ; East Greenland: Deitz et al. 

) . 


Biological effects of mercury 

Although the contaminant concentrations of mercury found in marine mammals often exceed 
those found to cause effects in terrestrial mammals (Fisk et al. ), most marine mammals 
appear to have evolved effective biochemical mechanisms to tolerate high concentrations of 
mercury. Prior to  , almost no information was available to assess the effects of mercury on 
marine mammals, including polar bears (Fisk et al. ). The biological effects of mercury are 
determined by the amount and type of exposure, overall health of the bear, and age (AMAP 
). Methylmercury (organic mercury) is more toxic than inorganic mercury, and more readily 

 



 


accumulated. Thus the amount of methylmercury and the percentage of organic mercury to total 
mercury are important biological measures. Mercury poisoning in mammals is characterized by 
neurological impairment, compromised immune response, and damage to the central nervous 
system, liver, and kidney (WHO , , ). Consumption of as little as pg of mercury 
per kilogram of body weight in humans can elicit clinical signs of mercury poisoning (Clarkson 
). Fetuses and polar bear cubs may be particularly susceptible to methylmercury during 
development of the central nervous system (Dietz et al.  p ). However, marine mammals 
with high concentrations of mercury often have high concentrations of selenium which combines 
with the mercury forming mercuric selenide in the liver (AMAP ). The  :  molar ratio of 
mercury to selenium which is commonly found in marine mammal livers, including polar bear, 
and the lack of evidence of mercury toxicity suggest that polar bears are able to demethylate Hg, 
by forming Hg/Se complexes, and accumulate higher levels of mercury than their terrestrial 
counterparts without detrimental effects. Evidence of mercury poisoning is rare in marine 
mammals, but Dietz et al, () noted that sick marine mammals often have higher 
concentrations of methylmercury, suggesting that these animals may no longer be able to 
detoxify methylmercury. Hepatic mercury concentrations are well below those expected to cause 
biological effects in most polar bear populations (AMAP ). Only two polar bear populations 
have concentrations of mercury close to the biological threshold levels of pg ww reported for 
marine mammals (Law et al. ), the Viscount Melville (southwest Melville Sound), Canada 
and the Southern Beaufort Sea (eastern Beaufort Sea) (Dietz et al. ). 

d. Future Impacts from Contaminants 

The highest concentrations of OCs have been found in species at the top of the marine food 
chains such as glaucous gulls which scavenge on marine mammals and polar bears which feed 
primarily on seals (Braune et al. ). Consistent patterns between OC and mercury 
contamination and trophic status have been documented in Arctic marine food webs (Braune et 
al. ). Changes in the food web dynamics could further change availability and access to 
seals which in turn could result in polar bears becoming more nutritionally stressed and perhaps 
more susceptible to effects of contaminants. These types of impacts are likely to vary between 

 



 


polar bear populations, age and sex cohorts, habitat use patterns, and the ability of polar bears to 
adapt to changes in sea ice dynamics. 

Polar bears are not distributed evenly throughout the Arctic and concentrate in the most 
productive areas over the continental shelf and the inter-island archipelagos surrounding the 
Arctic Basin (Derocher et al. ). Potential changes to contaminant pathways and 
contaminant concentrations as a result of global warming, which are presented in the AMAP 
report (MacDonald et ai. ), are discussed below. 

Changes in circulation patterns of atmospheric and oceanic currents would result in changes to 
contaminant transport pathways. This could result in both increases and decreases of 
contaminant concentrations. Loss of sea ice will affect the deposition and volatilization of certain 
compounds, particularly POPs. Increased precipitation would increase deposition of airborne 
contaminants, particularly those associated with particulates. Warmer temperatures could 
influence microbial degradation rates and species composition, which could affect the release of 
some compounds such as HCH. In addition, changes in the climate and sea ice conditions due to 
warming could result in the release of contaminants trapped in the pack ice, increased exposure 
to new contaminants, increased bear densities on the remaining sea ice, changes in habitat use 
and an increase in energetic demands associated with locating food. All of these factors could 
reduce the overall health of the polar bear populations. Polar bears that become nutritionally 
stressed may become more susceptible to mercury poisoning and the effects of other 
contaminants. It has been documented that concentrations of PCBs and oxychlordane are 
inversely proportional to fat content of the bear (Polischuk et al. ). Thus starvation will 
induce significantly higher contaminant concentrations in all tissues (Polischuk et al. ). 
Currently PFOS concentrations are group of POPs that are of the most concern because of their 
widespread use, potentially toxic effects at least in the livers, and the rapidly increasing 
concentrations found in Arctic marine mammals (Smithwick et al. ). 


Contaminant concentrations in most populations are presently not thought to have population 
level effects. However, one or several factors acting independently or together, such as loss or 

 



 


degradation of the sea ice habitat, decreased prey availability and accessibility, and increased 
exposure to contaminants have the potential to lower the recruitment and survival rates which 
ultimately would have negative population level effects. Svalbard, East Greenland, and the Kara 
Sea populations, which currently have some of the highest contaminant concentrations and thus 
have the potential for population level effects, should continue to be monitored closely. 

Increases in Arctic oil and gas development and trans-Arctic shipping will increase the 
probability of an oil spill and release of contaminants. Melting of the permafrost could also 
affect pipelines in some parts of the Arctic. In addition, a large oil spill could have immediate 
population effects. The median number of bears affected by a hypothetical oil spill ( bbl - 
the largest spill thought probable from a pipeline spill) from the proposed Liberty offshore oil 
well, in the Beaufort Sea in Alaska, during the autumn freeze-up was less than  (range - 
bears). For the purposes of this “worst-case scenario” it was assumed that a polar bear would die 
if it contacted oil. However, it should be noted that oil is expected to persist and last many 
months to years in this cold environment, not just the  days following the spill which was the 
limit of the modePs analytical power. Peterson et al. (), when evaluating the long-term 
