
bility and Predictability and it deals with variability from El Nino to global warm- 
ing. I have been involved in the global warming debate and I am extensively in- 
volved in the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) scientific assess- 
ment activity as a lead author of individual chapters, the Technical Summary and 
Policy Makers Summary of Working Group I. 

During the past  years, global mean surface temperatures have been rising at 
a rate as large as any that has been observed within the historical record. Such 
rapid warming at the Earth’s surface is in contrast to the trend in the global-mean 
temperature of the lowest  kilometers of the atmosphere (within that portion of the 
atmosphere referred to as the troposphere) as inferred from measurements of radi- 
ation emitted by oxygen molecules (a proxy for tropospheric temperature) sampled 
by the microwave sounding unit (MSU) carried aboard the NOAA polar-orbiting sat- 
ellites; see Fig.  for the vertical structure of the atmosphere. I will summarize here 
the state of knowledge with regard to observed climate change, and especially the 
issues of the changes in temperatures as seen by the synthesis of observations taken 
at the Earth’s surface versus those measured by satellite. 


Fig.  . The typical structure of temperature with height is shown. The lower atmosphere is the troposphere 
and the lowest  km or so of that is the region measured by the MSU-LT. The stratosphere contains the 
ozone layer and is separated from the troposphere by the tropopause which varies in height from about 
 km in the extratropics to  km in the tropics. 

Typical temperature profile 



Observed climate change 

It is important to appreciate that temperature changes are only a part of the total 
picture. Global warming refers to the increased heating of the Earth arising from 
well documented increases in greenhouse gases such as Carbon Dioxide. At the sur- 
face, some of that heat goes into raising temperatures, but most of it goes into 
evaporating moisture. This is especially true as long as the surface is wet, as it al- 
ways is over the % of the globe covered by oceans. After rainfalls, in bright sun- 
shine, it is only following the drying up of surface puddles that temperatures are 
apt to rise. Accordingly, the strongest heat waves occur in association with droughts 
because then there is no surface moisture to act as a “swamp cooler,” and droughts 
are apt to become more intense with global warming. Meanwhile the increases in 
atmospheric moisture fuel more vigorous storms. Changes in extremes of climate 
will be much greater than changes in the mean. It also means that temperature in- 
creases are likely to be muted in places where precipitation has increased, as is gen- 
erally the case for most of the United States. Changes in cloud cover, storm tracks, 
winds, and so forth further complicate the picture. The very nature of the atmos- 
pheric circulation, in which large-scale waves occur, also guarantees that some re- 



 


gions will warm more than others and some regions may cool even as the planet 
as a whole warms. These comments highlight the need to examine several factors, 
including precipitation, when developing an understanding of temperature changes. 

Surface temperatures 

The surface temperature record is made up mostly from measurements by ther- 
mometers that track surface air temperature over land and ocean, as well as sea 
surface temperatures (SSTs) over the oceans. In recent years satellite infrared 
measurements have helped determine patterns of SSTs. The coverage increases over 
time after about ; it was quite poor in the s and is best after the s. 
It is only truly global after  with the help of satellite measurements. It is gen- 
erally poor over the southern oceans and there were almost no data over Antarctica 
prior to the IGY (). Changing biases confound the climate record. These arise 
from changes in observing practices (thermometer types, their exposure, the time of 
measurement etc.), and changes in land use practices. The urban heat island is the 
best known latter effect and arises because of the concrete jungle in cities which 
retains heat at night and causes rapid runoff of rain. 

The advantages of the surface record are its length, well over  years, the many 
independent measurements, several independent analyses, and its robustness to the 
many cross checks, such as Northern versus Southern Hemisphere, urban versus 
rural, and land-based versus marine measurements. The disadvantages are the 
mostly less than global coverage, and coverage changes with time. An overall assess- 
ment is that the trends are robust, but may be slightly over-estimated owing to 
under-representation of the southern oceans and Antarctica. 


Fig. . The average annual mean global temperature expressed as the departure from the - average 
of C, called anomalies. From U.K. Met. Office and University of East Anglia. 



Surface temperatures (Fig. ) have increased by .°C (.°F) over the past cen- 
tury. The increase is not steady but occurs mainly from the s to  and the 
s to the present.  is the warmest year on record and the s are the 
warmest decade in both hemispheres, on land and on the ocean. Melting glaciers 
and rising sea level provide strong supporting evidence. However, over land night- 
time temperatures are rising faster then daytime temperatures, by almost .°C per 
decade since , apparently largely because of increases in low cloud cover. 

The surface temperature record has been extended back in time by use of proxy 
indicators that are known to be sensitive to temperatures, such as from tree rings, 
corals, and ice cores. A recent synthesis of these provides further context for the re- 
cent trends and shows that the last decade is likely to have been the warmest in 
the past  years. 

Radiosonde temperatures 

Measurements of temperatures in the atmosphere above the surface became rou- 
tine beginning in the mid- s through use of balloon-borne instrument packages 
(radiosondes) that transmit thermister-measured temperatures back to ground along 
with pressure and humidity. Their purpose has been mainly for aviation use and 
weather forecasting. The observations are at best twice daily and while spatial cov- 
erage improved in the IGY, it is marginal for large-scale estimates before about 
. The biases are the many changes in instrumentation and observing methods, 



 


often with poor documentation of these changes. There are known biases in some 
brands, and a common problem has been improper shading from the sun and ade- 
quate ventilation. [Recall the temperature is that of the air, which must therefore 
be circulated past the sensor, and the sensor must be protected from direct solar 
radiation.l The advantages are the very high vertical resolution of the measure- 
ments, the use of new independent instruments for each sounding and the diversity 
of instruments. Also, there have been a few independent analyses. The disadvan- 
tages are the diversity of instruments that are inadequately calibrated for climate 
purposes, their often unknown changes with time, and the spotty non-global cov- 
erage. An assessment suggests that the tropospheric record is reasonably well 
known after  in the Northern Hemisphere extratropics, but that coverage is in- 
adequate elsewhere. 

Satellite temperature measurements 

The satellite record is made up of MSU measurements of microwave radiation 
emitted by the atmosphere which are proportional to temperature. The coverage 
began in December  twice or four times a day from one or two satellites, and 
is global. The emissions represent a very broad layer in the vertical, and so a re- 
trieval is used to obtain the temperature closer to the surface. This is the commonly 
used satellite record but it still represents the lowest  km or so of the atmosphere, 
so it is physically a very different quantity than the surface temperature. 

The observation times vary with satellite and orbit drift. Biases arise from the 
use of  different satellites and instruments, orbital decay affects the retrieval, east- 
west drift of the satellite affects the time of day of observation, and there are instru- 
ment calibration and solar heating of the platform effects. Another significant factor 
is that the retrieval amplifies the noise by a factor of  to . Other disadvantages 
are some contaminating effects from the surface, especially over land, contamination 
by precipitation-sized ice, the difficulty of obtaining continuity across satellites, the 
shortness of the record, and one group has processed the data. The advantages are 
the global fairly uniform coverage, the long-term stability of microwave radiation 
emissions from oxygen, the biases may be well determined if there is adequate sat- 
ellite overlap, and there are many observations which can be used to reduce random 
noise. The assessment is that this record is excellent for spatial coverage and deter- 
