


 


by natural phenomena alone. And the scientific evidence, observa- 
tions and models suggest a discernible human influence. 

The recent projections of future emissions of greenhouse gases 
and sulfur dioxide suggest that in the absence of global climate 
policies, the atmospheric concentrations of greenhouse gases will 
increase substantially over the next  years, while the emissions 
of sulfur dioxide will increase initially for a decade or two, and 
then decrease significantly because of the concern of acid deposi- 
tion. 

Temperatures are projected to increase from about one to five de- 
grees Centigrade, two to nine degrees Fahrenheit, between now 
and . Why is this number that I am showing larger than the 
previous witnesses? And that is because the new emissions sce- 
narios from the IPCC suggest very low sulfur dioxide emissions 
over the next  years and, hence, there is little or no offsetting/ 
cooling effect due to aerosols on the greenhouse gas warming. 

So the projections for climate change are now larger than what 
they were a few years ago under the second assessment report. 
Precipitation is projected to increase globally. But many arid and 
semi-arid areas of the Earth are projected to become drier. The sea 
level is projected to increase between  and  centimeters by 
. 

So why do we, society, care? Water resources, managed and un- 
managed ecological systems, human health and human settlements 
are all predicted to be impacted by climate change. 

The arid and semi-arid areas of Africa, the Middle East and 
Southern Europe will become even more water-stressed than they 
are today. 

Agricultural production in Africa and Latin America could de- 
crease ten to thirty percent. The incidence of vector-borne diseases, 
such as malaria and dengue, will increase significantly in tropical 
countries. 

Tens of millions of people will be displaced by rising sea levels 
in small island states and low-lying deltaic areas. And major 
changes are expected in the boundaries and the structure and func- 
tioning of critical ecological systems, especially in forests and coral 
reefs. 

The social costs of inaction are quite uncertain, but they are like- 
ly to be in the range of a few percent of world GDP annually in 
a doubled carbon dioxide world, with the cost being substantially 
greater in developing countries. 

However, the good news is that if we go beyond political ideology, 
there are numerous cost-effective ways to mitigate climate change 
using the extensive array of technologies and policy measures in 
both the energy supply and demand sectors. 

In addition, a significant potential to increase the uptake or de- 
crease the emissions of carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases 
through cost-effective changes in land use, land-use practices and 
forestry, slowing deforestation, and improve forest, crop land and 
range land management. 

Policy reform such as the elimination of fossil fuel subsidies and 
the internalization of the social costs of environmental damage will 
be essential to reduce the emissions of greenhouse gases. 



 


The flexibility mechanisms of the Kyoto Protocol, emissions trad- 
ing, and project-based carbon-offset activities, offer the possibility 
of reducing greenhouse gas emissions at a lower cost than domestic 
actions alone, and can lead to the transfer of environmentally 
sound technologies to countries with economies in transition and 
developing countries. 

What we also note, however, is that the current efforts and proc- 
esses will not be sufficient to facilitate the efficient transfer of envi- 
ronmentally sound technologies from developed to developing coun- 
tries, but opportunities do exist to enhance the transfer of these 
technologies, but it will require all stakeholders to play their role, 
i.e., governments, industry, and NGO’s. 

We should note that the atmospheric lifetime of carbon dioxide, 
which is the major anthropogenic greenhouse gas, is more than a 
century. This means that if policy formulation waits until all sci- 
entific uncertainties are resolved and carbon dioxide and other 
greenhouse gases are responsible for changing the earth’s climate 
as projected by all climate models, the time to reverse human in- 
duced changes in climate and the resulting environmental damages 
will not be years or decades, but centuries to millennia. 

I note that enhanced R&D, research and development, policy re- 
form and promoting market mechanisms will be essential to ad- 
dress the climate change issue, both domestically and globally. 

Last, while scientific uncertainties clearly exist, governments 
from around the world have recognized that we know enough to 
take the first steps to mitigate climate change. 

And, let me leave you with one simple observation. Many of the 
global warming skeptics today are the same skeptics who ques- 
tioned whether human activities were destroying the earth’s fragile 
ozone layer and increasing the level of damaging ultraviolet radi- 
ation reaching the Earth’s surface. These skeptics argued against 
national and global action to protect the ozone layer. 

We now know that human activities were destroying the ozone 
layer and thankfully governments from around the world, working 
with industry, ignored the skeptics and cost-effective solutions were 
developed, thus protecting all life on Earth from the damaging — 
damaging ultraviolet radiation. 

Thank you. 

The Chairman. Thank you, Dr. Watson. 

[The prepared statement of Dr. Watson follows:] 

Prepared Statement of Dr. Robert Watson, Chairman, 
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change 

It is a pleasure to appear before you today to discuss an issue of critical impor- 
tance to this and future generations: global climate change. My name is Robert T. 
Watson and I am testifying in my capacity as the chairman of the Intergovern- 
mental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC). 

I would like to first describe the work of the IPCC (Part I) and then briefly review 
the current state of knowledge concerning the climate system (Part II). 

PART I: The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change 

The IPCC is an intergovernmental panel established by the United Nations in 
 under the auspices of the World Meteorological Organization (WMO) and the 
United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) to assess the current state of sci- 
entific, technical and economic knowledge regarding climate change. While the IPCC 
is an independent scientific panel, it rides itself on being responsive to addressing 



 


