On closer inspection of these studies, however, one finds that the apparent agree- 
ment was achieved only by comparing apples with oranges. The model experiments 
included some major processes, but not all major processes. When those additional 
processes are also factored in, such as real El Ninos, the climate models do not 
produce the observed global average vertical temperature changes observed since 
. In other words, the temperature of % of the atmosphere appears to be going 
in a direction not predicted by models. That, in my view, is a significant missing 
piece of the climate puzzle which introduces considerable uncertainty about a mod- 
el’s predictive utility. 

It is certainly possible that the inability of the present generation of climate mod- 
els to reproduce the reality of the past  years may only reflect the fact that the 
climate experiences large natural variations in the vertical temperature structure 
over such time periods. By recognizing this however, the implication is that any at- 
tention drawn to the surface temperature rise over the past two decades must also 
acknowledge the fact that % of the atmospheric mass has not similarly warmed. 

Regional Averages 

This disparity between observations and model results is a curious and unex- 
plained issue regarding the global average vertical temperature structure. But we 
do not live , feet in the atmosphere, and we do not live in a global average 




 


surface temperature. We live in specific places, cities, states and regions. Local and 
regional projections of surface climate are very difficult and challenging. An example 
from Alabama’s past is useful here only to illustrate the difficulty of providing local 
predictions with a high level of confidence. 

A few of the present set of climate models have attempted to reproduce the dis- 
tribution of actual surface temperatures since the th century. These complex mod- 
els incorporate solar changes, increasing carbon dioxide, sulfate pollution and so on. 
They indicate that since the ’s we in North Alabama should have experienced 
a warming of about °F (°C). The truth is that we have actually experienced a cool- 
ing of over °F (°C).  The model may have done fairly well in the global average, 
and may have done acceptably well in many geographic locations, but in my opinion 
it provided false information for those of us in the Southeast. If in trying to repro- 
duce the past we see such model errors, one must assume that predicting the future 
would produce similar opportunities for errors on a regional basis. 


Summer Daily Average High Temperatures 
Madison Co. Alabama, - 



Weather Extremes and Climate Change 

I want to encourage the Committee to be suspicious of media reports in which 
weather extremes are given as proof of human-induced climate change. Weather ex- 
tremes occur somewhere all the time. For example, you may have seen a recent re- 
port based on one version of the U.S. surface temperature data stating that January 
through March of this year was the hottest ever recorded. The satellite data provide 
information for the entire globe and show that indeed tropospheric temperatures 
were much above average over the lower  states. However, most of the globe expe- 
rienced below average temperatures in that massive bulk of the troposphere. It was 
our turn to be warm while in places such as the equatorial oceans and the Sahara 
Desert it was their turn to be cold. 


 Data have been adjusted for all station moves, time of observation biases and instrument 
changes. 




 


Jan to Mar  Troposphere (int = . C) 




Above: Departure from a -year average for January to March  of tropospheric temperature 
measurements. Colored areas are those with departures greater than . (yellow),  . (light 
orange),  . (dark orange) and . (red) °C. Note that most of the globe is covered with 
negative departures (dashed lines). 

Has hot weather occurred before in the US? All time record high temperatures 
by states begin in . Only eleven of the states have uniquely seen record highs 
since  ( occurred prior to ,  states had records occurring both before and 
after .) Hot weather happens. Similar findings appear from an examination of 
destructive weather events. The intensity and frequency of hurricanes have not in- 
creased. The intensity and frequency of tornadoes have not increased. (Let me 
quickly add that we now have more people and much more wealth in the paths of 
these destructive events so that the losses have certainly risen, but that is not due 
to climate change.) Droughts and wet spells have not statistically increased or de- 
creased. Last summer’s drought in the Northeast was remarkable in the sense that 
for the country as a whole, the typical percentage area covered by drought was 
below average. Deaths in U.S. cities are no longer correlated with high tempera- 
tures, though deaths still increase during cold temperatures. 


 o 

  

 o 

  

  

  

  

  

  

 

 

        

Source: NOAA/NCDC 


% U.S. Area Under Extreme Conditions 





 


When considering information such as indicated above, one finds it difficult to 
conclude the climate change is occurring in the U.S. and that it is exceedingly dif- 
ficult to conclude that part of that change might have been caused by human fac- 
tors. 

In the past  years, sea level has risen  in. ±  in. ( cm ±  cm) and is 
apparently not accelerating. Sea level also rose in the th and th centuries, obvi- 
ously due to natural causes, but not as much. One of my duties in the office of the 
State Climatologist is to inform developers and industries of the potential climate 
risks and rewards in Alabama. I am very frank in pointing out the dangers of beach 
front property along the Gulf Coast. A sea level rise of  in. over  years, or even 
 years is minuscule compared with the storm surge of a powerful hurricane like 
Fredrick or Camille. Coastal areas threatened today will be threatened in the fu- 
ture. The sea level rise, if it continues, will be very slow and thus give decades of 
opportunity for adaptation, if one is able to survive the storms. 
