
Indeed, polar bears depend entirely on sea ice as platforms for hunting the marine 
mammals that provide their nutritional needs. Because the necessary ice bridges linking 
land and sea have disappeared, adult and young polar bears have starved and drowned. 
Some polar bears have even resorted to cannibalism, leading scientists to remark that they 
are witnessing stressors unprecedented in decades of observation. Consequently, the U.S. 
Fish and Wildlife Service has proposed listing the polar bear as threatened under the 
Endangered Species Act, a proposal which Defenders of Wildlife strongly supports. 

On land, prospects are no better. Disapp)earance of permalrost has led to draining 
of Arctic wetlands, aquatic habitats used extensively by the breeding waterfowl that winter 
in the lower  states and support a multi-billion dollar sport hunting economy. Declining 
winter snow packs threaten species such as the wolverine, a large relative of the weasel 
that relies upon snow for denning. 

One place where all of these changes are occurring is the Arctic National Wildlife 
Refuge in Alaska. The Arctic Refuge is the most important on-shore denning habitat for 
polar bears in the United States. As offshore sea-ice denning areas melt away, the Arctic 
Refuge becomes one of the last places for these polar bears to winter with their newborn 
cubs. The refuge’s famed Porcupine caribou herd is also being affected by global 
warming. Caribou are departing their wintering grounds a month earlier and are still 
having trouble making it to the coastal plain of the Arctic Refuge in time for the earlier 
arrival of spring, when the most nutritious forage is available for their calves. Thus, the 
importance of the Arctic Refuge to wildlife is made even greater by global warming. 



 


making proposals to open the refuge to oil and gas development even more misguided. 

Habitat shifts. As the planet warms, the habitat occupied by particular species 
shifts as well, typically northward in the northern hemisphere, upsiope, and inland. 
Northern and elevational boundaries have moved, on average, .  km northward and .  
meters upward each decade. 

For some species, already on the edge, these shifts could spell extinction. For 
instance, the Peaks of Otter salamander is endemic to central Virginia near the Blue Ridge 
Parkway. With one of the most restricted ranges of any salamander in the United States, all 
of this amphibian’s habitat lies within a handful of mountains in two counties. If global 
warming pushes it further up the mountains in search of a cooler environment, it will have 
no place left to go. In the polar regions, with expectations that the Arctic Ocean will be 
largely devoid of summer sea pack ice later in this century, species such as polar bears, 
ivory gulls, walruses, and the ice-dwelling seals will find their habitat literally melted 
away. 

In our recent report. Refuges at Risk— The Threat of Global Warming: America ’s 
 Most Endangered National Wildlife Refuges , Defenders of Wildlife highlights the 
impact of global warming on the National Wildlife Refuge System. We point out that the 
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) estimates that many tree species may shift their 
ranges  miles to the north. Places like the Silvio O. Conte National Wildlife Refuge in 
New England are expected to lose tree species wholesale, including the regionally 
important sugar maple whose range may shift entirely out of the United States. Changing 
forest composition will directly affect wildlife that depends on the current tree species of 
New England’s forests, like Bicknell's Thrush, a bird species dependent on 



 


New England’s high elevation balsam fir trees, which may decline % by century’s end 
due to global warming, according to the EPA. 

Rising sea levels. Estimates of sea level rise from global warming range from  
to  inches over the next century, according to the latest IPCC report. Catastrophic 
melting of Antarctica or Greenland could raise sea levels by several meters. However, 
any rise will have negative consequences for some wildlife. Islands used by the 
endangered Hawaiian monk seal could be completely imderwater by century’s end, 
overcrowding the remaining islands used for breeding and rearing of young and 
increasing the predation of seals by sharks. Other coastal species like the endangered 
Florida Key deer depend entirely upon low-level barrier islands, and are especially 
vulnerable to sea level rise. 

Federal properties and resources are at serious risk. There are approximately  
national wildlife refuges in coastal areas. Many of these refuges, like Virginia’s 
Chincoteague National Wildlife Refuge, protect coastal marshes that are only a foot or 
two above the current sea level. Even the lowest estimated rise in sea level over the next 
century will have profound effects on coastal wetlands, which are one of the most 
biologically productive ecosystems on earth. Coastal marshes also happen to be 
tremendous carbon sinks, and their loss will reduce their ability to absorb carbon and 
potentially even release more carbon dioxide into the atmosphere as inundated marsh 
plants decompose. 

Longer droughts. Drought resulting from global warming poses a further threat to 
species that rely on already scarce water in arid environments such as the American 
southwest. For example, even in the best of times, survival can be precarious for desert 



 


bighorn sheep. Inhabiting steep, rocky terrain in the driest areas of the American 
southwest, they live in small groups isolated by miles of blazingly hot terrain. In 
southeastern California, rainfall has declined by as much as %, leading to drying up of 
springs and disappearance of plants^. More than a third of the populations of sheep that 
once lived in California’s mountains have disappeared in the last century. 

Non-arid regions are going to face dramatic changes as well. As we highlight in 
Refuges at Risk, the prairie pothole region of the country is the nation’s duck factory; its 
thousands of small lakes and ponds providing ideal habitat for breeding waterfowl. Over  
national wildlife refuges, such as Medicine Lake refuge in eastern Montana, and Devils 
Lake Wetland Management District in North Dakota, have been established in this region to 
protect breeding bird habitat. Climate scientists predict that warmer climates in the 
northern prairie wetlands region will increase the frequency and severity of droughts - so 
much so that the number of breeding ducks in this region could be cut in half. 

Excess carbon dioxide. Often described as the rainforests of the ocean, coral 
reefs support a dazzling array of creatures. But die-offs of corals, as much as % in 
some locations during the last  years, landed two coral species on the endangered 
species list. Staghorn and elkhom coral form massive thickets, provide cover for 
numerous reef fish, and are essential for the health of entire reef ecosystems. However, 
warming ocean temperatures are stripping corals of the algae they need to survive, while 
carbon dioxide emissions are also turning the naturally alkaline oceans more acidic. 

Reefs subsequently turn into rubble because of lowering concentrations of carbonate ions, a 
key building block for calcium carbonate required by the corals. 

jEpps, C. W., D. R. McCullough, J. D. Wehausen, V. C. Bleich, and J. L. Reehel. . Effects of climate 
change on population persistence of desert-dwelling mountain sheep in California. Conservation Biology : 
-. 



 


The threat from global warming to coral reefs affects many national wildlife 
refuges, including the Northwest Hawaiian Islands refuge, Guam National Wildlife 
Refuge, and the Palmyra Atoll, Midway Atoll, and Kingman Reef refuges in the south 
Pacific. 

Other impacts. Global warming will affect wildlife in other ways as well. For 
example, changes in migration patterns will alter some species’ ability to find suitable 
habitat and food. Changes in average precipitation (far more or far less annual rain and 
snow than falls currently) will place strain on species adapted to current precipitation 
patterns. 

Another result of global warming is that certain weather events will become more 
extreme, causing a greater probability of freshwater flooding inland and more intense and 
violent storms and other weather events, such as hurricanes, along the coasts. Rapidly 
changing environments will also heighten the risk of invasive native and invasive 
non-native species, both of which can pose threats to the species they displace. For 
example, global warming has been implicated in the recent severe outbreaks of spruce bark 
beetles on Alaska’s Kenai National Wildlife Refuge, which have decimated half of the 
forests on the Kenai peninsula. 

Helping wildlife navigate the global warming bottleneck 
