President Bush. I hope that Congress sees fit to continue the bipartisan tradition 
of strong support for this scientific endeavor, which is providing the sound, objective 
information we need to support decision-making in the public and private sectors. 

The Science of Climate Change 

I would now like to summarize what we know about the Earth’s climate and how 
it is changing. In , the Second Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental 
Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) reviewed all of the science then available. Through 
the IPCC process, leading scientists from more than  countries periodically re- 
view and assess scientific information about climate change and its environmental 
and economic effects. The report documented a series of changes that had already 
occurred, including increases in greenhouse gas concentrations, an unusually rapid 
increase in temperatures, and rising sea levels. It explained that the magnitude, 
timing, and geographic pattern of observed temperature changes closely matches the 
changes that models project from human activities, and does not match well with 
model simulations of natural change or changes seen in the natural record. The Re- 
port famously concluded: “The balance of evidence suggests that there is a discern- 
ible human influence on global climate.” 

The qualified nature of the IPCC attribution statement reflected the existence of 
alternative interpretations of parts of the data and known shortcomings in models 
of how the climate system works. 

Recently, however, important scientific evidence has emerged that has substan- 
tially undercut many of potential dissenting arguments, thereby fundamentally 
changing the debate over global warming. Basically, the debate has changed from 
“Are we warming the Earth?” to “How much are we warming the Earth?” To under- 
stand the current state of climate change science, let me first start with a series 
of statements that virtually all credible atmospheric scientists agree with. 

. The atmospheric concentration of C  has been significantly increased by 
human activities. In the past century or so the CO  concentration has risen from 
less than  parts per million by volume (ppmv) to about  ppmv, an increase 
of about  percent. At  ppmv, CO  is now higher than at any time over the 
past , years. It is universally recognized that human activity is responsible 
for this increase, mainly through fossil fuel combustion and deforestation. Our best 
estimates show that unless action is taken to reduce CO  emissions, atmospheric 
carbon dioxide levels will likely reach about  ppmv by the end of the st cen- 
tury, about double current levels. Other greenhouse gases, such as nitrous oxide, 
methane, and halocarbons (CFCs and HFCs), have also increased due to human ac- 
tivities and further increases over the st century will add to the tendency for glob- 
al warming. 

. The surface of the Earth is warming. There is now near unanimous agreement, 
including most of the climate skeptics, that the Earth’s surface has warmed signifi- 
cantly over the last century. 

• A recent National Research Council report (“Reconciling Observations of Global 
Temperature Change”) carefully examined direct measurements of surface tem- 
perature. The report concluded that “The warming trend in global-mean surface 
temperature observations during the past  years is undoubtedly real and is 
substantially greater than the average rate of warming during the twentieth 
century.” These data show that the surface of the Earth has warmed by .- 
. degrees C (. -. degrees F) over the last  years, with .-.  degrees 
C (.-.  degrees F) of that coming in just the last  years. 



 


• Borehole measurements of temperature at various depths below the Earth’s sur- 
face show that the average surface temperature of the late th century is with- 
out precedent in the last  years. 

• Using tree rings, lake sediment records, ice cores, and other paleoclimate indi- 
cators, a global temperature record extending back  years has been con- 
structed. This record is in broad agreement with the other data sets, and it 
shows that the s were the Earth’s warmest decade in the last  years, 
and that  was the warmest year in this entire period. 

• Measurements made over the last few decades have shown a precipitous de- 
crease in both the areal extent and thickness of Arctic Sea ice. Model simula- 
tions of the data suggest that this decline is unlikely to be an entirely natural 
phenomenon. Mountain glaciers have retreated worldwide during the last cen- 
tury. 

• Over the last century, global mean sea level has risen  to  inches, and further 
rise is inevitable because of the thermal inertia of the ocean and melting gla- 
ciers. 

• During the past  years the upper  meters of world Ocean has warmed by 
approximately . degrees F. This warming is consistent with predictions from 
general circulation models that simulate the effect of greenhouse gas increases 
since the beginning of the industrial revolution. 

. The Earth’s surface temperature will continue to rise during the next century. 
Elementary physics shows that increasing greenhouse gases in the atmosphere must 
exert a strong warming tendency on the surface temperature of the Earth. This is 
not a controversial concept. Indeed, the greenhouse effect is responsible for pro- 
viding a hospitable climate on Earth. It is generally agreed that the Earth’s surface 
temperature will rise over the next century as the atmospheric concentrations of 
CO  and other greenhouse gases increase. The questions are: “How much and how 
fast will temperature increase, and with what regional impact?” The  IPCC Sec- 
ond Assessment Report, representing the broad consensus of the scientific commu- 
nity, projected a temperature increase of . to . degrees C ( to . degrees F) 
over the next  years. The more sophisticated analyses conducted since that time, 
which will form the basis of the IPCC Third Assessment Report, due out in early 
, continue to show that such an increase is likely. This rate of warming would 
be greater than any seen during the past , years. 

. There is mounting scientific evidence that climate change is already affecting 
ecosystems. Data from many sites in Europe and North America show that the ob- 
served warming has been accompanied by earlier plant growth and flowering. For 
example, here in Washington, D.C., cherry trees, along with  of  other plants 
examined, are blooming a week or more earlier than they did  years ago. Satellite 
data for high latitudes in the Northern Hemisphere show that plants are leafing 
eight days earlier in  than in . Observed changes are not confined to vege- 
tation: 

• The ranges of some animals appear to be shifting. Birds are going further north 
to breed and the range of many European and North American butterflies are 
shifting north as well. 

• Some species are disappearing when a habitat changes. Warmer and drier con- 
ditions have caused the high elevation “cloud forest” of Costa Rica to rise and 
 frog species to disappear. 

• Observations in several sites along the Pacific coast of North America indicate 
that the distribution of fish and phytoplankton has changed as waters warm. 
There is also evidence that warming waters increase the amount of coral 
bleaching. 

We have discovered much about the way the climate system works, and about 
how the climate system is likely to evolve in response to increases in greenhouse 
gases. As I noted above, the debate has changed from “Are we warming the Earth?” 
to “How much are we warming the Earth?” It leads directly to the question of “So 
what?” Right now, science only provides a partial answer. As temperatures rise 
evaporation will increase, leading to more moisture in the atmosphere. Hence, 
worldwide, an increase in total rainfall is likely, with much coming in heavier 
downpours. But increased evaporation will also lead to more drought in some re- 
gions. Rising temperatures will also bring sea-level rise. These changes in tempera- 
ture, precipitation and sea level will likely change the ideal ranges for plant and 
animals, and will also affect human society. Our understanding of how the life sup- 



 


port systems on Earth will respond to these changes remains quite uncertain. This 
uncertainty is no reason to be complacent about the future. 

Emerging Questions 

Let me now move past points of agreement, and talk about the cutting edge of 
climate science. 

To a large extent, the disagreements between future estimates of the climate are 
