that Senator Boxer showed of the polar bears, seeming to be 
stranded on a piece of ice or jumping from one to the other, the lay- 
man’s conclusion is, well, the ice is melting so the area in which 
the polar bear can exist is smaller, therefore the species is threat- 
ened. 

Is that, for the record, that is the layman’s reaction. I want you 
to speak to how the disappearance of  percent of the summer ice 
affects the polar bear. Maybe that is not direct, but you know what 
I am asking. 

Mr. Kelly. Yes, I do, I think. I am a little bit reluctant to par- 
ticipate too much in this idea of using polar bears as sort of the 
poster species, simply because then all of a sudden, the argument 
starts to about a single species. And what is important, in my view, 
is the entire ecosystem. Hence I talked about algae that live in the 
ice. I talked about fish and plankton that are all associated with 
that. 

So you have to understand that, I sort of think this is not like, 
well, we have just wiped out all the bison, but now we are rolling 



 


up the plains behind them, to having the sea ice go away. It is tak- 
ing the whole ecosystem out. It is not just taking the charismatic 
mega fauna away. 

Senator Lieberman. Very good point, and I take it. 

Mr. Kelly. And that said, the fact is that yes, I was there when 
that photo was taken of the bear pouncing. That was taken up near 
Angle Island. Yes, you can show polar bears doing that in situa- 
tions where the local conditions are quite healthy and fine. 

But just last week in Anchorage, at a science symposium, I heard 
presentations by the polar bear research community on their latest 
research. One of the things that was particularly compelling to me 
was that they had very good information on denning sites from sat- 
ellite tracking that has gone on for several decades. And what they 
see is a substantial shift from, most bears in Alaska used to den 
on the sea ice, and few on land. And now increasingly larger num- 
bers are denning on land, because the ice is so far offshore. 

This is a big response, a big change. And it is for reasons like 
that, I think there are data out there that we would be foolish not 
to extrapolate and be proactive rather than waiting until we can 
show with  percent confidence that the population has declined 
by X amount. 

Senator Lieberman. Thank you. I appreciate that answer very 
much. It is very helpful. 

Mr. Stalling, let me ask you a last question. In your testimony 
you talked about changes you have observed in the trout. Neither 
you nor I are scientists. But I presume, correct me, that you have 
read some of the science here and if I am right, to the extent that 
you have, what does the science tell you to explain the changes 
that you have observed in trout? And obviously, particularly to the 
extent that it is convincing, the effect of global warming. 

Mr. Stalling. With less snow pack and less waters in the 
streams and hotter conditions and the water evaporating and dry- 
ing out quicker, we are just seeing less stream flows and lower 
streams. I have seen a lot of trout in the streams that I fish bunch 
up more in what deep pools still remain. And as the water gets 
warmer and the fish are bunched up more, there is a lack of oxy- 
gen and increased algae which further takes the oxygen and puts 
a lot of stress on the fish. It makes them more susceptible to preda- 
tion. 

In fact, the Montana Fish, Wildlife and Parks is increasingly 
closing our rivers, many of our rivers, like the Big Hole, and the 
Badger and the Dearborn, fishing earlier and earlier in the sum- 
mer, because they are drying up so quickly. And the fish are so 
stressed that it is just not looking so good for them. 

Senator Lieberman. Thank you very much. 

Senator Warner. 

Senator Warner. Let me follow onto that important question. I 
recited what I have seen in acid rain. But do you see changes in 
trout populations in either the east or the west or east coast? We 
are east coast here, obviously, the Blue Ridge Mountains. But what 
about the west coast? 

Mr. Stalling. That I am not familiar with. Senator, but I could 
find out and get back to you. 



 


Senator Warner. I think we need to look at the entire geo- 
graphic spectrum on that. Of course, we know that the trout is a 
magnificent fighting fish, that is why we spend so much of our lives 
trying to outwit it. And it is a smart fish. 

But are they more susceptible than other species? I mean, the old 
catfish in our ponds in Virginia and the crappie and other things, 
they seem to proliferate, nothing can stop them. Is it because of the 
weakness of their system? 

Mr. Stalling. Senator, they are real sensitive to warmer tem- 
peratures, they are generally in cold fisheries. They need that cold, 
clear water that we get in the mountains of Montana. 

Senator Warner. My last question, Mr. Chairman, is to follow on 
your question with Dr. Kelly. 

Is there any correlation between the problems that the commer- 
cial fishermen in the Antarctic are experiencing to global warming? 

Mr. Kelly. Did you say in the Antarctic? 

Senator Warner. Well, up there in the Arctic, in that whole re- 
gion, the Antarctic or Arctic. 

Mr. Kelly. Yes, the rich Bering Sea fishery, as I stated in my 
testimony, is very much linked into the ecology of the ocean as, it 
is really dominated by sea ice. And starting with the plant produc- 
tion — 

Senator Warner. Dominated by sea ice? 

Mr. Kelly. Sea ice, that is correct. Oceanography and where the 
nutrients go, where the primary production happens, the plant life 
that supports the fish population is very much driven by where sea 
ice is in the springtime. So what we are beginning to see are, we 
think, a shift from a community where the bottom communities are 
where a lot of the nutrients end up, to a very different situation 
where, because of the changing oceanography associated with ice 
retreat, the nutrients are more concentrated in the water column. 
That means a very different suite of organisms living there. It may 
mean a less productive system. 

But most importantly, I think, for commercial fisheries is that it 
is a very abrupt shift in what is there and what is available to be 
captured. So this is one of many ways in which we are likely to see 
very substantial economic impacts. This is huge in terms of over 
half of our national fisheries. 

Senator Warner. Mr. Chairman, we should congratulate this 
panel, who have come from distances afar to join us here today. I 
think their associates and colleagues and following constituencies, 
