bears are not uniform through time. In fact, near-shore densities of polar bears are two to five 


 



 


times greater in autumn than in summer (Durner et al. ), and polar bear use of coastal areas 
during the fall open water period has increased in recent years in the Beaufort Sea. 

Though there is a low probability that a large number of bears (i.e. -) might be affected by a 
large oil spill, the impact of a large spill, particularly during the broken ice period, could be 
significant to the polar bear population (Federal Register  :, USFWS ). The number 
of polar bears affected by an oil spill could be substantially higher if the spill spread to areas of 
seasonal polar bear concentrations, such as the area near Kaktovik, in the fall, and could have a 
significant impact to the Southern Beaufort Sea (SB) polar bear population. It seems likely that 
an oil spill would affect ringed seals the same way the Exxon Valdez oil spill affected harbour 
seals (Frost et al. a, Frost etal. b, Lowry et al. , Spraker et al. ). As with polar 
bears the number of animals killed would vary depending upon the season and spill size (NRC 
). 

Industrial development in polar bear habitat may also expose individuals to other hazardous 
substances through improper storage or spills. For example, one polar bear died in Alaska from 
consuming ethylene glycol in  (Amstrup et al. ). 

b. Persistent Organic Pollutants (POPS) 

Contamination of the Arctic and sub-Arctic regions through long-range transport of pollutants 
has been recognized for over  years (Bowes and Jonkel , deMarch et al. , 
Proshutinsky and Johnson , MacDonald et al. , Lie et al. ). These compounds are 
transported via large rivers, air, and ocean currents from the major industrial and agricultural 
centers located at more southerly latitudes (Barrie et al. , Li et al. a, Proshutinsky and 
Johnson , Lie et al. ). The presence and persistence of these contaminants within the 
Arctic is dependent on many factors, including transport routes, distance from source and the 
quantity and chemical composition of the contaminants released to the environment. The Arctic 
ecosystem is particularly sensitive to environmental contamination due to the slower rate of 
breakdown of persistent organic pollutants (POPs), including organochlorine compounds, 


 



 


relatively simple food chains, and the presence of long-lived organisms with low rates of 
reproduction and high lipid levels. The persistence and lipophilic nature of organochlorines 
increase the potential for bioaccumulation and biomagnification at higher trophic levels (Fisk et 
al.   ). Polar bears are well suited for monitoring environmental contaminants because of 
their position at the top of the food chain, wide circumpolar distribution, and ability to 
accumulate a wide range of persistent contaminants. Polar bears, because of their position at the 
top of the Arctic marine food chain, have some of the highest concentrations of OCs of any 
Arctic mammals (Braune et al.  p. ). Organochlorine metabolites, particularly MeS- 
PCB and HO-PCB, which have potential endocrine disrupting properties, are an example of 
biotransformation of OCs in polar bears (Letcher et al.  ). Adipose tissue and/or blood 
samples from most of the polar bear populations in the Arctic have been sampled at least once 
for the main groups of persistent organic pollutants described below. 

The most studied POPS in polar bears include polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs), chlordanes 
(CHL), DDT and its metabolites, toxaphene, dieldrin, hexachloroabenzene (HCB), 
hexachlorocyclohexanes (HCHs), and chlorobenzenes (CIBz). Overall, the relative proportion of 
the more recalcitrant compounds, such as PCB  and P-HCH, appears to be increasing in polar 
bears (Braune et al. ). Although temporal trend information is lacking, newer compounds, 
such as polybrominated diphenyl ethers (PBDEs), polychlorinated naphthalenes (PCNs), 
perflouro-ociane sulfonate (PFOS), perfluoroalkyl acids (PFAs), and perflourocarboxylic acids 
(PFCAs) have been recently found in polar bears (Braune et al. ), Of this relatively new 
suite of compounds, there is concern that both PFOS, which are increasing rapidly, and PBDEs 
are a potential risk to polar bears (deWit , Martin et al. , Braune et al. , Smithwick 
et al. ). Currently the polychlorinated dibenzo-p-dioxins (PCDDs), dibenzofurans (PCDFs) 
and dioxin-like PCBs are at relatively low concentrations in polar bears (Norstrom et al. ). 

Geographic and temporal trends in Persistent Organic Pollutants in polar bears and their 
habitats 

PCBs 


 



 


The highest Z PCB concentrations have been found in polar bears from the Russian Arctic (Franz 
Joseph Land and the Kara Sea), with decreasing concentrations to the east and west (Andersen et 
a!. ). Throughout the Arctic the highest concentrations ofSPCBs in descending order by 
region or (population) are Franz Josef Land (Kara Sea) > Kara Sea > Svalbard > East Greenland 
> North Baffin Island (Baffin Bay) > South Baffin Island (Baffin Bay) > Western Hudson Bay > 
Amundson Gulf (Northern Beaufort Sea) > Foxe Basin/Gulf of Boothia > Beaufort Sea 
(Southern Beaufort Sea) > Siberian Sea (Laptev Sea) > Chukchi Sea (Norstrom et al. , Muir 
and Norstrom , Andersen et al. , Lie et al, , Verreault et al. , Braune et al. 
). In a comparison of polar bear adipose tissues from Alaska, Canada, East Greenland, and 
Svalbard, Norway from  to , East Greenland and Svalbard populations had the highest 
concentrations of the more persistent PCB congeners (hepta- to nona-chlorinated) whereas 
Alaska had the highest proportion of the tower chlorinated PCB congeners (tri- to penta- 
chlorinated) (Verreault et al. ). Andersen et al. (), in a comparison of PCB congeners 
in blood samples from Svalbard, Franz Joseph Land, Kara Sea, Siberian Sea, and Chukchi Sea 
(  -), found that the higher chlorinated PCBs decreased from Svalbard east to the 
Chukchi Sea. 

Assessment of temporal trends requires long-term data sets which are available for only a few 
populations. Direct temporal comparisons between populations or within a population often 
cannot be made, as contaminant concentrations are influenced by factors such as sex ratio, age 
composition, nutritional and reproductive status, feeding habits, analytical techniques, congeners 
analyzed, tissues sampled, and statistical analyses used (AMAP , Muir et al. ). 

Braune et al. () presents a detailed summary of temporal changes in PCBs and chlorinated 
pesticides for Canadian ringed seal and polar bear populations. The Western Hudson Bay 
population has been studied since the late s and thus has one of the most complete temporal 
data sets that can be used to assess temporal changes in organochlorine (OC) concentrations. 
Although Verreault et al. () reported a % decline in IPCBs in adipose tissue from adult 
females from Western Hudson Bay between the periods - and -, Braune et al. 

 



 


() indicated that no long-term trend was evident as the concentrations of SPCBs in the 
s were similar to those of the late s. Norstrom et al. () observed a significant 
decrease in the XPCBs in Western Hudson Bay in the s. The composition of congeners that 
make up the XPCBs in Western Hudson Bay changed from  to , with a decrease in the 
number of highly chlorinated congeners and an increase in the less chlorinated congeners 
(Braune et al. ). Recent trends indicate an average decline of % of XPCBs from the time 
periods - (Norstrom et al. ) and - (Verreault et al. ) for the Alaska 
populations (Southern Beaufort Sea and the Chukchi Sea combined), Amundsen Gulf, Western 
Hudson Bay, Foxe Basin/Gulf of Boothia, Lancaster Sound, North Baffin Island, and South 
Baffin Island (Verreault et al. ). A comparison of XPCBs concentrations between the same 
time periods indicated a decrease of % and % in Svalbard and East Greenland (Verreault et 
al. ). Although Derocher et al. () found that XPCBs concentrations in blood plasma 
from polar bears in Svalbard, Norway increased from  to -, other studies have 
found declining XPCBs concentrations in both Svalbard (Henriksen et al. ) and East 
Greenland (Dietz et al. ). Peak Svalbard PCB concentrations probably occurred between 
the mid-s to the mid-s and may have been quite high (=  ppm) based on backward 
extrapolation from the steep decline in the early s (Henriksen et al. ). Overall there is 
evidence for recent declines in XPCBs for most populations. 

Other Chlorinated Hydrocarbon Contaminants 

The pattern of distribution of most other chlorinated hydrocarbons and metabolites generally 
follows that of XPCBs, with the highest concentrations of DDT-related compounds and XCHL in 
Franz Joseph Land and the Kara Sea, followed by East Greenland, Svalbard, the eastern 
Canadian Arctic populations, the western Canadian populations, the Siberian Sea, and finally the 
