North America’s wetlands support a rich abundance and diversity of waterfowl and other 
wildlife that have many important economic, ecological, recreational, and aesthetic values. 
But climate-driven changes in wetland ecosystems may profoundly affect future waterfowl 
populations and other wetland-dependent species. In the Prairie Pothole Region, the single 
most important breeding ground for North American migratory waterfowl, the effects of 
global warming on their abundance could be drastic, reducing migratory waterfowl 
populations throughout North America. Sorenson et al. () used model projections of 
future drought conditions in the Prairie Pothole Region to project trends in wetland and 
duck abundance during the " century. Most scenarios and models projected significant 
declines in wetlands (ranging from no change to % declines), and thus declines in the 
abundance of breeding ducks (losses ranging from % to %) in this region by the s. 

Trout. Salmon and Steelhead 

America’s prize cold-water fish, including trout and salmon, are imperiled by global 
warming. As the average temperature of our atmosphere increases, there is an associated 
increase in the temperatures of many rivers, streams, and other bodies of water, 
particularly when the air temperature remains at a certain level over time periods of a 
week or longer (Rahel, Keleher, Anderson, ). Water temperatures are among the most 
important factors affecting the health and distribution of trout, salmon and 
steelhead — collectively called salmonids (McCullough, ). 

Temperatures above optimal conditions can influence cold-water fish in each of their life 
stages (Kyle & Brabets, ). Just a few degrees increase in temperature above their 
optimum range can affect salmonids in many ways, including changing migration timing, 
reducing growth rates, reducing available oxygen in the water and increasing susceptibility 



 


to toxins, parasites, and disease (Poole et al., ). In general, salmonids will not be 
found where river temperatures are outside the optimum range for an extended period of 
time. The “thermal limit” for most adult salmon, steelhead and trout species occurs where 
the average daily air temperature in the warmest summer months exceeds .° F (° C) 
(McCullough, ). Salmonids exposed to water temperatures at or above .° F (° 

C) over several days are impaired or will die (Ministry of Water, Land, and Air Protection, 
). 

The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency projects that a .° F (.° C) increase in av- 
erage stream temperatures will yield a - to -percent reduction in cold-water fish 
habitat in many New England, Great Lakes and western states (U.S. EPA, ). Other 
research estimates that an increase in average summer water temperatures of . to  ° F 
(. to ° C) could eliminate  to  percent of stream habitat for the nation’s trout and 
salmon species (O’Neil, ). 

Polar Bears 


A circumpolar species with its southernmost population in Hudson Bay, Canada, the polar 
bear is dependent upon sea ice from which it catches seals, its primary prey. In western 
Hudson Bay the duration of ice has declined by  days in just  years, forcing polar 
bears to spend longer periods on shore where little food is available. As a result, average 
weight of polar bears in this area is down by % in  years, leading to lower 
reproduction and a % or more population decline. 

In the Arctic Ocean, perennial sea ice has declined . percent per decade since , with 
a  percent thinning of the remaining ice from the s and s to the s in some 
local areas. In a recent four year period Arctic Sea ice declined by an area three times that 
of California. (Folkestad, ) A recent study revealed that Arctic summer sea ice may 
disappear entirely by . (Holland ) Already, adult polar bears are experiencing 
wei^t loss and lower cub survival in both Canada and the Southern Beaufort Sea in 
Alaska. Furthermore, in  biologists observed four drowned polar 

bears and others swimming an incredible  miles from the coast in open ocean, 
occurrences that have not previously been documented. 

Due to the rapid decline in sea ice accompanied by declining weights, reproduction and 
populations of polar bears in some areas, the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, in a 
preliminary review of the evidence currently available, determined in December  
that the polar likely warrants listing as a threatened species. 

Songbirds 

Although migratory birds may appear to be particularly suited for adapting to climate 
global wanning because of their ability to move, they may not be well adapted to the new 
prey, predators, competitors and habitat conditions that changing climate could force upon 
them (Price & Click, ). Their optimal habitats will no longer exist, at least in the short 
term (Price & Root, ). The number of neotropical migrant bird species is expected to 



 


decrease throughout the contiguous United States as bird ranges shift in response to global 
wanning. For example, the southwestern United States could lose  percent of its current 
neotropical migrant bird species (Price & Root, ). American goldfinches may no 
longer breed in much of the United States. Savannah sparrows, sage thrashers and other 
birds that keep outbreaks of rangeland grasshoppers in check may disappear from Arizona, 
Nevada and New Mexico (Price & Click, ). 

Migratory birds also may face declines in such key food sources as seeds, insects and 
other foods, affecting bird health for migration and breeding (Price & Click, ). As 
sea levels rise, populations of shorebirds and other birds that rely on coastal marshes 
could be reduced (Erwin, ). Van Riper et al. () found that the endangered 
southwestern willow flycatcher has seen its numbers plummet during the past  years 
firom the loss of its habitat along rivers, streams or other wetlands in southern California, 
Arizona, New Mexico and parts of Nevada, Utah, Colorado and Texas. Clobal warming 
could exacerbate the habitat loss by restricting water flow even further, hurting fish and 
wildlife as well as songbirds. 

Coastal Habitats and Oceans 


A significant increase in the rate of sea-level rise due to melting glaciers and ice caps and 
to thermal expansion of the oceans is one of the most direct consequences of global 
wanning, putting many of the nation’s low-lying coastal areas at considerable risk. 
Sea-level rise is expected to contribute to significant coastal erosion as well as to 
inundation of coastal wetlands, marshes and other habitat important to many fish and 
wildlife species. This development threatens not only the fish and wildlife that depend on 
this habitat but also the security and economy of coastal communities that rely on these 
buffer zones to help reduce the impacts of hurricanes, storm surges and other severe 
weather events. 

A recent study of sea-level rise in Florida, for example, found that nearly  percent of 
critical salt marsh and  percent of tidal flats at nine important coastal sites would be 

lost under a moderate -inch increase in average sea level (Glick and Clough, ). The 
area of dry land at these coastal sites is projected to decrease by  percent, and roughly 
 percent of ocean beaches and two-thirds of estuarine beaches would disappear. The 
area of brackish marsh is projected to increase more than -fold, mostly around 
Apalachicola, taking over much of the current hardwood swamp land. These changes 
would have a significant impact on Florida’s marine fish and shellfish species and, 
accordingly, on the state’s commercial and recreational fisheries. 

Loss of coastal wetlands will likely be exacerbated by other human-induced stressors, such 
as groundwater withdrawal, wetland drainage and levee construction. In Louisiana, for 
example, a combination of sea-level rise and these other factors has already contributed to 
a loss of close to  million acres of coastal wetland since  (USGCRP, ). With the 
rate of sea-level rise projected to accelerate during the next century, the losses in this and 
other regions are likely to be catastrophic - particularly in areas where dikes, levees and 
other developments hinder the ability of wetlands to shift inland (Glick, Inkley and Tufts, 
 ). 



 


In addition to sea level rise, global warming also is raising ocean temperatures. On average, 
the temperature of the upper  meters of the world’s oceans rose about . degree 
Fahrenheit since the  s, a trend that scientists have determined is a direct result of 
human activities (Barnett, Pierce and Schnur, ). In the Tropical Atlantic, average 
sea-surface temperatures have warmed  degree Fahrenheit during the past three decades. 
These higher sea-surface temperatures are damaging coral reefs, enhancing marine diseases 
and harmful algal blooms and making hurricanes more intense and destructive. For 
example, two recent studies have offered compelling evidence that hurricanes around the 
