coastal shelves (ACIA ). In common with terrestrial and freshwater ecosystems in the 
Arctic, they experience strong seasonality in sunlight and low temperatures and are also 
influenced by freshwaters delivered mainly by the large rivers flowing into the Arctic Ocean 
mainly from Siberia (ACIA ). Ice cover is an important physical characteristic, affecting 
heat exchange between water and atmosphere, light penetration to organisms in the water below, 
and providing a biological habitat above, within, and beneath the ice. The marginal ice zone, at 
the edge of the pack ice, is important for plankton production and plankton-feeding fish (ACIA 
). In general, arctic marine ecosystems are relatively simple, productivity and biodiversity 
are low, and species are long-lived and slow growing (ACIA ). 

The simplicity of arctic marine ecosystems, together with the specialization of many of its 
species, makes them potentially quite sensitive to environmental changes (ACIA ). 

. Polar bear-ice relationships - general 

Polar bears are distributed throughout the ice-covered waters of the circumpolar Arctic (Stirling 
), and are reliant on the sea ice as their primary habitat (Amstrup ). Polar bears depend 
on sea ice as a substrate to hunt and eat seals, seek mates and breed, make long-distance 
movements to terrestrial maternity denning areas, or for maternity denning (Stirling and 

 



 


Derocher ). Polar bear distributions are not uniform throughout the Arctic, but depend upon 
the type of sea ice and its location and extent over time, availability of prey, and reproductive 
status (Durner et al. ). Mauritzen et al. (b) indicated that habitat use by female polar 
bears during certain seasons may involve a trade-off between selecting habitats with abundant 
prey availability versus the use of safer, retreat habitats with less prey. Their findings indicate 
that population distribution may not be solely a reflection of prey availability, but instead other 
factors may operate to influence distributions. 

The sea ice environment is highly dynamic and follows annual patterns of expansion and 
contraction. Movements of sea ice are related to winds, currents, and seasonal temperature 
fluctuations that promote its formation and degradation. A number of systems exist to classify 
sea ice (NOAA ). These systems generally categorize the stage of development, form, 
concentration, and type of ice. Stirling et al. () defined seven types of sea-ice habitat and 
classified polar bear use of these ice types based on the presence of bears or tracks in order to 
determine habitat preferences. The seven types of sea ice were: stable fast ice with drifts; stable 
fast ice without drifts; floe edge ice; moving ice; continuous stable pressure ridges; coastal low 
level pressure ridges; and fiords and bays. In another assessment of polar bear - habitat 
relationships the authors categorized ice types/zones in Alaska as follows: pack ice; shore-fast 
ice; transition zone ice; and polynyas and leads (USFWS ). 

As reported by Stirling (), stable fast ice with drifts was suitable for ringed seal haul-out and 
birth lairs. This habitat is most prevalent in the mouths of bays and near coastlines or offshore 
islands because that is where the annual ice is most stable. Stable fast ice without drifts did not 
contain habitats preferred by ringed seals for constructing birth lairs and maintaining breathing 
holes with lower risk from predation. Floe edge habitat was suitable for bearded seals of all age 
and sex classes and non-breeding ringed seals. Moving ice shifting constantly because of wind 
and ocean currents was generally not thought to be stable enough to be suitable for ringed seal 
birth lair habitat (Wiig et al. ), though bearded seals of all age and sex classes and non- 
breeding ringed seals were generally abundant in this habitat and some ringed seals have been 
observed to occupy and pup in offshore active ice environs. Continuous heavy pressure ice was 

 



 


a compressed aggregate of rough, stable ice that was generally unsuitable for seals. Coastal 
pressure ridges accumulate drifted snow and they were noted as being suitable for ringed seal 
haul-out and birth lairs. Fiords and bays such as in Prince Albert Sound, Victoria Island, NWT, 
Canada, developed snow-drifted pressure ridges and cracks that refroze and remained flat, and 
were used by ringed seals for birth lairs and breathing holes (Smith and Stirling ). Although 
ringed seals were abundant polar bears were not commonly seen in fiords and deep bays such as 
Prince Albert Sound (Stirling et al. ) and in East and Northwest Greenland. Fiord and large 
deep bay habitat are not widespread in the Arctic. Polar bears were not evenly distributed over 
these sea-ice habitats, but concentrated on the floe ice edge, on stable fast ice with drifts, areas of 
moving ice (Stirling , Stirling et al.l). 

As reported by USFWS (), pack ice consists of annual and multi-year ice that is in constant 
motion caused by winds and currents. Pack ice is used by polar bears for traveling, feeding and 
denning and it is the primary summer habitat for Alaska polar bears. Shore-fast ice is ice that 
has become grounded near shore and may include pressure ridges caused by the movement of 
pack ice against it. Shorefast ice is important in the spring for feeding on seal pups, traveling, 
and occasionally denning. The transition zone is located seaward of the shore-fast ice and may 
be highly dynamic depending on environmental conditions. It is characterized by lead systems 
(linear openings) that open and close between the active pack ice and shore-fast ice. The 
transitions zone is important in the winter and spring for feeding and travel. Leads and polynyas 
(nonlinear openings) that are predictable in their location are called recurring polnyas and lead 
systems. Open water at recurring leads and polynyas attract seals and other marine mammals and 
are used by polar bears for feeding, especially during the winter. Ephemeral leads and polynyas 
are used opportunistically by polar bears for hunting. 

. Polar bear - ice relations - specific 

Stirling et al. (, ) observed a strong preference by polar bears in the Beaufort Sea for 
the floe edge, fast ice with drifts, and moving ice with less than / ice cover. The preference is 


 



 


almost certainly because these areas are where seals are most accessible to polar bears for 
hunting. 

Polynyas a preferred habitat of polar bears, represent areas of increased biological productivity at 
all trophic levels, especially when they occur over continental shelves (Stirling ). Recurring 
polynyas may be preferred habitat for ringed seals because their location is predictable, they 
afford resting areas, and may operate as a barrier to escape predation from polar bears (Stirling 
). In the Canadian Arctic, polar bears concentrate each year at the North Water poiynya in 
Smith Sound and northwestern Baffin Bay, and at smaller permanent polynyas at Cardigan 
Strait-Hell Gate, Penny Strait-Queens Channel, and in the eastern entrance to Fury and Hecia 
Strait (Stirling ), Polar bears also concentrate at shore leads that may freeze and open where 
seals maintain their breathing holes (Stirling ), Changes in wind and current patterns or ice 
ablation and formation processes could alter the location and persistence of these polynyas 
(ACIA ). 

In the Viscount Melville Sound area Messier et al. () and Ferguson et al. () found that 
ringed seals occurred at lower densities than in most other areas of polar bear habitat from 
Alaska east to West Greenland (Stirling and Oritsland ) possibly because there is greater 
proportion of multi-year ice in this area, which is less preferred by ringed seals. Ringed seals 
tend to be concentrated along tidal cracks and pressure ridges that parallel the island coastlines 
(Kingsley et al. ). By contrast, in the southern Beaufort Sea, the annual ice that 
predominates is more dynamic and allows a greater amount of sunlight into the water column to 
support primary productivity. Consequently the Southern Beaufort Sea has more variable ice 
habitats and supports higher densities and numbers of ringed seals and polar bears (Stirling et al. 
, Kingsley et al. , Stirling and Oritsland ). 

Given the differences in ringed seal densities, polar bears in the Beaufort Sea may spend more 
time in winter actively foraging, and those in the Viscount Melville Sound area may spend more 
time resting and conserving energy. Messier et al. () reported that long periods of 
“sheltering” were common among bears wintering in Viscount Melville Sound, and attributed 

 



 


this behavior to the poor foraging conditions there. Another factor may be the greater 
predictability of the foraging conditions in the stable ice of the High Arctic. With less change in 
the character of the sea-ice after freeze-up, polar bears may be able to determine where the best 
hunting areas will be in early winter. Predictable sea-ice conditions could help bears minimize 
midwinter searching for good hunting areas and maximize benefits of sheltering (Ferguson et al. 
). The fluctuating sea-ice condition in regions like the Beaufort Sea or Baffin Bay, 
however, may require modifications of foraging strategy from month to month or even day to 
day during break-up, freeze-up, or periods of strong winds (Ferguson et al. ). Polar bears 
are adaptable enough to modify their foraging patterns for the extreme range of sea-ice scenarios 
