Atmospheric carbon dioxide amounts are expected to double over pre-industrial 
levels in this century. Current emissions growth is on track to quadruple atmos- 
pheric carbon dioxide. 

Long Time to Draw Down Excess Carbon Dioxide (virtually certain) 

We know that it takes decades to centuries to produce a large buildup of green- 
house gases. Much less appreciated is that a “return to normal” from high carbon 
dioxide levels would require many additional centuries. 

Global Surface Warming Over the Past Century (virtually certain) 

The measured th century warming in the surface temperature records of over 
one degree fahrenheit is undoubtedly real. Its cause is very probably due mostly to 
added greenhouse gases. No other hypothesis is nearly as credible. 

Future Global-Mean Surface Warming (very probable ) 

For the middle of the next century, global-mean surface warming is estimated to 
be in the range of  to ° fahrenheit, with continued increases for the rest of the 
century. The largest uncertainty is due to the effects of clouds. 

Increased Summertime Heat Index (very probable) 

In warm, moist subtropical climates the summertime heat index effect is expected 
to magnify the warming impact felt by humans by an additional %. 

Rise in Global Mean Sea Level (very probable) 

A further rise of - inches in mean sea level by the year  is estimated due 
to thermal expansion of warmer sea water. Continued sea level rise is expected for 
many centuries, probably to much higher levels. 

Summer Mid-Continental Dryness and Warming (probable) 

Model studies predict a marked decrease of soil moisture over summer mid-lati- 
tude continents. This projection remains sensitive to model assumptions. 

Increased Tropical Storm Intensities (probable) 

A warmer, wetter atmosphere will likely lead to increased intensities of tropical 
storms, such as hurricanes. We still know little about changes in the number of hur- 
ricanes. 

Increased Numbers of Weather Disturbances ( uncertain) 

Although many speak of more large-scale storms, there is still no solid evidence 
for this. 

Global and Regional Details of the Next  Years (uncertain) 

The predicted warming up to now is not yet large compared to natural climate 
fluctuations. On these shorter time scales, the natural fluctuations can artificially 
reduce or enhance apparent measured greenhouse warming signals, especially so on 
regional scales. 

Even though these uncertainties are daunting, important advances have already 
been achieved in observing, understanding, and modeling the climate. Today’s mod- 
els can simulate many aspects of climate and its changes. Although major progress 
has been made, much more needs to be learned. More efforts are needed world-wide 
to provide a long-term climate measuring system. Focussed research into climate 
processes must be continued. Theories must be formulated and re-evaluated in the 
light of newer data. Climate modeling efforts must receive resources that are in bal- 
ance with the broader scientific programs. 

The U.S. Global Change Research Program has already made important progress 
on these fronts. However, patient, sustained efforts will be required in the years 
ahead. 

Through long-term research and measurements, uncertainties will decrease and 
confidence for predicting climate changes will increase. 

In summary, the greenhouse warming effect is quite real. The state of the science 
is strong, but important uncertainties remain. Finally, it is a “virtually certain” bet 



 


that this problem will refuse to go away, no matter what is said or done about it 
over the next five years. 

Thank you, Mr. Chairman. That concludes my testimony. 

The Chairman. Thank you, Dr. Mahlman. 

Dr. Trenberth, welcome. 

STATEMENT OF DR. KEVIN E. TRENBERTH, DIRECTOR, 

CLIMATE ANALYSIS SECTION, NATIONAL CENTER FOR 

ATMOSPHERIC RESEARCH 

Dr. Trenberth. Thank you, Senator. 

I recently served on the National Research Council Panel that 
produced the report that has been referred to, this report here on 
reconciling observations of global temperature change. And I was 
asked in my comments to especially address the findings of this 
particular Committee. 

The first thing I would say is that the mere need for this report 
highlights the fact that we do not have a global climate observing 
system. Most of the observations that are used for climate purposes 
are made for weather or aviation purposes. The observations are 
made for purposes other than for climate. 

Heroic efforts are, therefore, needed, it turns out, to reconstruct 
exactly what has happened even in the instrumental period, let 
alone what has happened in the last , years. 

What we do conclude in this report is that in the past  years, 
global mean surface temperatures have been rising at a rate as 
large as any that has been observed within the historical record. 

The surface temperatures have increased. A central number I 
would put on it is about . degrees Fahrenheit over the past cen- 
tury.  is the warmest year, as has been mentioned several 
times, and the ’s is the warmest decade. And melting glaciers 
and rising sea level provides additional support that these effects 
are real. 

Now this rapid warming at the earth’s surface is in contrast, as 
John Christy has mentioned, to the trend in the satellite record, 
which only began though in . Now the satellite record meas- 
ures the temperature of about the lowest five miles of the atmos- 
phere. It is not measuring the same thing as the temperature of 
the surface. It is an indirect measurement, and it is inferred from 
radiation that is emitted by oxygen molecules and it is sampled by 
a microwave sound unit. 

So these are measurements in the microwave frequencies, and 
these measurements are made aboard polar orbiting satellites. 

Before I go on to summarize some aspects of the temperature 
record, I would emphasize a point which has been made by others: 
Temperature changes are only part of the total picture, and that 
the global mean temperature, I think of more as an indicator that 
something extraordinary is happening now. It is a little bit like the 
canary in a cage in a coal mine. It shows that something extraor- 
dinary is happening, but it has very little practical significance lo- 
cally. And other changes such as rainfall and droughts, and fires 
such as in your own state, Senator, are probably of much more 
practical significance. 

Now in my written testimony, I summarize firstly, the surface 
temperature record; second, the radiosonde balloon-borne tempera- 

