
Dr. Mahlman. But on the other hand, I think it is important for 
all of us to recognize that there are contrarians and there are also 
exaggerators. OK? And both are essentially, in my view, making 
points because of agendas that are somewhat independent of sci- 
entific analysis, and you can say, “Well, I do not see that as nec- 
essarily a new phenomenon on Capitol Hill.” But it 

[Laughter.] 

Dr. Mahlman [continuing]. Is part of human nature to have peo- 
ple torque the facts a little bit to hustle whatever their position is. 
And, as you know, they say, “That is part of the policy debate,” but 
it is also part of the values conflicts and everything else. 

I have gotten so that I do not get all that concerned about it, be- 
cause I think it is part of the process of dealing with a problem 
that is extraordinarily difficult. Lots of folks see that a very special 
thing is going to get hurt by mitigation or is going to get hurt by 
climate change. I thus consider this to be the real greenhouse 
warming controversy. 

Senator Kerry. Governments came together in Kyoto to adopt a 
policy, a response, and hopefully this policy does not represent 
grinding of a particular axe, but represents a reasonable approach 
in the middle. I do not think the Chairman or I or others want to 
adopt a policy we do not need to adopt. 

I do not have any industry axe to grind on one side or the other. 
I mean, I am trying to respond to what I see is a problem caused 



 


by human beings, which is increasing because of our unwillingness 
to reduce what we are doing that is causing it. Now, we have got 
to make a decision, because there is some money involved here. Do 
we need to reduce the level of emissions or do we not? Countries 
signed on in Kyoto to the notion that we do; that reducing emis- 
sions is a worthwhile goal. Does anybody disagree with that? Is it 
a worthwhile goal? 

Dr. Mahlman. I would like to comment. I was quoted in the New 
York Times before the Kyoto Conference. And I have written a 
paper in Science Magazine, you know, prior to Kyoto. 

At that time, I said that the best Kyoto could do would be to set 
up a small, but significant decrease in the rate of increase of car- 
bon dioxide in the atmosphere. And, this statement was somewhat 
controversial at the time. But the whole point was, that even Kyoto 
itself, if it were fully implemented, would still be nipping around 
the edges. 

Senator Kerry. Absolutely. 

Dr. Mahlman. And I said this not to demean the Kyoto process, 
but more or less to educate people that are probably going to be 
whittling away at this problem for the rest of the century. And 
Kyoto is kind of ground-zero, or maybe Rio was, of the process of 
what the world is going to do about it and how all of the hard 
issues can get worked out. 

And so, therefore, Kyoto, from the point of view of the problem, 
was a very small step; not a radical, the world is going off the edge 
if we implement the Kyoto Protocol. And so, the next question is, 
what will happen in the next round? 

Senator Kerry. Does anybody else want to add to that? Dr. 
Bradley, and then Dr. Watson. 

Dr. Bradley. I think it is clearly — there is a long ladder we have 
to climb. And Kyoto is, perhaps, just the first rung on that ladder, 
but it is an important step, because it forces governments through- 
out the world to recognize the problem and to take steps to address 
the problem. 

It is not going to solve the problem, but it — but just like the 
Montreal protocol, which began small and gradually made stronger 
and stronger steps, I think that is what is necessary in Kyoto. 

Senator Kerry. Dr. Trenberth. 

Dr. Trenberth. Well, the Kyoto Protocol is flawed, at least in 
some respects, especially insofar that it is not truly global, in terms 
of the agreements that exist. 

The important thing about it is that it would buy time. The esti- 
mate is that doubling of carbon dioxide would be delayed by about 
 years. And people then ask, “Is it worth buying that time?” 

And I think it, very strongly, is, because the climate is going to 
change, and every step we can take to buy that time provides us 
with better capabilities of planning for what is going to happen and 
for planning the adaptation that will be necessary to occur in the 
future. 

And so, I think it is a desirable first step, even if a flawed first 
step. 

Dr. Watson. Yes. I think it is quite clear that governments from 
around the world recognize that human induced climate change is 
a threat to society. And what we need is some first steps toward 



 


meeting the ultimate objective of the convention, which is Article 
Two, which calls for the stabilization of greenhouse gas concentra- 
tions in the atmosphere. 

They also recognize, and I agree, that it is very important to dif- 
ferentiate the responsibility between developing and developed 
countries. Energy is needed to alleviate poverty in developing coun- 
tries and for having economic development. 

But why is the Kyoto Protocol such an important first step? It 
will stimulate the development of new energy technologies. It will 
stimulate policy reform, both in developed and developing coun- 
tries. We will find better mechanisms, which will involve all sectors 
and an appropriate enabling government framework for technology 
transfer. And it will give us the chance to put these flexibility 
mechanisms in place. 

So, even though it is not a global convention, it does recognize, 
just like the Montreal Protocol did, that the developed world has 
the institutional, financial, and technical capability to take the first 
steps. 

As they take those first steps, we will see a flow of technology 
transfer, such that it will be in the best interest of China and India 
to also reduce their greenhouse gas emissions, and simultaneously 
to reduce their local air pollution and regional air pollution. 

So, I believe it is a very well founded first step, but clearly, at 
the end of the day, all countries will have to reduce their green- 
house gas emissions, if we are going to meet the ultimate objective 
of Article Two. There is no question. 

Senator Kerry. Well, I agree with that. I accept that. I think 
that the difficulty is that the current political formulation in the 
United States makes it difficult for us to embrace that first step, 
absent at least an acknowledgment by the developing countries 
that they are willing to adopt some measures. Tackling the prob- 
lem is going to be very complicated. 

You know, I was involved and I led the fight on the floor to try 
