
• What is known about the potential for, and costs and benefits of, and timeframe 
for reducing greenhouse gas emissions? 

• What are the most robust findings and key uncertainties regarding attribution 
of climate change and regarding model projections of: (i) future emissions of 
greenhouse gases and aerosols; (ii) future concentrations of greenhouse gases 
and aerosols; (iii) future changes in regional and global climate; (iv) regional 



 


and global impacts of climate change; and (v) costs and benefits of mitigation 
and adaptation options? 

I would like to briefly summarize the current state of scientific knowledge con- 
cerning climate change. 

PART II: Present State of Knowledge 

Overview 

The overwhelming majority of scientific experts recognize that scientific uncer- 
tainties exist, but still believe that human-induced climate change is inevitable. In- 
deed, during the last few years, many parts of the world have suffered major heat- 
waves, floods, droughts and extreme weather events leading to significant economic 
losses and loss of life. While individual events cannot be directly linked to human- 
induced climate change, the frequency and magnitude of these types of events are 
expected to increase in a warmer world. 

The question is not whether climate will change in response to human activities, 
but rather where (regional patterns), when (the rate of change) and by how much 
(magnitude). It is also clear that climate change will adversely effect human health 
(particularly vector-borne diseases ), ecological systems (particularly forests and coral 
reefs), and socio-economic sectors, including agriculture, forestry, fisheries, water re- 
sources, and human settlements, with developing countries being the most vulner- 
able. These are the fundamental conclusions of a careful and objective analysis of 
all relevant scientific, technical and economic information by thousands of experts 
from the appropriate fields of science from academia, governments, industry and en- 
vironmental organizations from around the world under the auspices of the United 
Nations International Panel on Climate Change. The good news is, however, that 
the majority of energy experts believe that significant reductions in greenhouse gas 
emissions are technically feasible due to an extensive array of technologies and pol- 
icy measures in the energy supply and energy demand sectors at little or no cost 
to society. In addition, changes in land-use practices can also reduce net carbon 
emissions cost-effectively. 

However, decision-makers should realize that the atmospheric residence/adjust- 
ment time of carbon dioxide, the major anthropogenic greenhouse gas, is more than 
a century, which means that if policy formulation waits until all scientific uncertain- 
ties are resolved, and carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases are responsible for 
changing the Earth’s climate as projected by all climate models, the time to reverse 
the human-induced changes in climate and the resulting environmental damages, 
would not be years or decades, but centuries to millennia, even if all emissions of 
greenhouse gases were terminated, which is clearly not practical. 

This testimony briefly describes the current state of understanding of the Earth’s 
climate system and the influence of human activities; the vulnerability of human 
health, ecological systems, and socio-economic sectors to climate change; and ap- 
proaches to reduce emissions and enhance sinks. 

The Earth’s Climate System: The Influence of Human Activities 

The Earth’s climate has been relatively stable (global temperature changes of less 
than °C over a century) during the present interglacial (i.e., the past , years). 
During this time modem society has evolved, and, in many cases, successfully adapt- 
ed to the prevailing local climate and its natural variability. However, the Earth’s 
climate is now changing. The Earth’s surface temperature this century is as warm 
or warmer than any other century during the last thousand years; the Earth’s sur- 
face temperature has increased by between . and . degree centigrade over the 
last century, with land areas warming more than the oceans; and the last few dec- 
ades have been the hottest this century. Indeed, the three warmest years during the 
last one hundred years all occurred in the s and the twelve warmest years dur- 
ing the last one hundred years all occurred since . In addition, there is evidence 
of changes in sea level, that glaciers are retreating world-wide, that Arctic sea ice 
is thinning, precipitation patterns are changing, and that the incidence of extreme 
weather events is increasing in some parts of the world. Not only is there evidence 
of a change in climate at tbe global level, but there is observational evidence that 
the climate of the U.S. is changing in a manner consistent with that predicted by 
climate models (I have specifically mentioned the U.S. because it has a large geo- 
graphic area and a long accurate set of weather observations against which model 
simulations can be evaluated): increased temperatures (day and night), more intense 
rainfall events (defined as two inches within a  hour period), increased precipita- 
tion in winter, and less day-day variability in temperature. 

The atmospheric concentrations of greenhouse gases have increased because of 
human activities, primarily due to the combustion of fossil fuels (coal, oil and gas), 



 


deforestation and agricultural practices, since the beginning of the pre-industrial 
era around : carbon dioxide by nearly %, methane by more than a factor of 
two, and nitrous oxide by about %. Their concentrations are higher now than at 
any time during the last , years, the period for which there are reliable ice- 
core data, and probably significantly longer. In addition, the atmospheric concentra- 
tions of sulfate aerosols have also increased. Greenhouse gases tend to warm the 
atmosphere and, in some regions, primarily in the Northern hemisphere, aerosols 
tend to cool the atmosphere. 

Theoretical models that take into account the observed increases in the atmos- 
pheric concentrations of greenhouse gases and sulfate aerosols simulate the ob- 
served changes in surface temperature and the vertical distribution of temperature 
quite well. This, and other information, suggests that human activities are impli- 
cated in the observed changes in the Earth’s climate. In fact, the observed changes 
in climate cannot be explained by natural phenomena alone (e.g., changes in solar 
output and volcanic emissions). 

Future emissions of greenhouse gases and the sulfate aerosol precursor, sulfur di- 
oxide, are sensitive to the evolution of governance structures world-wide, whether 
the current inequitable distribution of wealth continues or decreases, changes in 
population and gross domestic product, the rate of diffusion of new technologies into 
the market place, production and consumption patterns, land-use practices, energy 
intensity, and the price and availability of energy. Most projections suggest that 
greenhouse gas concentrations will increase significantly during the next century in 
the absence of policies specifically designed to address the issue of climate change. 
Indeed, the recent IPCC special report on emissions scenarios reported, for example, 
carbon dioxide emissions from the combustion of fossil fuels are projected to range 
from bout  to  GtC per year in the year : compared to current emissions 
of about . GtC per year. Such a range of emissions would mean that the atmos- 
pheric concentration of carbon dioxide would increase from today’s level of  ppmv 
(parts per million by volume) to between  and  ppmmv by . It should 
be noted that two major oil companies, Shell and British Petroleum, have suggested 
that the mix of energy sources could change radically, with renewable energy 
sources (solar, wind and modern biomass) accounting for as much as half of all en- 
ergy produced by the middle of the next century. Such a future would be consistent 
with the lower projections of greenhouse gas emissions and would clearly eliminate 
the highest projections of greenhouse gases from being realized, but this vision of 
a future world will not occur without policy reform and significantly enhanced pub- 
lic and private sector energy R&D programs. 

While the recent IPCC special report on emissions scenarios (SRES ) reported 
similar projected emissions for carbon dioxide to the  projections, it differed in 
one important aspect from the  projections, in-so-far-as the projected emissions 
of sulfur dioxide are much lower. This has important implications for future projec- 
tions of temperature changes, because sulfur dioxide emissions lead to the formation 
of sulfate aerosols in the atmosphere, which as stated earlier can partially offset the 
warming effect of the greenhouse gases. 

Based on the range of climate sensitivities (an increase in the equilibrium global 
mean surface temperature of .-.°C for a doubling of atmospheric carbon dioxide 
concentrations) and plausible ranges of greenhouse gas and sulfur dioxide emissions 
(SRES ), climate models project that the global mean surface temperature could 
increase by  to °C by . These projected global-average temperature changes 
would be greater than recent natural fluctuations and would also occur at a rate 
significantly faster than observed changes over the last , years. These long- 
