(Ferguson et al. ). 

Polar bears must move throughout the year to adjust to the changing distribution of sea ice and 
.seals (Stirling , USFWS ). In some areas, like Hudson Bay and James Bay, bears 
remain on land when the sea ice retreats in the spring, where they must fast for several months 
(up to eight months for pregnant females) before freeze-up again in the fall (Stirling , 
Derocher el al. ). Other populations unconstrained by land masses, such as those in the 
Barents, Chukchi and Beaufort Seas, spend each summer on the multiyear ice of the polar basin 
(Derocher et al. ). In island areas such as the Canadian Arctic archipelago or Svalbard and 
Franz Josef Land archipelagos, bears stay with the ice most of the time, but in some years they 
may spend up to a few months on land (Mauritzen et al. ). Most populations use terrestrial 
habitat partially or exclusively for maternity denning, therefore, females must adjust their 
movements in order to access land at the appropriate time (Stirling , Derocher et al. ). 

Polar bears appear to have good navigational ability and are able to return to previously used 
areas after long distances of active and passive transport (Mauritzen et al. a, Amstrup ). 
As radiotelemetry studies have shown, female polar bears show only general fidelity to seasonal 
feeding areas (Ferguson et al. , Amstrup et al. b). A quantitative analysis of the 
movements of female polar bears over a multi-year period in the Beaufort Sea has made it 
possible to develop models to predict polar bear distribution (Dumer et al. ). These models 
may be useful in making short-term predictions of polar bear distribution and abundance and 


 



 


assist in predicting and responding to initial impacts from threats such as oil spills, and longer 
term changes associated with ice regime changes (Durner et al. ). 

. Variations in sea ice and polar bear 

Yearly sea ice changes in response to environmental factors may in turn have consequences on 
the distribution and productivity of polar bears as well as their prey. In the southern Beaufort 
Sea heavy ice conditions in the mid-s and mid-s caused significant declines in 
productivity of ringed seals (Stirling ). Each event lasted approximately three years and 
caused similar declines in the natality of polar bears and survival of subadults, after which 
reproductive success and survival of both species increased again. The changes in the sea ice 
environment, and their consequent effects on polar bears, are demonstrable in parallel 
fluctuations in the mean ages of polar bears killed each year by Inuit hunters (Stirling ). 

Telemetry data from radio-collared female polar bears confirm that individuals occupy home 
ranges (or “multi-annual activity areas”) which they seldom leave (Amstrup ). The size of a 
polar bear’s home range is determined, at least in part, by the annual pattern of freeze-up and 
break-up of the sea ice, and therefore by the distance a bear must travel to obtain access to prey 
(Stirling , Durner et al. ). A bear that has consistent access to ice, leads, and seals may 
have a small home range, while bears in areas such as the Barents, Greenland, Chukchi, Bering, 
or Baffin seas may have to move many hundreds of kilometers each year to remain in contact 
with sea ice from which they can hunt (Bom et al. , Mauritzen et al. , Ferguson et al. 
, Amstrup , Wiig et al. ). Figure  depicts population boundaries based on 
differing movement patterns. 

B. Maternal Denning Habitat 

Throughout their range, most pregnant female polar bears excavate dens in snow located on land 
in the fall- early winter period (Harington , Lentfer and Hensel , Ramsay and Stirling 


 



 


, Amstrup and Gardner ), The only known exceptions are in Western and Southern 
Hudson Bay where polar bears excavate earthen dens and later reposition into adjacent snow 
drifts (Jonkel et ai , Richardson et al. b), and in the southern Beaufort Sea where a 
portion of the population dens in snow caves located on pack and shorefast ice. Successful 
denning by polar bears requires accumulation of sufficient snow for den construction and 
maintenance, Adequate and timely snowfall combined with winds to cause snow accumulation 
leeward of topographic features create denning habitat (Harington ). Polar bears give birth 
in the dens during midwinter (Kostyan , Harington , Ramsay and Dunbrack ). 
Survival and growth of cubs depends on the warmth and stable environment within the maternal 
den (Blix and Lentfer ). Family groups emerge from dens in March and April when cubs 
are approximately three months old. 

Distribution of Denning. Most polar bear dens occur on land in “core areas" of each 
populations’ range (Harington ). Large numbers of pregnant female polar bears repeatedly 
and predictably concentrate their denning within these relatively small geographic regions. The 
location of these “core” denning areas are well known and include particular islands of the 
Svalbard Archipelago north ofNorway (Lona , Larsen ), Franz Josef Land, Novaya 
Zemlya, and Wrangel Island and Herald Island in Russia (Uspenski and Chemyavski , 
Uspenski and Kistchinski ), and the westcoast of Hudson Bay, (Harington , Jonkel et 
al. , Stirling et al. b, Ramsay and Andriashek , Ramsay and Stirling ). In 
portions of their range, polar bears den in a more diffuse pattern with dens scattered over large 
areas at low density (Lentfer and Hensel , Stirling and Andriashek , Amstrup , 
Amstrup and Gardner , Messier et al. , Born , Ferguson et al. a, Durner et al, 
, ). Areas of known low density denning occur on the north slope of Alaska (Lentfer 
and Hensel , Amstrup , Amstrup and Gardner , Durner et al. , ), 
Chutotka Peninsula of Russia (Stishov b, Stishov et al. , Stishov ), East and 
Northwest Greenland (Bom ), and Banks Island, Simpson Peninsula, eastern Southhampton 
Island, eastern Baffin Island and other less definable areas in Canada (Messier et al. , Bom 
, Ferguson et al. a). 


 



 


Habitat characteristics of denning areas vary and include the rugged mountains and fiord lands of 
the Svalbard archipelago, or the large islands north of the Russian coast (Uspenski and 
Chernyavski , Lono , Uspenski and Kistchinski , Larsen ), low relief 
topography characterized by tundra with riverine banks and coastal bluffs of Hudson Bay 
(Ramsay and Andriashek , Ramsay and Stirling ) and North Slope of Alaska (Amstrup 
, Amstrup and Gardner , Durner et al. , ), and offshore pack ice pressure 
ridge habitat. The common characteristic of all denning habitat is topographic features that catch 
snow in the autumn and early winter (Durner et al. ). The northern Alaskan coast gets 
minimal snowfall. However, the landscape is so flat and snow is blown continuously throughout 
the winter creating drifts in areas of relief. Most polar bear dens occur relatively near the coast 
with the exception of Western Hudson Bay, where females regularly den  to   km inland to 
traditional denning areas (Kolenosky and Prevett , Stirling and Ramsay ). 


Fidelity to Denning Locales. Amstrup and Gamer () followed  females for up to four 
maternity dens. Bears that denned once on pack ice were more likely to den on pack ice than on 
land in subsequent years, and vice versa. Similarly, bears were faithful to general geographic 
areas. Those that denned once in the eastern half of the Alaskan coast were more likely to den 
there than to the west in subsequent years. When all years were considered, denning polar bears 
preferred some areas, but no areas were used by collared bears in all years. Weather, ice 
conditions, and prey availability, all of which varied annually, probably determined where bears 
denned. Those annual variations and the long-distance movements of polar bears (Amstrup et al. 
, Amstrup et al. b; Gamer et al, ) make seasonal recurrence at exactly the same 
location unlikely. 

The only other region where data are available on fidelity to denning areas is Hudson Bay. 
There, pregnant females initiate their over winter denning period in earthen dens they occupy in 
summer. During winter, they burrow into adjacent snow drifts (Watts and Hansen ), There 
was greater fidelity to local areas than in the Beaufort Sea, but site-specific philopatry was not 
apparent (Ramsay and Stirling ). 


 



 


Despite general fidelity to local areas, the overall distribution of denning along the west coast of 
Hudson Bay shifted inland over a -year period (Ramsay and Stirling ). Because bears are 
able to return to the same area, the reason for the shift is not clear but may be related to adult 
males occupying the areas nearest the coast and precluding use by females. A similar shift 
appears to be occurring in the Beaufort Sea region as well. In the southern Beaufort Sea a trend 
