


 


Global warming is expected to decrease the thickness of multi-year sea ice and therefore increase 
the rate of movement of the ice flow (Derocher et al. ). Since polar bears catch very few 
seals in open water, sea ice is the essential platform from which they hunt (Stirling , 

USFWS , Derocher et al. ). 

Polar bear body temperature will stay fairly constant at walking speeds up to  km per hour 
(about . mph) at air temperatures ranging from -° C to -° C (approximately -° F to -° 
F), (Oritisland  p. , Stirling  p. ). After that, however, body temperature begins 
to climb rapidly, until at about  km per hour (. mph), it is about ° C (° F), which is 
equivalent to a fever in humans (ritisland  p. , Stirling  p. ). In addition, to 
move at this relatively slow speed, a polar bear must bum  times more energy than it would if 
it were lying down (Hurst et al. a, Hurst etal. b, Stirling ). These factors explain 
why a polar bear’s average lumbering gait, which it can maintain for hours, is only about . km 
per hour (. mph) (Hurst et al. a, Hurst etal. b, Stirling ). 

Polar bears are inefficient walkers (and mnners), expending about twice the average energy use 
of other mammals when walking (Best , Hurst et al a, Hurst et al. b). The 
inefficiency of polar bear locomotion likely explains why polar bears are not known to hunt 
musk oxen (Ovibos moschalus) or snow geese(Anser caenilescens), potential prey species that 
co-occur with the polar bear in many areas (Lunn and Stirling ). The energy needed to catch 
such species would almost certainly exceed the amount of energy a kill would provide (Stirling 
). 

Polar bears tend to walk against the movement of ice in order to adjust their movements to 
habitat suitability rather than seek areas of fixed location (Mauritzen et al. a). Increased 
rates and extent of ice movement will require additional efforts and energy expenditure for bears 
to maintain their position near preferred habitats (Derocher et al. ). Ferguson et al. (  ) 
found that polar bears inhabiting areas of highly dynamic ice had much larger activity areas and 
movement rates compared to those populations inhabiting more stable, persistent ice habitat. 

This finding suggests adaptation by polar bears to a fluid or moving environment. However, 


 



 


even in the areas of highly dynamic ice movement, there was predictability in inter-annual 
location of the habitat (Mauritzen et al. b). The areal extent, timing (rate of movement) and 
distances of ice retraction in recent years in certain areas of the Arctic brings to question the 
ability of polar bears to adapt to this rapidly changing landscape. If the ice moves more quickly 
or becomes more fragmented, polar bears would likely have to use more energy to maintain 
contact with the ice and these increased energetic costs could result in lower survival and 
recruitment. (Derocher et al. ). During summer periods the remaining ice in much of the 
central Arctic is now positioned away from more productive continental shelf waters and over 
much deeper, less productive waters, such as in the Beaufort and Chukchi Seas of Alaska. If the 
width of leads or extent of open-water increases, the transit time for bears and the need to swim 
or to travel will increase (Derocher et al. ). Polar bears are capable of swimming great 
distances, but exhibit a strong preference for sea ice (Derocher et al. ). However, polar 
bears will also abandon sea ice for land once the sea-ice concentration drops below % 
(Derocher et al. , Stirling et al, ). Researchers believe this is likely due to the increased 
energetic costs of locomotion since moving through highly fragmented sea ice is difficult and 
likely more energy intensive than walking over consolidated sea ice (Derocher et al. ). 
Derocher et al. () suggest that as habitat patch sizes decrease, available food resourees are 
likely to decline, resulting in reduced residency time and thus increased movement rates. 

Although data on the energetic costs of swimming are not available, it is likely that swimming is 
more costly than walking (Hurst et al.  a, Hurst et al.  b) even though walking is 
relatively energy intensive for polar bears compared to other mammals (Best ). Subadult 
polar bears are more vulnerable than adults to environmental effects (Taylor et al. ). 
Observations of density dependent and density independent effects on populations of other 
marine mammals indicate that environmental effects typically manifest as reductions in annual 
breeding success and reduced subadult survival rates (Eberhardt and Siniff ). Therefore the 
relative impacts of an increased need for travel, and corresponding energy expenditures, will 
disproportionately impact younger animals (Derocher et al. ). 


 



 


Another possible impact is that as movement of sea ice increases and areas of unconsolidated ice 
increase, some bears may lose contact with the main body of ice and drift into unsuitable habitat 
from which it may be difficult to return (Derocher et al. ). This already occurs in some areas 
such as Southwest Greenland and offshore from the island of Newfoundland (Derocher et al. 
). Increased frequency of such events could negatively impact survival rates and contribute 
to population declines (Derocher et al. ). The earlier-than-normal break-up of ice in Hudson 
Bay in  may have contributed to an extremely rare extralimital sighting of a polar bear at 
Burnett Lake in Saskatchewan at ° ’ N, ° ’ W (Goodyear ). 

Space-use patterns of polar bears differ widely both within and among populations (Derocher et 
al. ). Amstrup et al. () and Taylor et al. (b) found that space-use patterns were not 
substantially different between males and females although there is not much data on the space- 
use patterns of males, Due to these differences, impacts from climate change on populations will 
likely show large geographic variation and may also impact individual bears in different ways 
(Derocher et al. ). 

b. Polar bear distribution changes and access to prey 

In Western Hudson Bay, break-up of the annual ice occurs approximately . weeks earlier than 
it did  years ago (Stirling et al. ), reducing the amount of time that bears are able to feed 
on seals during late spring and early summer, the most important time of the year for feeding 
purposes (Derocher et al. ). A highly significant relationship between break-up of the sea ice 
and condition of the bears when they come ashore has been determined (Stirling et al. ). 
Bears that arrive ashore earlier have foregone feeding opportunities and consequently have lower 
fat reserves required for a -month open water fasting period (Derocher et al. ). Declining 
reproductive rates, subadult survival, and body mass (weights) have resulted from the 
progressively earlier break-up of the sea ice caused by an increase in spring temperatures 
(Stirling et al. , Derocher et al. ). 


 



 


Stirling et al. () found a statistical correlation between year and breakup date which was just 
below the accepted level. However, that was updated in Stirling et al. (, p. ) as follows: 
"These results are consistent with a significant trend toward earlier breakup in the total area 
occupied through the winter by the Western Hudson Bay bear population (r = ., df = , p = 
.).” In years of large ice extent, the date of break-up tended to be later while the date of 
freeze-up was earlier, and conversely in years with relatively low ice extent. The -year period 
- revealed a trend of earlier spring breakup that approached statistical significance 
(Stirling et al. ). The earlier breakup was probably due to spring air temperatures in the 
region warming at a rate of .-.° C per decade since  (Skinner et al. ). There was no 
trend for the timing of freeze-up and consequently the increase in the number of ice-free days 
was due to the trend for an earlier break-up (Stirling et al. , Gough et al. ). 

The earlier spring breakup was highly correlated with the mean dates on which telemetry 
collared female polar bears came ashore (Stirling et al. ). Between  and , female 
bears with radio collars came ashore an average of . days after break-up, indicating that they 
remained on the ice to hunt seals well after a significant reduction in total ice cover (Stirling et 
al. ). 

Stirling et al. () reported a significant decline in body condition (weights) of both male and 
female adult polar bears since the s in Western Hudson Bay, which was interrupted by 
improved condition in  and , They also found a statistically significant relationship 
over the  year study between the date of break-up, body condition of the adult females coming 
ashore and natality (Stirling et al. ), Earlier break-up dates related to poorer body condition 
of females coming on shore and resulted in lower natality rates (Stirling et al. ). Adult 
female polar bears in the study showed a strong fidelity to specific terrestrial areas that took 
precedence over remaining on drifting ice. A positive relationship between body mass of 
females with cubs and survival of cubs was also established (Derocher and Stirling , ). 
The survival of cubs from when they left their dens in early March to the following August- 
September when the radio-collared females and accompanying cubs were re-sighted also 
