of the length of the life time reproductive period ( years). Based on these calculations, the 
projected period for  generation was calculated at  years and the projected period for  
generations was calculated as  years. 

For other species evaluated for listing as threatened, such as the Yellowstone cutthroat trout 
(Oncorhynchus clarki bouvieri), the status assessment report (May et al. ) considered the 
“foreseeable future” to be  to  generations, depending on the productivity of the environment. 
For the greater sage grouse {Cenirocercus urophasianus) the status review agreed by consensus 
that given all of the uncertainties, a reasonable timeframe for “foreseeable future” for the 
threatened definition was approximately  to  years [approximately  greater sage-grouse 
generations or  sagebrush habitat regeneration cycles( FR )]. These time frames were 
considered reasonable and appropriate for each status review as the time frame is long enough to 
take into account multi-generational dynamics of life-history and ecological adaptation, yet short 
enough to incorporate social and political change that affects species management. 

 



 


In this status review we have adopted the three generation limit from the lUCN Red List criteria 
for analysis. Given the lUCN criteria, the life-history and population dynamics of polar bears, 
documented changes to date in both multi-year and annual sea ice, and the direction of projected 
rates of change of sea ice in future decades, we chose  years as the “foreseeable future”. 

We examined each of the listing factors in the context of present-day distribution of polar bear. 
We incorporate by reference published information on each of the listing factors. The evaluation 
of the five factors with respect to polar bear populations is presented below. 


A. Present or Threatened Destruction, Modification, or Curtailment of the 
Species’ Habitat or Range 


. Arctic Climate Change- Overview 


Recently, two comprehensive reports prepared by panels of leading scientists have been 
published that describe the current state of climate change globally and the impact on the Arctic 
specifically. The first report, the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Changes, Climate Change 
: The Scientific Basis (IPCC ), is a detailed assessment of current and predicted future 
climates around the globe. The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) was 
established by World Meterological Organization and United Nations Environment Programme 
to assess scientific, technical and socio-economic information relevant for the understanding of 
climate change, its potential impacts and options for adaptation and mitigation. The other 
document, Arctic Climate Impact Assessment (ACIA ), addresses the changes that will 
likely occur in the Arctic and their consequences. The ACIA report was an international project 
of the Arctic Council and the International Arctic Science Committee (lASC), to evaluate and 
synthesize knowledge on climate variability, climate change, and increased ultraviolet radiation 
and their consequences. This assessment was prepared over a period of five years by an 


 



 


international team of over  scientists, other experts, and knowledgeable members of the 
indigenous communities. Shorter overview of observational evidence of Arctic change, in 
addition to changes in sea ice including shrinking glaciers, thawing permafrost, and Arctic 
greening, are given by Morison et ai, (), Sturm et al. () and by Comiso and Parkinson 
(), and Parkinson (in press). 


Observed Changes in Arctic Sea Ice 

Sea ice is the defining characteristic of the marine Arctic (ACIA ). It is the primary method 
through which the Arctic exerts leverage on global climate, by mediating the exchange of 
radiation, sensible heat, and momentum between the atmosphere and the ocean (ACIA ). 
This section describes observed changes in Arctic sea ice over the past several decades. 

Sea ice extent and thickness . Sea-ice extent in the Arctic has a strong seasonal cycle. It is 
typically at its maximum [- million square kilometers (sq km)] in March and minimum (- 
million sq km) in September (Parkinson et al. ). There is considerable interannual 
variability both in the maximum and minimum extent of sea ice. In addition, there are decadal 
and inter-decadal fluctuations in the areal sea-ice extent due to changes in atmospheric pressure 
patterns and their associated winds, continental discharge, and influx of Atlantic and Pacific 
waters (Gloersen , Mysak and Manak , Kwok , Parkinson b, Polyakov et al. 
, Rigor et ai. , Zakharov ). 

Observations have shown a decline in late summer Arctic sea ice extent of . % per decade and 
in the perennial sea ice area of . % per decade (Stroeve et al. , Comiso ), a lesser 
decline of . % per decade in yearly averaged sea ice extents (Parkinson and Cavalieri ). 
The estimated rate of decrease in late summer sea ice coverage has increased as the satellite data 
record has lengthened: From  through  the trend was -. % per decade, through  
it increased to -, % per decade, and through  it was -. % per decade. Record low 
minimum extents in the ice cover during the last four years (-) caused an acceleration 


 



 


of the negative trend in the extent of the perennial ice cover (i.e. summer ice minima) from - 
,% per decade to -.% per decade (Stroeve et al., in press, Comiso ). 

Observations have likewise shown a thinning of the Arctic sea ice of  % from the  s and 
s to the s in some local areas (Rothrock et al, , Yu, Y. et al. ), with an overall 
thinning of about .-. % per decade (ACIA ). Lindsay and Zhang () suggest that 
feedback mechanisms caused a tipping point in Arctic sea ice thinning in the late s, 
sustaining the continual decline in the sea ice cover. Zhang and Walsh () investigated the 
reproduction of the sea ice state in the IPCC models and found generally consistent results and 
an amplified seasonal cycle in sea ice area. They found that the model predicts multiyear ice 
area shrinks more rapidly than the total sea ice area, which is consistent with observational 
studies (Johannessen et al. , Comiso b). As multiyear ice is generally much thicker 
than first-year ice, a decline in the multiyear iee amplifies the seasonal melting of the sea ice. 

The predominant reasons for amplified decreases in the extent of sea ice are; (a) the sea ice 
albedo feedback (i.e. less sea ice cover, which has a high reflectivity, causes more absorption of 
solar radiation in the ocean and hence more heat storage in the ocean, and a warmer ocean 
further delays formation of new sea ice cover in the fall); (b) the thinning of the sea ice 
(including the reduction in perennial ice (Comiso b), which leads to more rapid melting of 
sea ice; (c) an increase in melt season length (Stroeve et al., in press, Comiso ) which 
enhances the ice albedo feedback, and decrease in ice season length (Parkinson b), which 
limits the winter ice extent and the average thickness of ice during the season; and (d) the recent 
transport of multiyear ice out of the Arctic Ocean (Lindsay and Zhang , Kwok et al. ). 

In addition to these direct sea ice processes, oceanic circulation plays an important role. Pierce et 
al. () compared ocean temperature observations with results from two climate models that 
include anthropogenic forcing and found close agreement. Both model and observation show the 
largest increase in ocean temperature in the North Atlantic. Similarly, Polyakov et al. () 
analyzed ocean observations of the Atlantic Water (a water mass that enters the Arctic Ocean 
and Barents Sea via the Norwegian Sea) and concluded that the Arctic Ocean is in transition 


 



 


towards a warmer state, which has implications for the Arctic sea ice cover. The variability in 
both the temperature and velocity of the inflow of Atlantic waters in the Barents Sea appears to 
drive changes in the Arctic surface air temperature (Goose and Holland ). 

Melt period . The length of melt period is considered an important factor affecting sea ice cover, 
especially ice thickness (Hakkinen and Mellor , Laxon et al. ). An accumulating body 
of observations points to an earlier melt onset in spring and lengthening of the melt season, 
favoring less total ice cover at summer’s end (Stroeve et al. ). Comiso () examined 
trends from  to  using satellite thermal infrared (AVHRR) data on surface 
temperatures, and calculated an increase in the melt season of - days per decade. 
Subsequently, Comiso () evaluated - AVHRR data and determined that the length 
