make it. The threat may be enormous, but the truth is, if we were 
to unleash the technological capacity of this country to truly face 
this problem — we have an extraordinary capacity to develop jobs 
and economy and a future that is sustainable. But it seems to me 
that we need to face the difficulties of educating the public and 
drawing the people into the potential solutions here. 

Problems are real, but solutions are there. We can certainly work 
through this, I think, providing we show some leadership. 

Does anybody else want to make a comment? 

Dr. Watson. Yes. I would like to make one comment on it. Tech- 
nology is very important and R&D is important, but the policy 
framework is crucial. 

We are never going to get renewable energies to penetrate the 
marketplace unless we internalize the social costs of pollution, for 
example air pollution and acid deposition, and eliminate fossil fuel 
subsidies. It is worse in other countries than the U.S.A. But it has 
to be a combination of research and development into new energy 
technologies and policy reform. 

There is no way that one is ever going to get renewable energies 
in most countries, because of the subsidies on fossil fuels and they 



 


subsidize the railways to transport coal, and they do not internalize 
the social costs of environmental pollution. 

So, we do not have a level playing field. It does not matter how 
well you do on technology. So, it must be the combination of tech- 
nological development and policy reform. 

And the comment that should be made is, unfortunately, both 
public sector and private sector research in energy has decreased 
in every country in the world, except for Japan. And  percent of 
their research is on nuclear power, not on renewable energy. 

In most of the European Union, energy research has dropped by 
a factor of five to ten. And in the U.S., in real terms, it has also 
dropped. And most of the U.S. money goes into, again, fossil fuels 
and nuclear power. Only  percent of the energy R&D budget goes 
into either renewable energies or energy efficiency. 

And the other problem that compounds this, is that not only has 
public sector research dropped off, but because of deregulation of 
industries and liberalization, private sector research has dropped 
even further. And so, we have the unfortunate situation of both 
public and private research dropping precipitously. 

We do not have the associated policy reform. And so, while we 
have been debating climate change at the convention and the Kyoto 
Protocol, the very instruments we need to enact a decarbonization 
of the energy system have actually been taken away from us. 

Senator Kerry. Well, with respect to that policy, let me just add, 
I am a passionate and deeply committed advocate of a much more 
thoughtful foreign policy, where we, in fact, have a much more sig- 
nificant component of technology transfer and technical assistance. 

And a year ago, I managed to get Jim Wilbinson, to his enormous 
credit, to commit the World Bank to holding the conference in, of 
all places, Hanoi, Vietnam. It is about precisely this kind of devel- 
opment. 

And all the donor countries came, including Japan, to think 
about how, as they need to put in a power plant, we could provide 
them with an alternative to simply burning high-sulphur coal. We 
could even provide them with direct grant transfer of some of our 
technological abilities to be able to do these things, so that they can 
develop without repeating the mistakes that we have made, and 
learn, at the same time, that this is not a Western conspiracy to 
keep them from sharing in the abundance and wealth of the world, 
which is the way they view it today. 

I concur with you that we desperately need to have a change in 
policy and a much more thoughtful approach to this. I thank you 
for your comments today. And I thank my colleague for his forbear- 
ance, and look forward to continuing this dialogue with you. 

Senator Brownback [presiding]. I want to thank the panel for 
the presentation. It was excellent. I thought it was very illu- 
minating. 

And it reminded me just — in looking at how much everything is 
interconnected. When you do one thing, and it just moves  dif- 
ferent things, different places. I guess the philosopher says that 
you pull on one place in the universe and everything else moves. 
And it just really is interconnected. 

Let me ask you — Dr. Bradley, you have already started to articu- 
late some of this, about what you think the policy moves are that 



 


we should do today. Renewable energy sources, I think, is what 
your primary focus is. 

Are there other specific policy recommendations outside of imple- 
mentation of the Kyoto Treaty or the renewables that you — some 
of you would like to put on the table that we should start to discuss 
now in the U.S. Congress? 

Dr. Bradley. I’m not convinced that renewable energy is going 
to be the solution, but I think one of the simplest things is con- 
servation. And by that I mean using more energy-efficient proc- 
esses, whether that process is heating a house or keeping the heat 
from going out of the roof; heating water; obviously, more efficient 
automobiles, and that goes for trucks and public transportation, 
too. 

Those issues can be — can be encouraged with tax credits. As I re- 
call, the Carter Administration there were — they introduced tax 
credits for energy conservation measures. And that was a boost to 
a whole emerging economic sector, which was the development of 
these products. 

And it seems to me that would be a fairly painless way of encour- 
aging energy conservation, by providing significant tax credits for 
people who buy cars that get more miles per gallon, people who in- 
troduce energy-efficient measures to their homes, et cetera. And 
that, in turn, would generate economic activity that could be trans- 
ferred to other countries. And so, it would be a boost to our econ- 
omy. 

Senator Brownback. Dr. Trenberth. 

Dr. Trenberth. I mentioned before that it is not so much what 
you do, as how you do it. One of things which was mentioned by 
Dr. Watson was the importance of taking into account the lifetimes 
of the infrastructure that exists and planning appropriately. And I 
think that is very important. 

A good example might be, for instance, automobiles. If we were 
to increase the cost of gasoline by a dollar tomorrow — well, firstly, 
that would not be politically viable. And secondly, it would cause 
major problems in the whole of the economy; very disruptive. But 
if we increased the cost of gasoline by a penny, it would be lost 
completely in the noise. 

So, what would happen if we increased the cost of gasoline by a 
penny every month? After  years, we would have $. increase 
