leagues, as well as sportsmen, sportswomen, wildlife conservation 
advocates and academic experts to do so. 

I do want to put in the record a letter from  sportsmen and 
wildlife conservation groups, asking that funding for fish and wild- 
life protection and conservation be included in any global warming 
legislation, as well as a letter from the Association of Fish and 
Wildlife Agencies of our country, supporting the provisions in our 
bill that allocate funds from auctioned emission allowances to help 
fish and wildlife adapt to the warming of the globe that the IPCC 
now tells us is unavoidable. 

[The referenced letter can be found on page .] 

Senator Lieberman. I really look forward to working with my fel- 
low members of this subcommittee and the overall committee to see 
if we can’t find bipartisan, non-partisan common ground to begin 
to take action and assume responsibility for a problem that it cer- 
tainly seems to me we are causing. I thank all the witnesses who 
are here, and I look forward to hearing their testimony. 

At this point, I would invite Senator Warner to make an opening 
statement. 

OPENING STATEMENT OF THE HON. JOHN WARNER, U.S. 

SENATOR FROM THE COMMONWEALTH OF VIRGINIA 

Senator Warner. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would be happy 
to defer to my distinguished colleague, the ranking member, and I 
want to thank you. Senator Inhofe, for honoring my request, which 
is the only one I made to the committee, and that is to serve on 
this Subcommittee. If you would like to proceed, I will follow you. 

Senator Inhofe. You go ahead. 

Senator Warner. I will just ask to include in the record my 
opening statement and maybe make a personal observation. 

I come to this issue, I would have to tell you, uninformed, and 
with an open and an objective mind, to learn about it. I don’t claim 
to be an expert in this area. But I have an intense interest. You 
said something about the sportsmen. I have to tell you, my per- 
sonal habits are, when I can’t go to sleep, I reach over and get ei- 
ther my magazine on Trout Unlimited or one of my shooting vol- 
umes to read, and then I can quietly go to sleep. 

[Laughter.] 

Senator Warner. And my lovely wife and I just rehabbed our 
house, we bought a house that needed substantial rehab. And I 
soon recognized that I was going to have almost no voice whatso- 
ever in what was to be done. But I did prevail on one thing, and 
that is in our library, I finally got the gun case I always wanted, 
with glass panels. And in it is a shotgun given to me by my father 
when I was  years old. And to give you a point in time, I will 
be  in  weeks. That gun has seen some action. 

Anyway, I love the outdoors, and I cherish the moments I am 
with my grandchildren now, sharing the simple joys of fishing and 
hunting that I had with my wonderful father and others in years 
past. So I feel an obligation to make this work. 

Lastly, of all of our hearings, I don’t know, this will be the one 
I perhaps look forward to the most, because I am interested in this. 
I just simply say this. There is such controversy out here that it 
is really a challenge for this subcommittee to try and plow through 



 


that and find the solid factual base on which any conclusions that 
the Congress may make has to rest. In doing that, I observe one 
thing, with no disrespect to anyone in the audience, with their par- 
ticular constituency they are representing, the wildlife and the 
plant species are not represented by any lobbyist. And how they 
react to today’s climate is a pure, clear science. It could well pro- 
vide the benchmarks, the indicators, the early indicators of what 
direction our Nation and a collective group of nations must move 
to solve this problem. 

So long live the wildlife and the plant life and I am anxious to 
hear what you have to say. 

Senator Lieberman. Thanks, Senator Warner. Congratulations 
in that small victory in the ongoing spousal disputes that we all 
have. 

[Laughter.] 

Senator Lieberman. And may I say, I believe I speak for every- 
one in the room, I certainly speak for myself, that I hope I am look- 
ing and doing as well as you are when I approach . God bless 
you. 

Senator Boxer. 

OPENING STATEMENT OF THE HON. BARBARA BOXER, U.S. 

SENATOR FROM THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

Senator Boxer. Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman, and I am 
very pleased at the makeup of this subcommittee, and pleased that 
you and Senator Warner are launching this early hearing. 

Today, we address a very important topic as we continue to con- 
sider global warming and its impact on our planet, particularly 
global warming’s effect on wildlife, and I won’t go over the IPCC 
report, because I think Senator Lieberman laid it out very clearly. 

But I think it is important to note that that report was  years 
in the making was, , scientists directly involved. If you con- 
sider all the scientists, it was about , for more than  coun- 
tries, including the United States of America. As a matter of fact, 
the Bush administration took credit, in large part, for the report, 
said that they had been very much in the lead in putting it to- 
gether. 

Now, the catastrophic effects that are discussed in the report in- 
cluding melting of Arctic ice, rising sea levels, destruction of coral 
reefs, deadly heat waves, increases in extreme weather events, neg- 
ative impacts on food production and water supplies, and many 
other dangerous impacts that can affect our national security, our 
economic security and, as Senator Warner pointed out, our qualify 
of life with our families. 

While the impacts on humans will be severe if we don’t act, and 
of course, I am an optimist and I believe we will act, the impacts 
on wildlife and endangered species can be equally devastating if we 
don’t act to curb global warming. Because if the earth continues to 
warm, many animals will find themselves living under conditions 
for which they are not well adapted, and many of these species are 
already under great pressure from development and other human 
activities. Global warming could magnify those effects many times 
over. The affected wildlife could include many game species that 



 


are both culturally and economically important to us in a variety 
of ways. 

I just want to show you three charts. I love charts. The first one 
is the statement of Secretary of the Interior Kempthorne: “We are 
concerned the polar bears’ habitat may be literally melting.” He 
said that December , , when he acted to consider whether 
