
CLEAN ENERGY FUTURE A MUST TO COMBAT 
GLOBAL WARMING AND PROTECT AMERICAN 
SECURITY, FAMILIES, HEALTH, AND ENVIRONMENT 

“America is addicted to oil.” 

—President George W. Bush, State of the Union Address, January   ,  

“The long term solution is to get off oil.” 

—President George W. Bush, Bloomberg News, April ,  

“Efficiency offers the clearest, most easily traversed path to energy independence.” 
—Business Week, March ,  

“We think the [global warming] debate is over. We are not going to debate the science. 

We think a national cap-and-trade system would be a good idea.” 

-Shell President John Hoftneister, October ,  

Our nation faces several simultaneous energy and environmental threats: global climate 
change, oil dependency, and energy insecurity. Little time remains to confront the global 
warming crisis. The latest government energy forecasts indicate that our dependency on 
fossil fuels will climb dramatically in coming years if we fail to act now. Burning these 
fuels produce the carbon dioxide pollution primarily responsible for global warming. 

The Energy Information Administration predicts more than a one-third increase in carbon 
dioxide pollution from oil and coal by . Carbon dioxide and other heat-trapping gases 
linger in the atmosphere for decades or centuries, which means that additional pollution 
will create an almost irreversible wanning effect for generations to come. Thus, these rapid 
pollution increases are morally and scientifically indefensible because they will make it 
impossible to adequately contain the threat of global wanning in the future. Scientists 
urgently tell us that we must act now to avert this looming catastrophe. 

America has the know-how to cut global warming pollution and reduce our dependence on 
fossil fuels, which will move us toward a cleaner, more secure future. Reductions in use of 
oil and other fossil fuels will cut emissions of carbon dioxide, rein in volatile energy 
prices and heating costs, and enhance America’s energy security. 

For decades, government policy favored subsidies and tax breaks for oil and other 
conventional energy sources over energy efficiency and renewable energy technologies, 
and better gas mileage. But now there’s momentum for change. We know that the air we 



 


breathe every day can be hazardous to our health because of pollution from vehicles and 
antiquated power plants, costing lives and millions of dollars in health costs. Dependence 
on oil leaves our economy vulnerable and puts our national security at risk. Our military 
must maintain a presence in the Middle East to ensure a stable supply of oil, which is used 
to produce about  percent of our country’s transportation fuel. Until we break our oil 
addiction, we will continue to face vexing problems such as the concern that extremists in 
oil producing nations could blackmail other countries with a threat to cut off oil exports. 

Americans seek cars with better gas mileage, greater energy efficiency, and clean 
renewable energy sources. We need a national commitment to a new energy strategy that 
will protect our climate, national security, economy, health, and environment. Any energy 
policy must also reduce greenhouse gas emissions. Policies that provide real solutions to 
our climate and energy problems should reflect the following goals. 

• Reduce emissions of heat-trapping gases by at least   to  percent below 
current levels by . Ultimately, the US must reduce its emissions of 
heat-trapping gases on the order of  percent by mid-century to avoid the 
worst long-term effects of global warming, such as a substantial rise in sea 
level, more severe storms and droughts, and mass species extinctions. 

• Reduce our dependence on fossil fuels by adopting a suite of clean-energy 
policies: 

o Reduce oil use  percent by  ( million barrels per day), through 
efficiency, clean renewable fuels and transportation alternatives, with an 
interim goal of reducing consumption  percent by  (, million 
barrels per day). 

 Harness clean, renewable, homegrown energy sources such as wind, 
solar and farm-based bio-fuels for at least a quarter of all energy needs by 
. 

o Save energy with high performance homes, buildings, and appliances 
so that by  we use at least  percent less energy than we do today. 

We must ensure that as we embrace these goals we adopt a path of genuinely sustainable 
envirorunental and public health benefits. Protection of our air, water, endangered 
ecosystems, and sensitive lands is critical for a healthy planet. Whether renewable or 
conventional, energy production must comply fully with environmental laws and 
regulations, be appropriately sited and include enforceable standards that minimize 
environmental impact. 

Achievement of these goals would secure our energy future with lower costs for 
consumers, creation of new jobs, less dependence on oil, and reduction of the pollution 



 


that causes global warming. The following policies are the fastest, cleanest, cheapest way 
to achieve these goals. 

REDUCE GLOBAL WARMING POLLUTION 


A comprehensive mandatory emissions reduction program is essential to drive investment 
into clean energy technologies in all sectors at the scale needed to achieve the deep 
reductions in carbon dioxide emissions required to avoid dangerous global warming. A 
strong and effective cap on emissions, combined with complimentary clean energy policies, 
can achieve these global warming pollution reduction targets, create jobs, and strengthen 
our economy via deployment of available technologies. It also would effectively spur 
additional private sector research and development of clean energy, which may unleash 
even better future technological options. In the meantime, we know that a balanced 
portfolio of existing energy efficiency, renewable energy, and low-emission energy 
generation technologies can achieve deep cuts in pollution. What America needs now is 
leadership. 

 . ESTABLISH AN AGGRESSIVE DECLINING CAP ON U.S. GLOBAL 
WARMING EMISSIONS. Scientists around the world have warned that 
additional global warming of more than  degrees Fahrenheit is likely to trigger 
severe consequences. To prevent this from happening, the U.S. must reduce its 
emissions by the order of  percent by mid-century. Given the magnitude of this 
task, we have no more time to lose. We must promptly adopt mandatory limits on 
global warming pollution that begin reductions within a few years and reduce 
emissions by at least   to  percent below current levels by . 

. JUST TRANSITION TO A REDUCED-CARBON WORLD. While the 
transition to a clean, low-carbon energy future creates economic opportunities and 
jobs in many sectors, it also will entail shifts in the economy. Low-income 
individuals and workers in high carbon industries should not have to bear the full 
brunt of society’s need to protect the planet. Revenues from carbon-control 
programs should help cushion any energy-price increases for low-income groups. 
Moreover, as we did with the GI Bill after World War II, we need programs to 
provide displaced workers with both transitional income and benefits to protect 
their families, and tuition to provide them with training for an alternate field. 

. NO FREE RIDE FOR NEW DIRTY COAL PLANTS. 

Despite the knowledge that new coal fired power plants would worsen global 
wanning, some companies are rushing to build scores of new dirty power plants 
before the adoption of carbon dioxide emission limits to evade the steepest 
reductions. It is critical that all new investments in power plants and other 
long-lived assets use the most advanced technology available, not lock us in to 
decades of excessive pollution. New plants should be required to meet a strong 
environmental performance standard of no net emissions. If the costs of future 
emission reductions are part of the calculus for new power plants, most, if not all. 



