The Outer Continental Shelf Lands Act (OCSLA) established federal jurisdiction over 
submerged lands on the Outer Continental Shelf (OCS) seaward of the State boundaries (-mile 
limit) in order to expedite exploration and development of oil/gas resources on the OCS, 

Implementation of OCSLA is delegated to the Minerals Management Service (MMS) of the 
Department of the Interior. OCS projects which could adversely impact the Coastal Zone are 
subject to federal consistency requirements under terms of the CZMA, as noted below, OCSLA 
also mandates that orderly development of OCS energy resources be balanced with protection of 
human, marine and coastal environments. 

Coastal Zone Management Act 

The Coastal Zone Management Act (CZMA) was enacted to "preserve, protect, develop, and 
where possible, to restore or enhance the resources of the Nation’s coastal zone." This is a State 
program subject to federal approval. The CZMA requires that federal actions be conducted in a 
manner consistent with the State's CZM plan to the maximum extent practicable. Federal 
agencies planning or authorizing an activity that affects any land or water use or natural resource 
of the coastal zone must provide a consistency determination to the appropriate State agency. 
The CZMA applies to areas on the northern and western coasts of Alaska which occur in polar 
bear habitat. The North Slope Borough and Alaska Coastal Management Programs through their 
project review processes have operated effectively to assist in protection of polar bear habitat in 
recent times, 

Alaska National Interest Lands Conservation Act 


 



 


The Alaska National Interest Lands Conservation Act{ANlLCA) created or expanded National 
Parks and Refuges in Alaska, including the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge (NWR). One of the 
establishing purposes of the Arctic NWR is to conserve polar bears. Most of the Arctic National 
Wildlife Refuge is designated Wilderness and is therefore off limits to oil and gas development. 
The coastal plain of Arctic NWR (Section  designated lands), which provides important 
polar bear denning habitat, does not have Wilderness status, however, and could be opened for 
development by an Act of Congress. 

Marine Protection, Research and Sanctuaries Act 

The Marine Protection, Research and Sanctuaries Act was enacted in part to "prevent or strictly 
limit the dumping into ocean waters of any material that would adversely affect human health, 
welfare, or amenities, or the marine environment, ecological systems, or economic 
potentialities.” 


b. Canada 

The constitutional arrangement in Canada specifies that the Provinces and Territories have the 
authority to manage terrestrial wildlife which includes polar bears as they are not defined as a 
marine mammal in Canada. The federal government is responsible for CITES related programs 
and has continued to provide both technical (long-term demographic, ecosystem, and inventory 
research) and administrative (Federal/Provincial Polar Bear Technical Committee, 
Federal/Provincial Polar Bear Administrative Committee, and the National Database) support to 
the Provinces and Territories. The Provinces and Territories have the ultimate authority for 
management, although in several areas, the decision-making process is shared with aboriginal 
groups as part of the .settlement of land claims. Flunting by aboriginal people is permissible. 
Harvest quotas or guidelines, in the instance where treaty interest rights are in effect, are based 
on principles of sustainable use (Derocher et al. ). 


 



 


In Canada, much of the denning areas in Manitoba have been protected by inclusion within the 
boundaries of Wapusk National Park. In Ontario, some denning habitat and coastal summer 
sanctuary habitat are included in Polar Bear Provincial Park. Some polar bear habitat is included 
coincidentally in some of the National Parks and National Park Reserves and territorial parks in 
the NWT, Nunavut and Yukon Territory (e.g. Herschel Island). Offshore areas which may be 
important habitat have variable levels of protection. Additional habitat protection measures 
include restrictions on harassment and approaching dens and denning bears, and a land use 
permit review that considers potential impacts of land use activities on wildlife (Derocher et ai. 
). 


Canada’s Species ai Risk Act 

Canada’s Species at Risk Act (SARA) became law on December , , and went into effect 
on June ,  (Walton ), Prior to SARA, Canada’s overview of species at risk was 
through the Committee on the Status of Endangered Wildlife in Canada (COSEWIC) and the 
Minister of Environment, which continued to function under SARA following passage of SARA. 
The Committee evaluates species status and provides recommendations to the Minister of the 
Environment, who makes the final listing decision and identifies species specific management 
actions. SARA provides a number of protections for wildlife species designated to the List of 
Wildlife Species at Risk, or "Schedule ” (SARA Registry ). 


SARA promotes species conservation through a number of mechanisms, including prohibitions 
on killing listed species and destroying critical habitat, and the implementation of recovery 
strategies. Those prohibitions apply only on federal lands, such as national parks (Walton ), 
however, SARA includes an exception for species like the polar bear. In such cases, the Federal 
Cabinet, based on recommendation of the Minister of the Environment, may apply restriction to 
non-federal lands in a Province or Territory (Walton ). This provision has not been tested by 
the courts (Walton ). 


 



 


The listing criteria used by COSEWIC are based on the  lUCN Red List assessment criteria 
(Appendix ). Currently, the polar bear is designated as a Schedule  species, “Species of 
Special Concern," awaiting re-assessment and public consultation for possible addition to 
Schedule  (Environment Canada ). The Minister of the Environment did not add the polar 
bear to the List of Wildlife Species at Risk under SARA at the request of Nunavut which wanted 
additional consultation. The Minister recognized that there was new knowledge available and a 
greater need to incorporate TEK and IQ (Dowsley ) in the assessment. There is an ongoing 
re-assessment through COSEWIC on the status of polar bears in Canada. 

Intra-jurisdiction polar bear agreements within Canada 

Polar bears occur in Canada in the NWT, Nunavut, Yukon Territory, and in the provinces of 
Manitoba, Ontario, Quebec, and Newfoundland and Labrador (Map I). All  Canadian polar 
bear populations lie within or are shared with the NWT and Nunavut. The NWT and Nunavut 
geographical boundaries include all Canadian lands and marine environment north of the th 
parallel (except the Yukon Territory) and all islands and waters in Hudson Bay and Hudson 
Strait up to the low water mark of Manitoba, Ontario, and Quebec. The offshore marine areas 
along the coast of Newfoundland and Labrador are under federal jurisdiction (GNWT). 

Although Canada manages each of the  populations of polar bear as separate units, there is a 
complex sharing of responsibilities. While wildlife management has been delegated to the 
provincial and territorial governments, the federal government (Environment Canada’s CWS) 
has an active research program and is involved in management of wildlife populations shared 
with other Jurisdictions, especially ones with other nations. In the NWT, native land claims 
resulted in co-management boards for most of Canada’s polar bear populations. Canada formed 
the Federal-Provincial Technical and Administrative Committees for Polar Bear Research and 
Management (PBTC and PBAC, respectively) to ensure a coordinated management process 
consistent with internal and international management structures and the International 
Agreement. The committees meet annually to review research and management of polar bears in 
Canada and have representation from all the provincial and territorial jurisdictions with polar 
bear populations and the federal government. Beginning in  , the Service has attended 

 



 


meetings of the PBTC and biologists from Norway and Denmark have attended a number of 
