
We have moved past the threshold of doubt. According to the report, an overwhelming 
body of evidence indicates that humans are causing global warming: 

• The amount of carbon dioxide — ^the most significant greenhouse gas — in the planet’s 
atmosphere has increased to a level that “exceeds by far the natural range over the last 
, years,” primarily as a result of burning fossil fuels such as oil and coal. 

• Average global temperatures have increased by about  . degrees Fahrenheit over the 
past century. This warming is “unequivocal” and accelerating. Globally,   of the last 
 years rank among the  warmest on record since . 

• Scientists are more certain than ever that the warming is being driven mostly by 
pollution that human activity is pumping into the atmosphere. 

• This seemingly modest increase in temperature has already had destructive 



 


consequences and more likely than not has helped fuel the increase in intense 
hurricanes in recent years. 

• Higher temperatures and reduced rainfall have contributed to an increase in the 
intensity and duration of droughts. 

• Sea levels have risen because of melting ice sheets and warming waters, and the rate 
of rising sea levels has about doubled in the past decade compared to the past  years. 

The report warns of dramatically more rapid warming in coming decades if we continue to 
use fossil fuels such as oil and coal as intensively as we do today. Global warming is 
accelerating because pollution is building up in the planet’s thin atmosphere at a faster rate 
as we use more and more fossil fuels. Moreover, we have not yet seen the full effects of the 
pollution we have already pumped into the air. Warming over the next two decades will 
occur at about twice the rate of the past  years. By the end of this century, if we continue 
to depend heavily on fossil fuels, the scientists’ consensus ‘best estimate’ is that 
temperatures will Increase  degrees Fahrenheit above the changes we have already seen 
(with a range of  to   degrees, based on the report’s ‘Fossil-Intensive’ emissions 
scenario). 

To put this change in perspective, consider the report’s description of the state of the 
planet , years ago, when average polar temperatures were  to  degrees 
Fahrenheit warmer than today because of differences in the Earth’s orbit. Under those 
conditions, oceans were likely   to  feet higher than they are now. To repeat such a 
scenario in the modem world will have almost unimaginable consequences. More than 
 million people live within  meter of average sea-level and a third of the world's 
population live near the coast. If temperatures rise as predicted, the world’s maps literally 
will have to be redrawn. Dr. James Hansen, director of NASA’s Goddard Institute for 
Space Studies and one of the world’s foremost experts on global warming, has warned 
that level of change would create a “different planet.’’ 

The report also warns of dramatic changes in the world’s oceans beyond the expected 
increases in sea levels. The scientists conclude that it is very likely that Atlantic Ocean 
currents will slow down this century. Further, they warn that the buildup of carbon dioxide 
in the atmosphere will lead to increasing acidification of the ocean; a factor that a number of 
scientists in other studies have warned will threaten marine life and fisheries. 

The stakes of further delay are enormous, and the clock is running out for wildlife. 
According to the report, the global warming pollution we emit in coming years “will 
continue to contribute to warming and sea level rise for more than a millennium, due to the 
timescales required for removal of this gas from the atmosphere.” 

It is imperative that this Congress and the current Administration come to terms with the 
urgency of global wanning and take meaningful and significant action to reduce the 
nation’s global wanning pollution. Dr. Richard Alley, one of the lead authors of the IPCC 
report and a professor at Pennsylvania State University, summed up the report’s 
implications as follows: “Policy makers paid us to do good science, and now we have very 



 


high scientific confidence in this work — this is real, this is real, this is real. So now act, 
the ball’s back in your court.” 

Opinions of Hunters and Anglers on Global Warming 

The United States is home to more than  million hunters and anglers, and they have been 
a powerful force for conservation in America. In  the National Wildlife Federation 
commissioned Responsive Management of Harrisonburg, Virginia, to conduct a nationwide 
non-partisan survey of hunters and anglers on the issue of global warming. Responsive 
Management, one of the most respected non-partisan research firms on sportsmen attitudes, 
is used widely by state governments and others. Respondents were randomly selected, 
largely from the pool of people who have recently purchased hunting and fishing licenses. 

This first-ever comprehensive nationwide survey of licensed hunters and anglers about 
their attitudes on global warming provided quantifiable evidence of what our members 
have been telling us; A vast majority of sportsmen are witnessing the effects of global 
warming and believe immediate action is necessary to address it. According to the 
survey,  percent of sportsmen believe we have a “moral responsibility to confront global 
warming to protect our children’s future.” Eighty percent of sportsmen believe the United 
States should be a world leader in addressing global warming. Seventy-five percent agree 
that Congress should "pass legislation that sets a clear national goal for reducing global 
warming pollution with mandatory timelines because industry has already had enough time 
to clean up voluntarily." Additional findings are included in the attached report and are 
available online at www.TargetGlobalWarmine.org. 

The polling firm, Responsive Management, has noted that some surveys “whisper” their 
results, but these results “shout” loud and clear. In a nation too often divided on major 
policy issues, America’s hunters and anglers have reached a clear consensus that, on the 
issue of global warming, now is the time to act. 

The sportsmen constituency is influential nationwide. Approximately one out of every 
five voters is a hunter and/or angler. One sportsman in six belongs to a labor union, and 
one in seven is a farmer or rancher. According to the survey,  percent of sportsmen 
identify themselves as evangelical Christians. In fact, sportsmen have a wide range of 
political views but tend to identify themselves as politically “moderate” ( percent) or 
conservative ( percent). 

Global Warming and America’s Wildlife 

For too long we have ignored nature’s warnings. As far back as ,  years before 
her landmark book Silent Spring. Rachel Carson wrote of a “startling alteration of 
climate.” Pointing to birds appearing in far northern lands for the first time, melting 
glaciers and other signs in nature, she warned that “the pendulum is swinging.” 

Decades of wildlife and climate studies have made it clear that global warming threatens 
to overwhelm wildlife in the United States and throughout the world with a host of 
climate-influenced threats. As conveyed by the Bush Administration to Congress in , 



 


“Analyses based on a large number of studies of plants and animals across a wide range of 
natural systems worldwide have found that many species have shifted their own geographic 
ranges or changed temperature-sensitive behavior — such as migration, flowering, or 
egg-laying, in ways consistent with reacting to global warming” (U.S. Climate Change 
Science Program, ). 

Furthermore, a report by The Wildlife Society, the pre-imminent association of wildlife 
professionals in North America, provides a comprehensive assessment of global 
warming’s likely consequences for North American wildlife and concludes that “the 
effects of climate change and variability on wildlife simply cannot be ignored” (Inkley et al, 
“Global Climate Change and Wildlife in North America,” ). 

Although the Earth’s climate has changed periodically throughout the past, the current 
global warming caused by the burning of fossil fuels is uniquely different because it is 
occurring at an imprecedented rate. Rapid global warming also is occurring at a time when 
wildlife habitat has been fractured and lost to development and other pressures, limiting the 
ability of wildlife to adapt. Dismption of habitat by global warming is further opening the 
door to the latest invasive species that threaten America’s wildlife. The link between 
wildlife and climate is highlighted in several examples below: 

Waterfowl: 

