of decreasing use of pack ice for denning has been detected (Fischbach et al., in prep.). Analysis 
of satellite telemetry data revealed that from -, .% of known dens were located on 
sea ice, compared to .% of dens from -. The potential reasons for the change in 
distribution included reductions in hunting pressure on land; availability of bowhead whale 
carcasses in the fail on land; climate induced changes in sea ice characteristics; availability of 
prey; and/or other unidentified ecological factors. Harington (), Larsen (), and Lono 
() concluded that variation in the local pattern of sea-ice movements during the preceding 
summer and autumn accounts for annual changes in the distribution of winter dens. Multiple- 
year trends in changing sea-ice patterns clearly could alter denning and other behavioral patterns. 

Denning Chronology. Pregnant female polar bears enter their dens in the autumn (September to 
November) after drifts large enough to excavate a snow cave are formed. The annually variable 
snow and ice conditions determine when and where bears enter their dens each autumn. Polar 
bears depart dens in the spring (February-April) when their cubs are able to survive in the outside 
climate (Blix and Lentfer , Amstrup ). 

Polar bears are largely food deprived while on land in the ice-free period. During this time, they 
survive by mobilizing stored fat. Pregnant females that spend the late summer on land and then 
go right into dens may not feed for  months (Watts and Hansen , Ramsay and Stirling 
). This may be the longest period of food deprivation of any mammal, and it occurs at a time 
when the female must give birth and nourishment to her new cubs. 

Satellite telemetry data confirm that the chronology of denning varies somewhat between 
populations. In the Beaufort Sea, mean dates of den entry were   and  November for land (n 

 



 


= ) and pack-ice (« = ) dens, respectively (Amstrup and Gardner ). Female bears 
continued foraging right up to the time of den entry, and then they denned nearby. The mean 
date of emergence was  March for pack ice dens (« = ) and  April for land dens (n =  ). 
Messier et al. () reported the mean date of entry and exit varied somewhat among years 
depending on sea-ice, snow, and weather conditions. Messier et al. () reported the mean 
entry into maternal dens in the Canadian Arctic was  September and mean emergence was  
March. Females and their cubs remained near dens for a mean  (SE=) days in the spring 
before leaving the denning area. This may indicate an earlier and more protracted denning period 
at higher latitudes than in the Beaufort Sea. Ferguson et al. (a) observed that bears denning 
at higher latitudes entered their dens a bit later than those to the south, but that exit times did not 
differ by latitude. They reported a mean den entry of  September ( September- October), a 
mean exit of March (- March), and a mean  days in dens (- days). As noted 
earlier, initiation of denning depends on sufficient snow accumulation to allow excavation of a 
den cavity. For bears denning on sea-ice or moving from sea-ice to land denning habitat, timing 
of sea ice consolidation can alter the onset of denning. Sea-ice dens must be in ice stable enough 
to stay intact for up to  days while possibly being moved hundreds of kilometers by currents 
(Amstrup , Wiig ). 

Scott and Stirling () examined the chronology of terrestrial den use by polar bears in 
Western Hudson Bay as indicated by tree growth ring anomalies associated with disturbance 
from den construction in the area of the root mass. Tree growth rings were evaluated in the black 
spruce (Picea mariana) around and above  den sites. Trees sampled at these den sites ranged 
in age from  to  years (n = , mean = ). Some individual den sites dated back at least 
 years. Increased denning activity in the area was correlated with reductions in disturbance 
due to humans at theYork Factory. Mark-recapture studies undertaken from  to  
indicate that female polar bears in the Western Hudson Bay population have a long-term fidelity 
to this specific area for maternity denning, and the area has used for denning area for several 
hundred years (Scott and Stirling ). 


 



 


IV. Population Status and Trend (excerpted from the PBSG  ‘^ Working 
Group Proceedings) 

A. Distinct Population Segments 

Just as the labile nature of the sea-ice results in annual variability in the distribution of suitable 
habitat for polar bears, it also eliminates any benefit to polar bears of defending territories. The 
location of resources is less predictable than resources on which terrestrial predators depend. 
Seals tend to be distributed over very large areas at low densities (Stirling and ritsland ). 
Furthermore, their distribution, density, and productivity are extremely variable among years 
(DeMaster et al. , Stirling et al. , Stirling and Oritsland ). Absence of strict 
fidelity, especially during breeding and denning seasons (Garner et al. b, Amstrup and 
Gardner ), essentially prohibits defendable territories. Males similarly must be free of the 
need to defend territories if they are to maximize their potential for finding mates each year 
(Ramsay and Stirling ). Although there may be limited spatial segregation among individual 
polar bears, telemetry studies have demonstrated spatial segregation among groups or stocks of 
polar bears in different regions (Schweinsburg and Lee , Amstrup et al. , b, Gamer 
et al. , , Messier et al. , Amstrup and Gardner , Wiig , Bethke et al.l, 
Ferguson et al, , Mauritzen et al. ). 

B. Status and distribution 

The total number of polar bears worldwide is estimated to be .-,. Polar bears are not 
evenly distributed throughout the Arctic, nor do they comprise a single nomadic cosmopolitan 
population, but rather occur in  relatively discrete populations (Figure ). The following 
population summaries are the result of discussions of the lUCN/SSC Polar Bear Specialist Group 
held in Seattle, Washington in June , and have been updated with results that became 
available as of June . The information on each population is based on the status reports and 


 



 


revisions given by each nation. Population sizes and associated uncertainty in estimates, historic 
and predicted human-caused mortality, population trends, and rationale for determinations of 
status are presented. Where data allowed, or the approach was deemed appropriate for a 
jurisdiction, results of stochastic population viability analyses (PVA) to estimate the likelihood 
of future population decline are presented. 

Status Table Structure 

Population Size 

Table  presents population sizes and uncertainty in the estimates as ±  standard errors of the 
mean (SE), or ranges. These estimates are based on scientific research using mark and recapture 
analysis or aerial surveys and the years in which data were collected is presented to give an 
indication of the current reliability of population estimates. For some populations, scientific data 
were not available and population estimates were extrapolated from density estimates and/or 
local traditional ecological knowledge (TEK). In some cases this also includes simulations based 
on the minimum size necessary to support local knowledge of population trends. Although these 
data are presented in addition to, or in some cases as an alternative to, dated scientific estimates, 
methods other than mark and recapture analysis or aerial surveys have unknown margins of error 
and in most cases, inestimable errors. 

Human-Caused Mortality 

For most populations, particularly those in North America, harvesting polar bears is a regulated 
activity. In many cases, harvesting is the major cause of mortality for bears. In most jurisdictions 
the total numbers of bears killed by humans in pursuit of sport and subsistence hunting, accident, 
and in defense-of-life or property are documented. Where data allow, the -year mean of known 
human-caused mortality (removals) for each population is presented. Also, the anticipated 
removal rate of polar bears in each jurisdiction based on known increases in hunting quotas 
and/or the average removal rate of polar bears by jurisdiction over the past  years is presented. 

Trend and Status 


 



 


Qualitative categories of trend and status are presented for each polar bear population (Table I ). 
Categories of trend include an assessment of whether the population is currently increasing, 
stable, or declining, or if insufficient data is available to estimate trend (data deficient). 
