female reproductive rates and juvenile survival first while adult female survival rates would be 
affected under severe conditions. Regehr et al. (, p. ) showed that while the Western 
Hudson Bay population has declined  percent since , this decline was not uniform across 
all age classes of bears. Survival of prime-adult polar bears (age  to  years) was stable over 
the course of the study; however, survival of juvenile, subadult, and past prime age polar bears 
declined as a function of earlier spring sea ice breakup date. 

Polar bear distribution changes in relation to changing sea ice environs associated with greater 
periods of fasting on land, and consequent reductions in body condtion and ultimate reductions 
in demographic factors such as recruitment and survival of polar bears in Western Hudson Bay 
have been document (Stirling et al. ; Regehr et al. in prep.) and discussed in detail 


 



 


previously (see also Distribution Section). Recent research results indicate that the Southern 
Beaufort Sea population has also been subject to dramatic changes in the sea ice environment 
beginning in the winter of  to  (Regehret al. , p. ). These changes were linked 
initially through direct observation of distribution changes during the fall open water period. 

With the exception of the Western Hudson Bay population, the Southern Beaufort Sea 
population has the most complete and extensive time series of life history data, dating back to the 
late  s. A -year coordinated capture-recapture study of this population to evaluate changes 
in the health and status of polar bears and life history parameters such as reproduction, survival, 
and abundance was completed in . Results of this study indicate that the estimated 
population size has gone from  , bears (Amstrup et al.  , p. ; Amstup , p. ) to 
 , polar bears in  (Regehr et al. , p. ). The precision of the earlier estimate of 
 , polars was low, and consequently the  estimate of  , is not statistically 
significantly different. Amstrup et al. (, p. ) provides an additional population estimate 
of as many as , bears for this population in the late s, although the statistical variance 
could not be calculated and thus precludes comparative value of the estimate. Survival rates, 
weights, and skull sizes were compared for  periods of time,  to  and  to . In 
the later period, estimates of total survival for cubs declined significantly from . (Amstrup and 
Durner , p. ) to .. Cub weights also decreased slightly. The authors believed that 
poor survival of new cubs may have been related to declining physical condition of females 
entering dens and consequently of the cubs born during recent years as reflected by smaller skull 
measurements. Also, between years during the -year study, a general decline in survival rates 
for cubs, females older than cubs, and males older than cubs was noted. In addition, body 
weights for adult males decreased significantly and skull measurements were reduced since 
. Since male polar bears continue to grow into their teen years (Derocher et al. , p. 
), if nutritional intake was similar since , the size of males should have increased 
(Regehr et al. , p.  ). The observed changes reflect a trend toward smaller size adult male 
bears. Although a number of the indices of population status were not independently significant, 
nearly all of the indices illustrated a declining trend. In the case of Western Hudson Bay, 
declines in cub survival and physical stature were recorded for a number of years (Stirling et al. 
, p. ; Derocher et al. , p, ) before a statistically significant decline in the 


 



 


population size was confirmed (Regehr et al. in prep.). Amstrup (pers. comm. ) indicates 
that if the trends in loss of sea ice continue as predicted, then, similar to the conditions for the 
Western Hudson Bay population, the ultimate effect will be a significant decline in the 
population trend for the Southern Beaufort Sea population. This declining trend will occur 
within the -year period determined to be the foreseeable future. 

In further support of the interaction of environmental factors, nutritional stress and their effect on 
survival rates for polar bears, several unusual mortality events have been documented in the 
southern Beaufort Sea. During the winter and early spring of , three observations of polar 
bear cannibalism were recorded (Amstrup et al. , p. ). Similar observations had not been 
recorded in that region despite studies extending back for decades. In the fall of , four polar 
bears were observed to have drowned while attempting to swim between shore and distant pack 
ice in the Beaufort Sea. Despite offshore surveys extending back to , similar observations 
had not previously been recorded (Monnett and Gleason , p. ). In spring of , three 
adult female polar bears and one yearling were found dead. Two of these females and the 
yearling had no fat stores and apparently starved to death, while the third adult female was too 
heavily scavenged to determine a cause of death. This mortality is suspicious because prime age 
females have had very high survival rates in the past (Amstrup and Durner  , p.    ). 
Similarly, the yearling that was found starved was the offspring of another radio-collared prime 
age female whose collar had failed prior to her yearling being found dead. Annual survival of 
yearlings, given survival of their mother, was previously estimated to be . (Amstrup and 
Durner , p. ). The probability, therefore, that this yearling died while its mother was 
still alive was only approximately  percent. Regehr et al, (, p. ) indicate that these 
anecdotal observations, in combination with changes in survival of young and declines in size 
and weights reported above suggest mechanisms by which a changing sea ice environment can 
affect polar bear demographics and population status. 

Evidence of declining body condition for polar bears in Western Hudson Bay suggests that there 
should be evidence of parallel declines In adjacent populations experiencing similar 
environmental conditions. A recent report of the analysis polar bear condition in Southern 


 



 


Hudson Bay compares body condition for two periods of time -  and - 
(Obbard et al. ). The authors found that the average body condition for all age and 
reproductive classes combined was significantly poorer for Southern Hudson Bay bears captured 
from  to  than for bears captured from  to . The mean condition value for all 
classes combined differed significantly among years (/’< .) as follows: (, ) > 
(, ) > (all other years). 

For individual age and reproductive classes considered separately, average body condition in the 
period from - was significantly poorer than in the period from -, The 
differences between periods were significantly greater for the solitary females, adult females, and 
subadult classes than for the male class of bears. The change in condition from - to 
- was greatest for solitary females, followed by subadults, and adult females 
accompanied by young. The decline in condition was least, yet still statistically significant, for 
adult males. 

The results indicate a declining trend in condition for all age and reproductive classes of polar 
bears since the mid-s. The results further reveal that the decline has been greatest for 
pregnant females and subadult bears — trends that will likely have an impact on future 
reproductive output and subadult survival. 

The authors evaluated inter-annual variability in condition in relation to the timing of ice melt 
and to duration of ice cover in the previous winter. A non-significant negative correlation 
between condition and date of break-up for the two periods of time existed. Similarly, a non- 
significant negative correlation between body condition and the duration of ice cover in the 
previous winter for the periods was determined. Based on the results the authors found that 
neither variation in the sea ice break-up date nor duration of ice cover in the previous winter as 
singular factors fully explained the variation in condition among years despite strong evidence of 
a significant trend towards both later freeze-up and earlier break-up (Gough et al. , Gagnon 
and Gough ), and the significant negative trend in body condition. 


 



 


The authors believe that the results suggest that other factors or combinations of factors (that 
likely also may include later freeze-up and earlier break-up) are operating to affect body 
condition in Southern Hudson Bay polar bears. These factors may include unusual spring rain 
events that occur during March or April when ringed seals are giving birth to pups in on-ice 
birthing lairs (Stirling and Smith ), depth of snow accumulation and roughness of the ice 
that vary over time and also affect polar bear hunting success (Stirling and Smith , Ferguson 
et al. ), changes in the abundance and distribution of ringed seals, and reduced pregnancy 
rates and of reduced pup survival in ringed seals from western Hudson Bay during the s 
(Ferguson et al. , Stirling ). 


. Biological effects on polar bear prey 
a. Prey Availability 
