Basin (AB) population, these boundaries are considered to be sufficiently discrete to be managed 
independently, based on behavioral and ecological factors. Telemetry data for the Arctic Basin 
population is insufficient to determine if bears occurring deep in the polar basin are residents to 
the area or may simply be occasional visitors from adjacent areas nearer shore (Figure  ). 
Furthermore, the overall correspondence between genetic data and the movement data among the 
polar bear populations reinforces the current population designations (Paetkau et al. , 
Amstrup ). 

E. Movements 

Data from telemetry studies show that polar bear movements are not random, nor do they 
passively follow the ocean currents on the ice as previously thought (Pedersen , Mauritzen 
et al. a). Movement data come almost exclusively from adult female polar bears because 
male anatomy (their neck is larger than their skull) will not accommodate radio collars. The 
movements of seven male polar bears surgically implanted with transmitters in  and  


 



 


were compared to movements of  females between  and  (Amstrup et al. ). 
Males and females had similar activity areas on a monthly basis, however, males traveled farther 
each month. Annual activity areas of females varied from year to year, however most females 
had an area of overlap each year (Amstrup et al. b). Activity areas combined over multiyear 
periods could be considered as home ranges. The smaller activity areas used within the larger 
home ranges vary annually possibly due to sea-ice habitat quality, which also varies annually 
(Stirling and Smith ; Ferguson et al. , Ferguson et al.l, Ferguson et al. a, 
Ferguson et al. b; DeMaster et al. ; Amstrup et al. b, Taylor et al. b, 

Mauritzen et al. , Wiig et al. ). 

Some polar bear populations are closely associated with pack ice. For example, in the Chukchi 
and Beaufort Sea areas of Alaska and northwestern Canada, only % of the polar bear locations 
obtained were on land (Amstrup et al. b, Amstrup, unpubl. data). The majority of the land 
locations were locations with bears occupying maternal dens during the winter. A similar pattern 
was found in East Greenland (Wiig et al. ). In the absence of ice during the summer season 
some populations of polar bears in eastern Canada, Fludson Bay, and the Barents Sea have 
developed a strategy of remaining on land for protracted periods of time until ice again forms 
and provides a platform for traveling and hunting. 

The home range size and the annual movements within home ranges vary among populations. 
Most Canada populations are bounded and constricted by land masses of the high Arctic 
Archipelago, whereas populations in Russia, Alaska, and Greenland are only bounded on the 
southern periphery by land masses or in the case of the Chukchi or Barents seas populations, by 
the southerly maximal position of pack ice. In some instances the size of space use patterns by 
individual bears can vary greatly within geographical areas. Mauritzen et al. () found that 
bears in the Barent’s Sea have huge variations in home ranges that appear to be influenced by 
geographical range size despite having the same land mass boundaries and the productivity of 
available habitat. In other instances geographical land mass boundaries appear to have no 
influence on home ranges. Space use patterns can vary within geographical areas by the 


 



 


individual polar bear. There is a -fold variation in size of area utilized and it seems that this 
variation may be a behavioural trait which is, perhaps, learned (Mauritzen et al. ). 

Activity areas have not been determined for many of the populations. The following information 
presents movement data collected from previous studies. The data do not reflect recent changes 
in retreating ice conditions. In the Beaufort Sea, annual activity areas for individually monitored 
female bears averaged , km^and ranged from , km^ to , km^ (Amstrup et al. 
b). The mean activity area in the Chukchi Sea, characterized by highly dynamic ice 
conditions, was , km^ (Garner et al.  ). The average annual distance moved by 
Chukchi Sea female bears was , km. Schweinsburg and Lee () reported smaller 
activity areas of <, km^ in the Canadian Arctic Archipelago. Spring movements averaged 
. km/day to the north at a time when ice was advancing . km/day in the opposite direction 
(Gamer et al. ). In the Beaufort Sea, total annual movements averaged  km and ranged 
up to , km. Movement rates of > km/hr were sometimes sustained for long periods, and 
movements of > km/day were observed (Amstrup et al. b). Polar bears in NE Greenland 
pack ice had very large home ranges of , to , km^ (Born et al.  ) and were able 
to move up to km/day, often against the direction of movement of the pack ice (Larsen et al. 
, Born et al. , Wiig et al. ). Annual movement rates ofthe two female bears 
ranged from  to  km (Wiig et al. ). Ferguson et al. () also reported large-scale 
movements for polar bears in highly dynamie sea-ice conditions of Davis Strait and Baffin Bay, 
and smaller movements for bears in the interior of the Canadian Arctic Archipelago. The 
mobility of polar bears appears to be directly related to variability in ice dynamics in specific 
areas (Garner et al. , Garner et al. a, Gloersen et al. , Messier et al. ). 

In regard to the timing of movements, Messier et al. () reported that peak movement rates of 
polar bears in Viscount Melville Sound in the Canadian High Arctic archipelago occurred from 
May to July. Ferguson et al. ( ) reported movement rates varied in response to season and 
ice, for bears occurring between ° N and ° N and from ° W to  ° W, including western 
Greenland, Davis Strait, Baffin Bay, and portions of the Canadian Arctic archipelago, while 
Messier et al. () reported increasing mobility from January through July with peak acitivity 

 



 


occurring in May through July in a study conducted in the Viscount Melville Sound and M’Clure 
Strait area of the Canadian Arctic. In the Barents Sea, movement rates varied by month with 
higher levels in December - January although strong interactions with the direction of drifting 
ice lead Mauritzen et al. (a) to conclude that the drifting sea ice functioned as a treadmill 
and probably increased the energetic cost of migration. In contrast, Amstrup et al. (b) 
reported that polar bears in the Beaufort Sea were most mobile in winter and early summer. The 
lower level of winter movement of bears of Viscount Melville Sound (Messier et al. ) result 
from the presence of multiyear ice year-round (Gloersen et al. ), and foraging opportunities 
are restricted to particular areas which bears key in to. Also, lower rates of movement may 
indicate an energy conservation mode invoked when food is scarce (Amstrup et al. b, 
Ferguson et al. , Wiig et al. ). The ability to conserve energy by reducing energy 
expended is an important adaptation that allows polar bears to be successful in areas such as 
Hudson Bay where at the extreme southern edge of their distribution they forego feeding for long 
periods of time. 

The high variability of summer and autumn ice presence and characteristics could affect seal 
hunting opportunities. This unpredictability may require longer movements and larger activity 
areas during seasons of freeze-up and break-up. Patterns of movement to the north and south 
appeared to be correlated with general patterns of ice formation and melting. (Stirling , 
Amstrup et al. b, Mauritzen et al, a). 

Between May and August, the ice of the southern Beaufort Sea is degrading (Gloersen et al. 
). October is usually the month of freeze-up in the southern Beaufort Sea and may be the 
first time in months when ice is available over the more productive near-shore shallow water. 
Polar bears summering on the persistent pack ice quickly move into shallow-water areas as soon 
as new annual ice forms in autumn to prey on seals occupying these areas, and make easterly and 
westerly movements as ice solidifies through winter. 


 



 


F. Feeding Habits 

Polar bears are carnivorous, unlike other bear species that are typically omnivores, and are an 
upper level predator of the Arctic marine ecosystem. Polar bears prey heavily throughout their 
range on ringed seals (Phoca hispida) and, to a lesser extent, bearded seals (Erignathus 
barbatus) and in some locales, other seal species. Although seals are their primary prey, polar 
bears also have been known to kill much larger animals such as walruses (Odobenus rosmarus), 
narwhal (Momdon monoceros) and belugas (Delphinapterus leucas) (Stirling and Archibald 
, Kiliaan et al, , Smith , , Lowry etal. , Calvert and Stirling , Smith 
and Sjare ). In some areas and under some conditions prey and carrion other than seals may 
be quite important to polar bear sustenance. Stirling and ritsland () suggested that in areas 
where ringed seal populations were reduced, other prey species were being substituted. Like 
other ursids, polar bears will eat human garbage (Lunn and Stirling ), and when confined to 
