or not to list the polar bear, I did start reading extensively. Now, 
in my opening statement. Dr. Foote, you heard me say, of the  
populations that  were relatively stable, and that perhaps the 
one population that is being used right now as the model is that 
of western Hudson Bay, where I concluded, after looking at it, we 
don’t have the exact time frame, but we have  years and  years, 
that approximately the reduction in population now is about the 
same as it would have been if hunting had not take place. 

Now, also the fact that in the s,  years ago, the population 
has increased from , to approximately ,, more than dou- 
bled over that period of time. Do you agree with my analysis of the 
statistics that we had? 

Mr. Foote. There is some merit there. However, the Polar Bear 
Technical Committee, which is the brain trust of all polar bear re- 
search at present, is meeting at Edmonton, Alberta today. Just last 
week I called one of the participants and asked specifically about 
the early data. He said that those were, the s and s esti- 
mates are really not completely to be trusted. They were a rough 
index,  is where our best data point comes. And it shows, it 
does show some moderate increase, even between that period. 

Senator Inhofe. Between  and today? 

Mr. Foote. And today,  was the last set of surveys. 

Your reference to western Hudson Bay, I have to compliment Ian 
Stirling on an exquisite piece of research and the program there. 
But it has to be kept in context. That is the southernmost popu- 
lation of polar bears and should be the first one to be affected and 
possibly affect 

Senator Inhofe. So range shift, this might be an example of 
range shift? 



 


Mr. Foote. Well, it may be, and that is the question that was 
so eloquently put by the previous speakers about the oyster dis- 
eases moving northward. It is a bit simplistic, but I will use the 
analogy of a belt around the circumpolar Arctic, that the belt 
doesn’t necessarily get narrower, it may just shift upwards and 
back. There are many examples in the ecological literature and 
within conservation biology theory of this happening. But that is 
an uncertainty at this point. 

Therefore, my plea for greater research dollars to understand 
possible increases in bear population to the north, it could be com- 
pensatory with the losses to the south. It is one of the models. Is 
it absolute loss? Is it a range shift? And I would also welcome input 
or thoughts after this meeting from somebody that actually has 
studied ice, here sitting to my left, to know whether conditions ac- 
tually can improve in the north for ringed seals to be able to be- 
come accessible to polar bears, whether multi-year ice conversion 
to annual sea ice in some situations, such as Davis Strait, could be- 
come a net positive. 

But these are the questions, and therefore my plea for greater re- 
search. 

Senator Inhofe. I see. And you have expressed concern that the 
proposed listing of the polar bear due to climate change is really 
about energy policy. Could you elaborate on that? 

Mr. Foote. I have underlined that, that was brought to my at- 
tention by the actual petitioners in a recent article. I have the 
quote here, December , ESP listing decision is the reference. 
And one of their lead counsel said, it gives me hope that we can 
get the United States to reduce greenhouse gas pollution before it 
is too late to save the Arctic. That was in reference to the petition. 
So it started a logical thought process that maybe there was some 
other agenda at work here. 

Senator Inhofe. I see. Thank you very much. Dr. Foote, and the 
whole panel. This has been very enlightening to me. 

Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

Senator Lieberman. Thanks, Senator Inhofe. 

Senator Boxer. 

Senator Boxer. Thank you. Dr. Foote, thank you for your com- 
ments about going to Sacramento in an environmentally sound 
way. 

Mr. Foote. I am looking forward to that meeting. 

Senator Boxer. You signed a letter in , along with dozens 
of Canadian scientists, that said, “We must reduce greenhouse gas 
emissions as rapidly as possible. Contrary to the views often por- 
trayed by the press and industry spokespersons, there is little dis- 
agreement in the scientific community about climate warming.” Do 
you stand by that? 

Mr. Foote. I am full of questions. Senator Boxer. 

Senator Boxer. Do you take that back, then? I don’t have a lot 
of time, I just want to know if you have changed your mind since 
then. 

Mr. Foote. It has evolved substantially, and it will continue to 
evolve. 

Senator Boxer. So you don’t stand by the statement you made 
in ? 



 


Mr. Foote. I would stand by a modified version of that. 

Senator Boxer. Okay, that is fair. Modified version, okay. 

Now, it is true that you work with the International LJnion for 
Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources, often known as the 
World Conservation, Union, correct? And you were a regional chair 
for North American Within the Sustainable Use Specialist Group, 
is that correct? 

Mr. Foote. That is correct. 

Senator Boxer. Okay. Is it not true that your position is directly 
contrary to the International Union for the Conservation of Nature 
and Natural Resources? 

Mr. Foote. I speak as an individual. 

Senator Boxer. Yes, isn’t it true that they disagree with you? 

Mr. Foote. I do not know their position. 

Senator Boxer. Well, their position is that the polar bear is list- 
ed as vulnerable. The Polar Bear Specialist Group determined that 
due to decreasing sea ice because of global warming, the polar bear 
is in decline and listed as vulnerable. I just wanted to make the 
point that you stand alone from that group that you were a part 
of 

I also want to put in the record parts of this review, if I can, Mr. 
Chairman. It is the analysis of our Fish and Wildlife Service, dated 
December , . 

Senator Lieberman. It will be entered into the record without ob- 
