order to avoid utilization incompatible with their survival. Appendix III includes species that are 
protected in at least one country, and for which that country has asked other CITES Party 
countries for assistance in controlling and monitoring international trade in that species. 

For species to be added or removed from Appendices I or II, a vote is required at a CITES 
Conference of the Parties, which is held every - years, but any CITES Party may add a native 
species to Appendix III unilaterally provided that the Party has domestic laws to protect the 
species. 

Polar bears are currently listed as an Appendix  species under CITES. As such, member 
countries to CITES must determine, amongst other things, that any polar bear, polar bear part, or 
product made from polar bear was legally obtained and that the export will not be detrimental to 


 



 


the survival of the species, prior to issuing a permit authorizing the export of the animal, part or 
product. 


f. Mechanisms to regulate climate change 

Regulatory mechanisms to comprehensively address the causes of climate change are still under 
development. Efforts to address climate change globally began with the United Nations 
Framework Convention on Climate Change (“UNFCCC”), which was adopted in May . 

The stated objective of the UNFCCC is the stabilization of greenhouse gas concentrations in the 
atmosphere at a level that would prevent dangerous anthropogenic interference with the climate 
system. Due to the complexity of climate issues and the widely divergent political positions of 
the world’s nation states, the UNFCCC itself was unable to set emissions targets or limitations, 
but instead created a framework that set the stage for subsequent actions (UNFCCC ). The 
UNFCCC covers greenhouse gases not otherwise controlled by the Montreal Protocol on ozone- 
depleting substances (UNFCCC ). A key feature of the Framework is the designation of 
different levels of responsibility to the parties of the convention, based on their differing levels of 
economic development (UNFCCC ). To date, the goals set by the Framework have not 
been met (International Climate Change Taskforce ). 

The Kyoto Protocol, negotiated in , became the first additional agreement added to the 
UNFCCC to set emissions targets. The Kyoto Protocol set goals for developed countries to 
reduce their emissions to at least % below their  levels (UNFCCC ). Implementation 
of the Kyoto Protocol would slightly reduce the rate of growth of emissions and would only 
make a small contribution to stabilizing the level of emissions in the atmosphere (Williams 
). Additionally, mechanisms for enforcement of emission reductions have not yet been 
tested and there are no financial penalties or automatic consequences for failing to meet Kyoto 
targets (UNFCCC ). Climate responds to changes in greenhouse gas concentrations with a 
time lag therefore, past emissions have initiated processes that lead to a certain degree of 
warming and climate change (IPCC , Williams , ACIA ). 


 



 


Domestic efforts relative to climate change focus on continued studies programs, support for 
developing new technologies and use of incentives for supporting reductions in emissions. A 
strategic plan for the U.S, Climate Change Science Program released by the Departments of 
Energy and Commerce and the White House Office of Science Technology and Policy is 
available t httD-.//climatescience.govA . The strategy is for developing knowledge of variability 
and change in climate and related environmental and human systems and for encouraging the 
application of this knowledge. The strategic goal of emissions reductions is measured by 
emissions intensity, the amount of emissions per unit of economic activity 
( http:// state , eov/e/oes/c I i mateA . This measure differs from an absolute measure of output and 
while the emissions intensity could decrease the total emissions would still increase (GAO 
). 


. International Classification Systems 

a. Natu reserve List 

NatureServe is a non-profit conservation organization that provides the scientific information 
and tools needed to help guide effective conservation action. NatureServe and its network of 
natural heritage programs are a major source for information about rare and endangered species 
and threatened ecosystems. 

NatureServe represents an international network of biological inventories — known as natural 
heritage programs or conservation data centers — operating in all  U.S. states, Canada, Latin 
America and the Caribbean. The organization collects and manages detailed local information on 
plants, animals, and ecosystems, and develops information products, data management tools, and 
conservation services to help meet local, national, and global conservation needs. The scientific 
information about species and ecosystems developed by NatureServe is used by a variety of 
government and private sectors to make informed decisions about managing our natural 
resources. 


 



 


On October ,  NatureServe revised its global status rank for polar bears to G, the 
equivalent of “Vulnerable,” from the previous classification of G, “apparently secure.” The 
term vulnerable is defined as one that is at moderate risk of extinction due to a restricted range, 
relatively few populations, recent and widespread declines, or other factors. Polar bears fit this 
classification as the population is restricted to high northern latitudes with a relatively small total 
population of ,-, individuals located in about  relatively discrete major 
populations. Potential negative impacts from various human activities were cited (e.g. oil and 
gas exploration and development, harvest, environmental contaminants) as increasing or not well 
regulated in some areas. Global warming effects on sea ice could result in major declines in polar 
bear distribution and abundance. Details regarding NaturServe and the polar bear status 
assessment can be found at the following web site: httD://www.natureserve.org and Appendix . 


b. lUCN Red List 

The lUCN World Conservation Union) through its Red List program assesses the conservation 
status of species, subspecies, varieties and selected subpopulations to identify taxa threatened 
with extinction in order to promote their conservation. The program goal is to provide the world 
with the most objective, scientifically-based information on the current status of globally 
threatened biodiversity. The lUCN Red List of Threatened Species provides taxonomic, 
conservation status and distribution information on taxa that have been evaluated using the 
lUCN Red List Categories and Criteria. 

De Grammont and Cuardn () conducted an evaluation of categorization systems that assess 
the risk of species extinction to evaluate the objectivity and accuracy of threatened or endangered 
classification systems. Twenty-five categorization systems from  countries were evaluated. 
These included examples of international lists, most national systems used in the American 
continent, and some systems independently proposed by academics. Fifteen characteristics that 
should be included in the categorization were assessed. They concluded that of all evaluated 
systems, the current World Conservation Union system (lUCN) is the most suitable for assessing 
species extinction risk. On May , , the lUCN/SSC Red List of Threatened Species was 

 



 


updated to include the “Vulnerable” classification of polar bears developed by the PBSG as 
discussed above. 

The assessment was based on an assumed population reduction of greater then % within  
generations (defined as age of sexual maturity, i.e.,  years, plus % of the length of the life 
time reproductive period, i.e.  years, or  years) that would result from a decline in area of 
occupancy, extent of occurrence, and habitat quality. The assessment, conducted by the Polar 
Bears Specialist Group, uses the  lUCN criteria (Appendix ) and found the following (Aars 
et al. ): 

“Polar bears rely almost entirely on the marine sea ice environment for their survival so 
