yet populations of these bears are a response to, not a cause of climate change. Re- 
gardless of bear populations, climate will be unaffected by them, hence more protec- 
tions for bears is illogical in remedying climate change. Simple association does not 
imply causation. 

. Errors of insufficient data. Polar bears are an extremely adaptable and per- 
sistent species that have occupied the arctic for at least the last , years® . 
Their range constitutes a circumpolar belt that, if it follows many other species 
range shifts, will have moved northward and southward in response to previous epi- 
sodes of ice ages and climate warming conditions'^. We need more information on 
the conditions leading to reductions in ice and in habitat quality at the southern 
fringes of polar bear range and whether a commensurate and offsetting improve- 
ment occurs at the northern fringe of the polar bear ranges. The hypothesis of shift- 
ing ranges needs extensive investigation by bear surveys in the poorly known north- 
ern ranges. For example, if healthy bears are found giving birth to triplets instead 
of twins in the north and skinny smaller bears are having singletons instead of 
twins in the south, evidence for population-wide compensation to climate may exist. 

. Errors of conflation. The listing of polar bears as endangered is likely pre- 
mature because there is insufficient data on most northern ranges to identify 
whether conditions are improving in response to climate change even as the south- 
ern fringes appear to be degrading. The knowledge of Hudson Bay (HB) bears is the 
best available for any polar bear subpopulation in existence®. The HB populations 
are the: 

(a) most southerly, 

(b) most accessible, 

(c) most handled, for example,  bears were anesthetized and helicopter ferried 
out of Churchill in  alone (Tyrell), 

(d) most habituated to humans and human food as they spend months near thou- 
sands of people in Churchill, some of whom feed them. 

Extrapolation from the HB sub population to all other more northerly polar bear 
populations is inappropriate, yet this leap of conflation is commonly taken by the 
media. Understanding of the  other global polar bear subpopulations north of HB 
are less robust (but see reference®), yet, many polar bear biologists on the agree that 
some subpopulations are increasing, some are stable, and some are believed to be 
decreasing. 

. Errors of bad faith. Charismatic species are useful for marketing perceptions 
of sports teams (Chicago Bears, Detroit Lions), retail products (Chevrolet Impala, 
polar bears for soft drinks) and causes (Free Willy, Born Free Foundation). Credi- 
bility is lost, however, when scientific knowledge is misused to achieve a political 
end such as unsubstantiated emotional appeals for polar bear survival when the ul- 
timate goal is to influence U.S. energy policy. As one of those petitioning for ESA 
listing!® of polar bears said: “[the December , ESA listing decision] gives me 
hope that we can get the United States to reduce greenhouse-gas pollution before 
it is too late to save the Arctic”!!. The goal of reducing climate change is honorable, 
the highly selective use of polar bear information for this is less so. 

. Confusion of proximate and ultimate causes: The ultimate cause of polar bear 
population reductions (absolute decreases over decadal time frames) is habitat re- 
duction, particularly less sea ice. In the absence of immediate proximate factors, the 
long-term population levels of polar bears will be determined by ultimate factors. 
Proximate factors may include reduced fecundity, cub abandonment, cannibalism, 
starvation, hunter harvests and increased energy demands from changing condi- 
tions. These sources of mortality are appropriate in that they reflect a form of popu- 
lation regulation to more closely match bear numbers with the ranges’ ability to 
support them. 


®http://pbsg.npolar.no/ 

®Pers corns Dr. Mitch Taylor,  February . 

http://www.abcbirds.org/cliniatechange/ 

^Stirling I, NJ Lund, and J locozza. . Arctic :-. 

^Stirling, I . Arctic  Supplement :-. 

!® http://pbsg.npolar.no/ 

!!http://www. grist.org/comments/interacti vist////siegel/index.html 



 


. Lack of specificity: The blanket listing of polar bears is a blunt and non-specific 
regulation that does not accurately target the threatened subpopulations of polar 
bears. The Endangered Species Act as applied to Grizzly Bears occurring on U.S. 
lands shows the flexibility to list the grizzlies in the coterminous States as endan- 
gered, yet those in Alaska as abundant enough for sustainable harvests and export. 
Even if this same mechanism were applied to polar bears, it redundantly mimics 
the Marine Mammals Protection Act that already provides protection for those spe- 
cific populations most at risk and acknowledges the increases/stability where they 
are known for subpopulations. 

Polar bear watching 

Bears are powerful and potentially dangerous predators, so polar bear watching 
is rarely promoted as a tourist activity given the lack of amenities available in the 
polar bears’ territories. The principal place where polar bear watching has been de- 
veloped (Churchill, Manitoba, the self-styled ‘Polar bear capital of the World’) is ac- 
cessible by rail and air and hosts -, tourists each fall to watch the bears from 
the safety of sturdy ’Tundra Buggies’ made from modified buses. Most bear observa- 
tions are from - meters and bears are approached approximately every  min- 
utes during the day.^^ 

Tourist amenities are well-developed because Churchill hosts not only polar bear 
watchers, but visitors at other times of year who variously watch whales, arctic/sub- 
arctic birds, and the Aurora Borealis, and who attend courses at the Churchill 
Northern Studies Center, or to fish, hunt, or engage in ecotourism expeditions. 

In North Alaska a small number of tourists visit Barrow and Kaktovik where they 
observe whaling activities and view polar bears attracted to the whale carcasses. 

Churchill, Manitoba is unique in having good access, good concentrations of bears 
and tourist infrastructure. It is a highly valued experience available for $,- 
$,. This form of tourism is not widespread. For example, seeing a solitary bear 
in a remote arctic village (necessarily at a distance, for safety reasons) is less attrac- 
tive than the opportunity available at Churchill, every day of the visit, to photo- 
graph dozens of bears at very close range. There have been problems with bear 
watching too. Tour operators are purported to attract bears with blocks of lard, by 
rubbing fish oils on the wheels of their tour buggies, and by hauling whale carcasses 
as attractants to nearby beaches to ensure client viewing opportunities. Habituated 
bears sometimes become nuisance bears, necessitating an identifying paint mark on 
their hide, sometimes temporary restraint in Churchill’s “bear jail” holding facility 
and occasionally helicopter translocation of bears to remote areas. In  there 
were  bears helicopter-transported out of Churchill. The remote northern town 
of Arviat,  miles up the coast from Churchill was simultaneously beleaguered 
with nuisance polar bears, many of which carried an identif  dng paint mark on 
themi'^. In earlier times, polar bear hunting was a crucial management tool in re- 
mote villages and possibly structured the bear-human relationship in ways that no 
longer occur. 

Polar bear hunting 

In contrast to the bear-watching industry, polar bear hunters need almost no 
amenities beyond those available to local people. Visiting hunters spend very little 
time in the communities, yet contribute a significant source of revenue. A recent 
study of polar bear conservation hunting determined that the nine Inuit commu- 
nities in Nunavut Territory who hosted visiting polar bear hunters received about 
$, for allocating  percent of their subsistence quota to visiting hunters^®. 
These revenues were paid out as wages (a guide may earn more than $, for 
accompanying a hunter on a two-week hunt and may work three hunts per season), 
to the outfitter for making all arrangements, and to various community members 
for making suitable clothing, preparing the trophies for shipment, and for local pur- 
chases. 

For the local residents, polar bear hunting is culturally, socially, economically, 
and nutritionally important, and for those engaged in outfitting and guiding visiting 
hunters, that seasonal occupation provides meaningful employment at a time of year 


