

 


ture record which measures the temperatures above the surface of 
the earth; and third, the satellite record. And for each of these, I 
discuss the nature of the measurements, their coverage in space 
and time, their biases, their advantages and disadvantages, and 
they all have some, and a brief overall assessment of them. And 
I then deal with the issues of reconciling them, and I do not have 
time to go through all of those things here. 

What I will say is that all three records have been improved and 
developed in recent years, in particular several corrections have 
been made to the satellite record, for example, through the effects 
of the systematic orbital decay of each satellite — and this has im- 
proved the level of agreement among the records. 

Now using the radiosonde record, we can estimate the tempera- 
tures of the layer seen by the satellite. And this shows quite good 
agreement during the overlap period after . And therefore, we 
can use the radiosonde record to extend that record back in time 
to about  quite reliably. 

And when we do that, although we find that the temperature 
trends in the satellite record from  to  are quite small, the 
longer term trends are somewhat more in agreement with what we 
see at the surface. 

I would emphasize that the trends in the satellite record, after 
, are less than those at the surface, primarily because they are 
measuring different things. A reasonable interpretation, I think, of 
the overall record is that global warming increases 

The Chairman. What different things are they measuring? 

Dr. Trenberth. The satellite record is measuring the layer in 
the lowest five miles or so of the atmosphere, and it is influenced 
by a number of things that have much less influence at the surface. 
I was just coming to that point, in fact. 

The Chairman. I am sorry. 

Dr. Trenberth. I think a reasonable interpretation of the overall 
record is that the global warming from increased greenhouse gases 
is producing the rising temperatures that we are seeing at the sur- 
face, and now those rises are above and beyond those arising from 
natural variability. 

The main reasons the tropospheric temperatures are not keeping 
pace are because of stratospheric ozone depletion which has a much 
greater effect on what is happening, especially in the lower strato- 
sphere and the upper part of the troposphere than it does on the 
surface. And also, changes in cloud cover, which have an effect on 
maximum versus minimum temperatures. We know that minimum 
temperatures are rising much faster than maximum temperatures, 
for instance. So changes in cloud coverage which may or may not 
be associated with other pollution in the atmosphere (effects other 
than climate change), may also be due to climate change itself. 
These are probably the two biggest effects that are causing the dis- 
parity. 

Therefore, what we do see is that the larger surface temperature 
increases are occurring over land and at night time, somewhat less 
during the day, and somewhat less over the oceans. 

The panel concluded that the records are probably reasonably 
consistent with each other once all of the forcing factors are taken 
into account. Now this goes beyond the models themselves, as it 



 


also is the forcing factors such as the depletion of the ozone layer 
and its vertical profile which are not known very well. And that is 
one of the uncertainties that exists. 

Once all of those factors are taken into account, we believe the 
records are consistent with one another. In other words, the bigger 
increase at the surface than in the troposphere is real. And accord- 
ingly, the recent warming at the surface is undoubtedly real. It is 
substantially greater than the average rate during the th cen- 
tury, and it is in no way invalidated by the satellite record. 

In my closing remarks, I would like to make a comment about 
global warming in general. I think the term itself is often misused, 
and it really should refer to the increased heating that is occurring 
because of the changes in composition of the atmosphere. 

Some of that heat goes into raising temperature, but in actual 
fact, most of it goes into evaporating moisture at the surface of the 
earth. Most of the earth is covered by ocean,  percent of the sur- 
face, and most of the heat is, in fact, going into evaporating mois- 
ture. 

Over land that is true also as long as there is moisture around, 
but when things dry out, as happens in a drought, then all of the 
heat tends to go into raising temperature, and that is when we get 
the greatest heat waves. 

In the United States, there has been a general increase in pre- 
cipitation and this tends to mute any changes in temperature be- 
cause more heat is going then into evaporating moisture. As an ex- 
ample of this, if it has been raining and the sun comes out, the 
first thing that happens is that all of the puddles dry up. The heat 
goes into evaporating the moisture, not raising temperature. 

So it is very important to consider changes in temperature along 
with changes in rainfall, and just focusing on temperature does not 
give you a complete picture or an adequate understanding of what 
exactly is going on. 

So I would emphasize that it is much more than changes in tem- 
perature. Changes in precipitation, changes in moisture can act as 
a swamp cooler to air condition the planet, and in fact, do so. And 
we should also be concerned about changes in storms and changes 
in severe weather events. 

Thank you for the opportunity to testify. 

The Chairman. Thank you very much. 

[The prepared statement of Dr. Trenberth follows:] 

Prepared Statement of Dr. Kevin E. Trenberth, Director, Climate Analysis 
Section, National Center for Atmospheric Research 

CLIMATE CHANGE AND TEMPERATURES 

Introduction 

My name is Kevin Trenberth. I am the Head of the Climate Analysis Section at 
NCAR, the National Center for Atmospheric Research. I am especially interested in 
global-scale climate dynamics; the observations, processes and modeling of climate 
changes from interannual to centennial time scales. I have served on many national 
and international committees including National Research Council/National Acad- 
emy of Science committees, panels and/or boards. I recently served on the National 
Research Council Panel on “Reconciling observations of global temperature change,” 
whose report was published in January . I co-chaired the international CLIVAR 
Scientific Steering Group of the World Climate Research Programme (WCRP) from 
 to  and I remain a member of that group as well as the Joint Scientific 
Committee that oversees the WCRP as a whole. CLIVAR is short for Climate Varia- 



 

