
By starting now to cut global warming pollution levels  percent annually and setting 
concrete goals to cut emissions  percent every decade, we can reduce our pollution 

levels a total of  percent by mid-century. After enacting such a plan, the U.S. will be 
positioned to provide global leadership and to encourage other nations to do their share to 
help stabilize our climate. 

This plan will be effective because global wanning is being driven largely by carbon 
dioxide pollution from fossil fuels we use as our primary sources of energy, particularly 
oil and coal. Every minute, we emit  million pounds of carbon dioxide into the 
atmosphere in the United States. The oil used for transportation and the coal used in 
power plants to generate most of the electricity we use in our homes and offices together 
account for about two-thirds of U.S. global warming pollution from energy. By cutting 
pollution from these and other sources  percent annually, we are likely to prevent the 
planet from warming more than an additional  degrees Fahrenheit — a potential ‘tipping 
point’ threshold scientists are warning we must not exceed if we are to avoid the most 
severe risks of global warming. 

Without urgent action, the Department of Energy projects that our dependency on fossil 
fuels will climb dramatically in coming years, resulting in a  percent increase by  in 
carbon dioxide pollution from oil and coal. (DOE, ) In short, if current energy 
practices persist, we will make the problem worse and worse every year, adding to the 
pollution legacy we are leaving our children. 

Because our growing dependency on fossil fuels is at the heart of the global warming crisis. 



 


sector today generates more than $ billion annually and supports  . million jobs in 
more than , firms. 

We ask Congress to show the same determination to get the job done when it comes to 
reducing global warming pollution. If Congress sets clear goals and safeguards to curb 
pollution, American industry will become the driving force behind solving global 
warming. 

Recently, a coalition of some of America’s leading companies and major emitters of 
greenhouse gases, including GE, Alcoa, BP, DuPont, Duke Energy, and Caterpillar, 
called for Congress to enact legislation to curb global wanning pollution by  to  
percent below current levels within  years and by  to percent by . The 
coalition warns that “any delay in action to control emissions increases the risk of 
unavoidable consequences that could necessitate even steeper reductions in the future.” 

These companies, which have voluntarily stepped forward to take action, have clearly 
demonstrated that technologies exist today to reduce emissions significantly. Companies 
that have set goals for reducing emissions have been able to achieve those goals 
consistently ahead of schedule and at a corporate profit. For example, BP, one of the 
world’s largest energy companies, met its internal greenhouse-gas-reduction target in 
, nine years ahead of schedule, reducing emissions by  percent and saving $ 
million over three years after an initial investment of $ million. 

As documented in the report Carbon Down, Profits Up, five global companies, including 
IBM and DuPont, have achieved greenhouse gas reductions of  percent or more with 
combined savings of more than $. billion from improved energy efficiency, fuel 
switching and reduced waste. 

Beyond the economic opportunity of shifting money from fossil fuels to clean energy, it 
also is important to consider the economic impacts of global warming if we fail to act. A 
recent report by a United Kingdom commission chaired by Sir Nicholas Stem, former chief 
economist of the World Bank, found that global warming could reduce world economic 
output by as much as  percent if we fail to take action. In contrast, the cost of taking 
steps to reduce worldwide pollution significantly would only amount to perhaps  percent 
over a period of decades. 

With more frequent weather extremes - heat waves, droughts, and heavy precipitation 
events - and more intense hurricanes, we are already experiencing the economic impacts of 
more frequent natural disasters. According to Mxmich Re - a leading insurance provider - 
the insurance industry has experienced a massive increase in the frequency and cost of 
natural disasters in recent years. Between  and  there were nearly three times as 
many weather-related natural disasters than during the  s. The trend is even clearer in 
light of the economic losses, which increased by more than a factor of five in the same 
period. (Munich Re, ). 



 


 was a record year for hurricane damages. The insurance industry had to pay a record 
$ billion for losses caused by North Atlantic hurricanes, especially in the United States 
and the Caribbean. Losses in  more than doubled this record - topping $ billion 
(Munich Re, ). 

There are numerous opportunities to reduce global warming pollution from a variety of 
sources and set us on a course that can minimize the economic damages of global 
warming. Consider the opportunities to address one key contributor to global warming - 
our skyrocketing dependence on oil. The fuel-economy of cars and SUVs sold today is, on 
average, worse than it was  years ago. Indeed, fuel-economy standards have not been 
updated significantly since the era of the -track tape player. 

The National Academy of Sciences concluded in  that we have the technologies today 
to make far more fuel efficient cars of all sizes (National Research Council, ). But 
without Congressional leadership, little has been done to get those technologies into the 
cars we drive. 

In contrast to our lack of progress on fuel economy, consider the innovation that has 
occurred over this time period: the personal computer, the Internet, mobile phones. The 
space shuttle, first launched in , is today considered an “old” technology that NASA 
plans to shut down within four years. With the right leadership, we can put America’s 
entrepreneurial and technology leadership to work for our planet. 

Many nations have already begun moving down this path and are far ahead of the United 
States in cutting pollution and promoting clean energy. Most industrialized nations have 
signed the Kyoto Protocol - an international treaty to curb global warming pollution. Even 
some major developing nations are taking bold steps. China has tougher fuel economy 
standards for motor vehicles than the United States and has recently established goals to 
promote renewable energy and energy efficiency. 

Without the leadership of the United States, which accounts for one-quarter of the world’s 
global warming pollution, the bold global pollution reductions needed in coming decades 
will not get done. The United States has the industrial strength and ingenuity to lead the 
way with low-pollution technologies, and it’s time we became a world leader in 
confronting global warming. 

Fortunately, state and local governments have not been standing still despite the lack of 
action in Congress. Representing more than  million Americans, there are now  
mayors who have signed onto the U.S. Mayors Climate Protection Agreement to curb 
emissions in their municipalities. California has enacted laws to cut emissions by  
percent by , and a dozen states have set new standards to curb carbon dioxide 
emissions from tailpipes of new cars and SUVs. 


Additional Steps Needed to Protect Wildlife from Global Warming 



 


In addition to reducing global warming pollution. Congress and the Administration need to 
take steps to fund and manage America’s wildlife resources better in preparation for the 
climate changes already underway. 

The Wildlife Society (Inkley et ah, ) has identified many actions wildlife managers 
should be implementing now to ameliorate the effects of global warming on wildlife. 

These management actions include protecting coastal wetlands to allow for sea level rise, 
reducing the risks to wildlife from potential catastrophic events, adjusting yield and 
harvest models, accounting for known climatic variations and taking global wanning into 
consideration when selecting the location and other characteristics of conservation areas. 
Wildlife managers also need to expect the unexpected and to reduce non-climate stressors on 
ecosystems. 

Overall, wildlife managers can minimize negative impacts to wildlife and take advantage 
of positive aspects by planning ahead and employing adaptive management. However, 
absent funding to implement these recommendations now, fish and wildlife resources will 
