
The Chesapeake Bay sits at the southern end of the distribution 
of a species called zostera, it is eel grass. Most of us don’t think 
very much about eel grass. But when you go out into the shallows 
in the Chesapeake Bay, it forms little forests, literally about this 
deep. Eel grass is an extraordinarily important habitat. It is where 
small fish and small crabs go to hide. They are hiding in there so 
that they can grow, so that they can move out when they get a lit- 
tle bit bigger and not get taken by the predators. 

In part because of the distribution of eel grass in this north- 
south direction, in the summer of  when we had an unusually 
warm summer in the Chesapeake Bay, the water went up to  de- 
grees centigrade. I apologize, I think in centigrade, not Fahrenheit. 

Senator Lieberman. Compared to the norm? 

Mr. Mann. To the norm, which is about . A couple of extra de- 
grees. What you saw was a large dieback in this habitat. The prob- 
lem is that eel grass grows very slowly in terms of building a bed. 
One warm summer, the loss of a lot of habitat, the prospect of a 
long time for it go grow back, and if it doesn’t have more cool sum- 
mers, it won’t grow back. What that means is that the crabs and 
the fish that typically use it as habitat have to look for other pieces 
of real estate, and they don’t find any that are as accommodating. 

You could say, well, won’t other grasses move in, aren’t there 
other grasses that do this? There are other grasses that potentially 
might move in, but they are different in their nature. They form 
small, ephemeral stands that last for a year or two and then move 
on. 

So rather like we have seen the suggestions that pine bark bor- 
ers actually destroy parts of pine forests, large stable pieces of com- 
munity over long periods of time, that it takes a long time to grow 
back after disturbance, the eel grass beds are much the same. Very 
small temperature changes, very significant losses, very long time 
periods for them to grow back. Very long time periods for critical 
habitats, fish and juvenile crabs. 

So when we go through this list, what we are seeing is not sort 
of a gradual change. You see what is a step function. You go past 
a certain temperature for a certain time and lots of things start 
changing, and they have domino effects. 

So in the Chesapeake Bay there are a number of these. And of 
course, not the last of which and not the least of which are the oys- 



 


ter diseases. As the good Senator noted, large amounts of money 
have been invested in trying to restore the ecosystems of the 
Chesapeake Bay. The oysters are actually central to that. The oys- 
ters at this point in time are challenged by not one but two very 
significant diseases. The activity of those diseases is strongly re- 
lated to temperature. As the temperature goes up in the summer, 
the diseases get worse. 

And indeed, those diseases, one of which used to have a distribu- 
tion from the Chesapeake Bay down into Texas, over the last  
to  years, we have seen the northern distribution of that disease 
go all the way to Long Island Sound. Long Island Sound has gone 
up by about  and a half degrees in the summer. Very small 
changes, very large effects, and definitely not linear, long time to 
recovery. The Chesapeake Bay is a laboratory in which we see lots 
of these. 

Senator Lieberman. That is very compelling, because it is evi- 
dence you have observed. I appreciate your testimony. My time is 
up. 

Senator Warner. 

Senator Warner. I would like to yield to the distinguished Rank- 
ing Member, and then I will follow in sequence. 

Senator Inhofe. I thank Senator Warner for that gesture. We 
are both working on the Armed Services, and there are events with 
our Chairman on the Floor right now, that are taking place. 

I was going to ask a question that I am not going to ask now, 
because I think it would probably take up too much of the time for 
my line of questioning. But during my opening remarks, I did refer 
to some of the individuals that have changed their position, some 
of the well-known scientists, climatologists, meteorologists, geo- 
physicists and others who had very strong, they were certain about 
their position at one time, then they changed their position. I men- 
tioned Claude Allegre from France. 

There is also David Bellamy from the U.K. who was absolutely 
certain of his position, and he has now reversed that as a result 
of the science that he has looked at over the past few years. Patrick 
Moore, who is one of the co-founders of Greenpeace, went through 
the same conversion. And just today, I found out about, a guy that 
I have been following, his name is Nir Shariv, he is the top astro- 
physicist in Israel, and he was one of them who was certain in his 
position also that it was in fact man-made contributions that are 
causing climate change. 

So with all of this that is taking place, my only position has 
been, let’s be real sure. If we are going to undergo the financial 
devastation in this country that, according to the Wharton Econo- 
metric Survey and others have said would happen, with some of 
the things with the greenhouse gases, or with the regulation of 
CO  , we want to be sure that the science is right. I go back and 
look at some of the scientists, such as Tom Wiggly, who happened 
to be A Gore’s scientist, after an exhaustive study, that if all of 
the developed Nations signed onto Kyoto and followed its emissions 
requirements, it would only reduce the temperature over a -year 
period by / of  degree centigrade. 

So you folks are scientists and we are not. But we have to look 
at what the scientists are saying. And let me just deviate for a 



 


minute, Mr. Stalling, I was listening to you. Back when I enjoyed 
life, and I was about your age, I used to do the same things that 
you are doing. So that was most enjoyable, and I am quite envious 
of your lifestyle now. 

This morning, there was an article that you probably have 
missed, because it just came out in Newsweek this morning, by 
George Will. He said over the millennium, the planet has warmed 
and cooled for reasons that are unclear, but clearly were unrelated 
to SUVs. Was life better when ice was a mile thick covering Chi- 
cago? Was it worse when Greenland was so warm the Vikings were 
farming there? Are you sure that the climate at this particular mo- 
ment is exactly right and that it must be preserved no matter the 
cost? 

So rather than to ask you, if you were to have your choice of 
where a climate should be right now, would it be today’s, or would 
it have been back in the s during the Medieval warming pe- 
riod, where some believe it was warmer than it is today? Or per- 
haps the s during the little ice age or perhaps  imme- 
diately following a period of warming and going into a cooling pe- 
riod? Maybe for the record you could send that back to me. 

But I do want to ask Dr. Foote some questions. The reason I 
want to ask this, we are talking about polar bears, and certainly 
you can’t look at the pictures that were shown by my good friend. 
Senator Boxer, without being sympathetic. However, when there is 
a discussion as to going into a -year process, determining whether 
