Conclusion 

Global wanning is the conservation challenge of our time. It casts a long shadow 
over all of our other efforts to conserve and recover wildlife. We must act promptly to 
reduce greenhouse gas emissions to halt and eventually reverse the changes we are 
causing to our planet from global warming. At the same time, we must take steps to 
enable wildlife to survive the next century of inevitable impacts from global warming, to 



 


navigate this bottleneck, so that wildlife and, ultimately, humans, will benefit from the 
actions we take now to stop global warming. On behalf of Defenders of Wildlife, thank 
you for the opportunity to share our perspective on this critical issue. We look forward to 
working with you in the days ahead to meet the challenge of global warming’s impact on 
wildlife and wildlife habitat. 



 


TESTIMONY SUBMITTED 


BY 


LARRY J. SCHWEIGER 
PRESIDENT* CEO 
NATIONAL WILDLIFE FEDERATION 


TO THE 

SENATE ENVIRONMENT AND PUBLIC WORKS 
COMMITTEE 


SUBCOMMITTEE ON PRIVATE SECTOR AND CONSUMER 
SOLUTIONS TO GLOBAL WARMING AND WILDLIFE 

PROTECTION 


FOR THE 

GLOBAL WARMING AND WILDLIFE HEARING 


FEBRUARY?,  



 


The National Wildlife Federation appreciates the Senators’ efforts today to take an 
in-depth look at the impacts of global warming on wildlife. The National Wildlife 
Federation is America’s largest wildlife conservation organization, representing more than 
 million members and supporters throughout the United States, including nearly , 
hunters and anglers. The National Wildlife Federation includes  affiliated state and 
territorial conservation organizations, which in turn support hundreds of local clubs across 
the nation. We are a non-partisan organization, and our membership mirrors the political 
diversity of Americans everywhere. 

The National Wildlife Federation represents a ‘big tent’ of wildlife enthusiasts - 
gardeners, hunters, anglers, birdwatchers, naturalists, educators, children, and others - 
who are united by our mission of protecting wildlife for our children’s future. Our 
signature children’s publication. Ranger Rick, is an American icon that heralds the joy 
and wonder of wildlife in our backyards and throughout the world. 


Global warming is the most dangerous threat to the future of wildlife, and we have a 
moral responsibility to take action now before it is too late. The National Wildlife 
Federation is confident America can be a global leader in solving global warming if we 
act with the urgency and determination with which we have successfully confronted past 
threats to our security and to wildlife. 

For the first time in history, we are nearing the tipping point in an ecological crisis that 
could see wholesale loss of wildlife populations and profound changes in our outdoor 
experiences. Wildlife species are ill-prepared to meet the threat of global warming’s rapid 
and disruptive climate changes, which extend well beyond temperature changes to include 
a much broader array of threats to vital habitat. Rising sea levels, drying wetlands, 
changing water temperatures, more favorable climates for wildlife pests and diseases, and 
shifting vegetation zones are some of the manifold dangers that make global wanning a 
deadly threat to wildlife. 

A study in the journal Nature concluded that, within the next  years, as many as a third of 
wildlife species in some regions worldwide could be headed for extinction because of 
global warming (Thomas et al., ). 

The threat of global warming to wildlife was vividly illustrated by the U.S. Fish and 
Wildlife Service’s proposal on December , , to list the polar bear as a threatened 
species. Secretary of the Interior Dirk Kempthome stated that “the polar bears’ habitat 
may literally be melting.” 

Species that survive global warming may nevertheless undergo large population reductions. 
For example, global warming-induced drought conditions in the Prairie Pothole Region of 
central North America could dry up vital wetlands and lead to a two-thirds decline in the 
abundance of ducks breeding in the region. This will affect mallards, gadwall, blue- winged 
teal, northern pintails, canvasbacks, redheads and ruddy ducks throughout North America’s 
flyways. 

The rapid pace of climate change is already unraveling the tapestry of life in entire 



 


ecosystems. In Alaska, Canada and parts of the continental United States, millions of 
acres of forest have been wiped out in recent years by beetle outbreaks brought about by 
warmer winters. Warmer, drier conditions due to global warming have caused a four-fold 
increase in the number of major wildfires in western forests. Some parts of the Caribbean 
have lost as much as  percent of their coral reefs as oceans warm. 

These and other threats to wildlife are detailed in a collection of educational reports and 
materials available on the National Wildlife Federation’s website at 
www.nwf.ore/elobalwarming. 

The remainder of my testimony is divided into the following sections: 

• The recent landmark assessment of scientific consensus on global warming 

• Opinions of hunters and anglers on global warming 

• Global warming and America’s wildlife 

• Economic importance of wildlife 

• Solving global warming 

• Additional steps needed to protect wildlife from global warming 

• Concluding Remarks 

Landmark Assessment of Scientific Consensus 

The release on February , , of the most recent scientific consensus report by the 
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) should be the final wake up call to 
Congress after years of procrastination and delay (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate 
Change ). The report is the culmination of decades of research and of unprecedented 
scientific collaboration by more than , scientists worldwide. The report is based 
entirely on research published only in peer-reviewed scientific journals. 

In the wake of this report, IPCC chair Rajendra Pachauri warns, “Clearly we are 
endangering all species on Earth.” 
