


 


pollutants and on environmental impact assessments in connection with planning development or 
activities in or near settlements. Some of these regulations were specific to the protection of 
polar bears e.g. through enforcing temporal and spatial restrictions on motorized traffic and 
through giving provisions on how and where to camp, and to ensure adequate security 
concerning polar bears in the area (Aars et al. ). 

In  Svalbard designated six new protected areas, two nature reserves, three national parks 
and one “biotope protection area”. The new protected areas are mostly located around Isijord, the 
most populated fjord on the west side of the archipelago. Another protected area, Hopen, has 
special importance for denning bears and is an important denning area on Svalbard (Aars et al. 
). Kong Karls Land is the main denning area and has the highest level of protection under 
the Norwegian land management system. These new protected areas cover  km^, which is 
% of the Archipelago’s total area, and increase the total area under protection to % of the 
total land area in all protected areas (http://www.norwav.org/Nevvs/archive/Q 
/svalbard.htm). 

e. Denmark/Greenland 

Under terms of the Greenland Home Rule () the government of Greenland is responsible for 
management of all renewable resources including polar bears. Greenland is also responsible for 
providing scientific data for sound management of polar bear populations and for compliance 
with terms of the  Polar Bear Agreement. Regulations for the management and protection of 
polar bears in Greenland that were introduced in  have been amended several times (Jensen 
). Hunting and reporting regulations include who can hunt polar bears, protection of family 
groups with cubs of the year from trophy hunting, mandatory reporting requirements, and 
regulations on the permissible firearms and means of transportation (Jensen ). In addition 
there are specific regulations which apply to the traditional take within the National Park of 
North and East Greenland and the Melville Bay Nature Reserve. A large amount of polar bear 
habitat occurs within the National Park of North and East Greenland. During the fall of , the 

Greenland Home Rule Government signed a MOU with Governement of Nunavut concerning 

 



 


shared populations. Greenland introduced a quota system taking effect on  January  
(Lonstrup ), 


E. Other natural or manmade factors affecting the continued existence: 
contaminants, development, human interactions/tourism. 

. Contaminants 

Understanding the potential effects of contaminants on polar bears in the Arctic is confounded by 
the wide range of contaminants present, each with different chemical properties and biological 
effects, and the differing geographic, temporal, and ecological exposure regimes impacting each 
of the  polar bear populations. Further, contaminant concentrations differ with age, sex, 
reproductive status, and other factors. Contaminant sources and transport, geographical, temporal 
patterns and trends, and biological effects are detailed in several recent publications (AMAP 
, AMAP , AMAP ). Three main groups of contaminants in the Arctic are thought 
to present the greatest potential threat to polar bears and other marine mammals: petroleum 
hydrocarbons, persistent organic pollutants (POPSs), and heavy metals. 

a. Petroleum Hydrocarbons 

The principal petroleum hydrocarbons include crude oil, refined oil products, polynuclear 
aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs), and natural gas and condensates (AMAP ). Petroleum 
hydrocarbons come from both natural and anthropogenic sources. The primary natural source is 
oil seeps. Anthropogenic sources include activities associated with exploration, development, 
and production (well blow outs, operational discharges), ship and land based transportation (oil 
spills from pipelines, accidents, leaks, and ballast washings), discharges from refineries and 
municipal waste water, and combustion of wood and fossil fuels. In addition to direct 
contamination, petroleum hydrocarbons are transported from more southerly areas to the Arctic 


 



 


via long range atmospheric and oceanic transport, as well as by north-flowing rivers (AMAP 
). 

The most direct exposure of polar bears to petroleum hydrocarbons comes from direct contact 
with and ingestion of oil from acute and chronic oil spills. Polar bear range overlaps with many 
active and planned oil and gas operations within  miles of the coast or offshore. To date, no 
major oil spills have occurred in the marine environment within the range of polar bears. 
However spills associated with terrestrial pipelines have occurred in the vicinity of polar bear 
habitat and denning areas (e.g. Russia, Komi Republic,  oil spill, 
http ://www .american.edu/ted/KOMl.HTMl . Despite numerous safeguards to prevent spills, 
smaller spills do occur. Minerals Management Service () estimated an  % chance of a 
marine spill greater than  barrels in the Beaufort Sea from the Beaufort Sea Multiple Lease 
Sale in Alaska. An average of  oil and  waste product spills per year occurred between 
 and  in the North Slope oil fields (USFWS c). The largest oil spill (estimated 
volume of approximately  , gallons) from the North Slope Oil fields in Alaska to date 
occurred on land in March , resulting from an undetected leak in a corroded pipeline. 

Similar situations are possible from underwater pipelines. Spills during the fall or spring during 
the formation or breakup of ice present a greater risk because of difficulties associated with clean 
up during these periods and the presence of bears in the prime feeding areas over the continental 
shelf. Amstrup et al. (a) concluded that the release of oil trapped under the ice from an 
underwater spill during the winter could be catastrophic during spring break-up. During the 
autumn freeze-up and spring break-up periods it is expected that any spilled oil in the marine 
environment would concentrate and accumulate in open leads and polynyas, areas of high 
activity for both polar bears and seals (Neff ), resulting in oiling of both polar bears and 
seals (Neff  , Amstrup et al. a, Amstrup et al. a). Increases in Arctic oil and gas 
development coupled with increases in shipping and/or development of offshore and land-based 
pipelines increase the potential for an oil spill to negatively affect polar bears and/or their habitat. 
Any future declines in the Arctic sea ice may result in increased tanker traffic in high bear use 
areas (Frantzen and Bambulyak ) which would increase the chances of an oil spill from a 


 



 


tanker accidents, ballast discharge, or discharges during the loading and unloading the oil at the 
ports. 


Biological Effects of Petroleum Hydrocarbons 

Polar bears are most likely to come in contact with oil either directly at preferred feeding areas or 
through ingesting contaminated prey (Neff ). Polar bears groom themselves regularly as a 
means to maintain the insulating properties of their fur, so oil ingestion would likely be by this 
means (Neff ). Most direct information comes from an experimental study (St. Aubin ) 
in which two polar bears were involuntarily forced into a pool of oil for  minutes and then 
observed. The animals immediately attempted to clean the oil from their paws and forelegs by 
licking, and continued grooming trying to clean their fur for five days. After  days one bear 
died of liver and kidney failure and the other bear was euthanized at day . Gastrointestinal 
fungus-containing ulcers, degenerated kidney tubules, low-grade liver lesions, and depressed 
lymphoid activity were found during necropsy (St. Aubin ). Other effects included loss of 
hair (Derocher and Stirling ), anemia, anorexia, and stress (St. Aubin ). The results of 
an earlier study on thermoregulation (Oritisland et al. ), as well as this study, suggest that 
polar bears are particularly vulnerable to oil spills due to inability to thermo-regulate and to 
poisoning due to ingestion of oil from grooming and/or eating contaminated prey (St. Aubin 
), Additionally, polar bears are curious and are likely to investigate oil spills and oil 
contaminated wildlife. Although it is not known whether healthy polar bears in their natural 
environment would avoid oil spills and contaminated seals, bears that are hungry are likely to 
scavenge contaminated seals, as they have shown no aversion to eating and ingesting oil (St. 
Aubin , Derocher and Stirling ). 

Due to the seasonal distribution of polar bears, the times of greatest impact from an oil spill are 
summer and autumn (Amstrup et al. a). This is important because distributions of polar 
