purposes 

The following section presents information relative to the harvest of polar bears. In the initial 
evaluation the use of polar bears for commercial, recreational, scientific, and education purposes 
was considered. The relative low level and highly regulated non-lethal use for scientific 
purposes was discounted as a threat to populations. Similarly, the regulated low level of use for 
educational purpose through placement of cubs or orphaned animals into zoos or public display 
facilities or through public viewing was also discounted as a serious threat to populations. 
Regarding sport harvested polar bears in Canada, which has both a commercial and recreational 
value, we have not distinguished between harvest uses for sport or subsistence purposes and we 
have incorporated these activities into the harvest section below. 

. Overview of Harvest 

History of Polar Bear Hunting and Harvest Management 

Other forms of removal including take associated with accidental mortality during scientific 
investigations, placement of orphaned cubs into public display facilities, defense of life, 
industrial takes, and illegal take have been considered within this section of the assessment. The 
levels of take from sources other than harvest have been determined to be insignificant and 
having no effect on the population and not warranting a detailed analysis herein. These sources 
of mortality are incorporated into consideration of harvest management regimes. 

Polar bears have historically been and continue to be an important renewable resource for coastal 
communities throughout the Arctic. Polar bears and polar bear hunting were an important part of 
indigenous peoples’ myths and legends and polar bear hunting is considered a source of pride, 
prestige, and accomplishment. Polar bears provide a source of meat and raw materials for 


 



 


handicrafts, including functional clothing such as mittens, boots (mukluks), parka ruffs, and 
pants. 

Prior to the s most hunting was done by indigenous people for subsistence purposes. 
However, population declines due to sport hunting became an increasing international concern 
during the s and s. As a result, in , biologists from the  nations with polar bears 
in their respective jurisdictions met and formed the Polar Bear Specialist Group (PBSG) under 
the International Union for Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources (lUCN). The PBSG 
was largely responsible for the development and ratification of the  Inlemational Agreement 
on the Conservation of Polar Bears ( Polar Bear Agreement), which calls for cooperative 
international management of polar bear populations based on sound conservation practices. It 
prohibits polar bear hunting except by local people using traditional methods, calls for protection 
of females and denning bears, and bans use of aircraft and large motorized vessels to hunt polar 
bears (Prestrud and Stirling ). The  Polar Bear Agreement itself is not self- 
implementing and each signatory nation has its own national legislation to implement the  
Polar Bear Agreement 's terms, including individual harvest management practices. The PBSG 
meets every - years to review all aspects of polar bears science and management, including 
harvest management. 

Principles of Harvest Management 

Polar bears are a K-selected species: they are long-lived, take a relatively long time to mature, 
and have low reproductive rates and small litter sizes (DeMaster and Stirling ). Although 
this is compensated for with high adult survival rates, polar bear populations can be easily 
depleted through harvest (Taylor et al. ). To effectively manage polar bear populations 
using harvest management, scientists must know certain characteristics of the population, such as 
population size, and birth (recruitment), survival, and mortality rates. Generally, harvest 
management is based on the principle that, if recruitment and survival rates exceed mortality 
rates, the population will grow or remain stable. 


 



 


Mortality can be separated into deaths from natural and unnatural (human) causes. Unnatural 
causes include accidental kills such as research mortalities or ingestion/exposure to toxins, or 
intentional kills such as for sport hunting, subsistence hunting, or defense of life. Hunting can be 
managed through establishment of limits (quotas) on the number of animals killed per year in 
relation to population sustainability. 

Setting appropriate harvest quotas is dependent on accurate population estimates and age- 
specific survival and reproduction rates. With good population data, the total allowable harvest 
(TAH) can be used to adjust for population growth or decline. For example, if polar bear 
populations decline, a reduction in harvest quotas could be used to attempt to mitigate declines. 
Unfortunately, the cost and logistical challenges of conducting these studies has made obtaining 
reliable data difficult or impossible for many populations. 

The MMPA requires the Service to calculate the allowable level of human-caused mortality, or 
potential biological removal (PBR) level, for polar bear populations (also referred to as "stocks”) 
in the U.S. by using a minimum population size estimate (N min) multiplied by 'A of the 
maximum net productivity or rate (R max) of the population. The PBR is an estimate of the 
number of animals that can be taken without causing the population to decline below its 
optimum sustainable population (OSP), or that will allow a population already below OSP to 
increase to that level. If the population is known to be reduced or declining a recovery factor 
(Fr), can be used to reduce PBR. 

Nunavut uses flexible harvest quotas, the RISKMAN computer model, and MOUs with the local 
Hunting and Trapping Organizations and the wildlife officers for its harvest management. This 
management is not used by the NWT or any of the provinces. In the past, a key argument for 
sport hunting was that, because not all sport hunters were successful and unused tags could not 
be reused by local hunters, sport hunting actually reduced the total harvest. Although this is still 
the practice in the NWT, the policy was reversed in Nunavut so that all the unused tags go back 
to local Hunters and Trappers Organization for re-issue. 


no 



 


The TAH is determined using the “RISKMAN” computer model that incorporates population 
data such as survival rates, age of first reproduction, age-specific litter production rates for 
females available to have cubs, litter size, sex ratio of cubs, sex, age, and family status 
distribution of harvest, and population size (Taylor etai. , Taylor etal. a). The model 
also incorporates uncertainty due to sampling error and environmental variation. Although 
modeling indicated that a : (male/female) sex ratio in the harvest is sustainable, the adult sex 
ratio is usually :. Asa consequence of sex-selective harvesting, the sex ratio in some 
populations (e.g. Western Hudson Bay) is now permanently skewed towards females. This 
change in the sex ratio is due in part from the focus of sport hunters on larger males. The 
significance of the skewed sex ratios or sex-selective harvesting over the longer term is 
unknown. 

As a result of the unknown long-term effects of sex-selective harvesting and the rapidly changing 
sea ice environments in response to climatic warming, the PBSG passed a resolution in support 
of the precautionary principle with respect to managing polar bear harvests. 

Another approach (Taylor et al. ) calculates sustainable harvest based on a population size 
estimate (N), estimated rates of birth and death, and harvest sex ratios where: 

Sustainable harvest = N x . 

Proportion of harvest that was female 

Both the RISKMAN and Taylor et al.() approach project current life history demographic 
parameters into the future and ascribe a sustainable harvest level based on population parameters 
previously documented through capture research. The underlying assumption is that the 
populations will remain stable or increase during intervening years. Since there generally is a 
lengthy period between population inventory cycles, this approach has limitations for 
populations experiencing changes in survival or recruitment. 

. Harvest Management by Nation 

III 



 

