seals’ snow caves collapse before the pups are weaned. Declines in 
ringed seals will impact other species, not least polar bears, for 
which they are the major prey. 

Whether the changes underway today will be survived by wal- 
ruses, seals, polar bears, Eskimo culture, our economies and ways 
of life will depend critically on the pace of change. Ecosystems have 
changed before. Species have become extinct before. What is criti- 
cally important about our changing climate is the rapid rate of 
change and its predicted acceleration. Adaption, biological and so- 
cial, requires time for adjustment. 

The current rates of climate change, however, are very steep. 
Witness that the summer ice cover has decreased  percent during 
my career. 

If the biological and social environments change too rapidly, spe- 
cies and societies will not be able to keep pace. Thank you for your 
attention. 

Senator Lieberman. Thank you. Dr. Kelly, for those examples 
that you have observed, and also for the warning at the end. 

Before we do get into questions, I do want to indicate that maybe 
I should notice you, Mr. Stalling, on this, that Larry Schweiger, 
President and CEO of National Wildlife Federation, asked that we 
submit testimony on his behalf, with thanks to you for testifying. 
Same for Jamie Rappaport Clark, who is Executive Vice President 
of the Defenders of Wildlife. 

[The referenced material can be found on page .] 

Senator Lieberman. We will do seven minutes of questioning 
each and see where that gets us. 

Dr. Lovejoy, let me begin with you. In your testimony, you men- 
tioned that the shuffling of the ecological deck caused by unchecked 
global warming will favor opportunistic species, such as weeds and 
pests and diseases. I wonder if you could expand on that statement 
at this point, and also indicate what it might mean for agriculture 
in our country. 

Mr. Lovejoy. Well, it is a pretty standard topic that, in dis- 
turbed ecosystems, invasive species seem to do particularly well. 
And much less so in relatively pristine, highly diverse biological 
communities. 

So we are actually seeing that already with the wooly adelgid in 
Virginia, we are seeing it with the pine bark beetle in our north- 
western forests. 

Senator Lieberman. Say a little bit more about what you are 
seeing in Virginia. 



 


Mr. Lovejoy. Well, the wooly adelgid, which is an invasive spe- 
cies from Europe, I think, originally, particularly goes after hem- 
locks. 

Senator Lieberman. What is it, actually? 

Mr. Lovejoy. It is an insect. And it is sort of a white, fuzzy little 
thing. But it attacks coniferous trees. The mortality rate from the 
wooly adelgid has become a serious problem in Virginia. 

Senator Lieberman. And the climate has done that, we think? 

Mr. Lovejoy. It is because the night-time temperatures have 
been warmer, and as a consequence, the populations don’t get 
knocked back as much and kept in relative balance. In the case of 
the northwestern forests with the pine bark beetle, that actually is 
a native insect pest. But again, the balance has been tilted highly 
in favor of the pest. 

Senator Lieberman. By the temperature? 

Mr. Lovejoy. By successive mild winters and higher night-time 
temperatures. 

Senator Lieberman. Right. 

Mr. Lovejoy. So basically we can expect some of those things to 
spill over into agriculture. We may not be able to predict which 
ones. But it is highly likely. 

Senator Lieberman. Thank you. 

Dr. Mann, as someone who follows the temperature, seasonal 
timing and weather pattern changes that other scientists have 
been observing and predicting for Virginia, in the case of global 
warming continuing and expanding and increasing, can you say 
that those predictions include increased water temperature in the 
Chesapeake Bay, and assuming that is so, can you list again some 
of the impacts that you believe warmer water in the Chesapeake 
Bay would have on species that inhabit the Bay? 

Mr. Mann. I think there is a general consensus that we will see 
increasing temperatures in the Chesapeake Bay, and there are two 
effects, if you are looking at them, at the , feet level. Normal 
winters, cold winters typically knock back many of the diseases, so 
that when the warmer summers come, those diseases start to 
progress. If you have warmer winters, those diseases often get a 
foothold earlier in the year and the sorts of things that they attack, 
oysters and fish, are subject to a greater disease stress through the 
summer, simply because of this temperature cycling. 

Higher temperatures in the summer. The Chesapeake Bay is an 
interesting system, because it is an estuary. Saltwater comes in 
from the ocean, freshwater comes down from the watershed. The 
freshwater is less dense than the saltwater, because there is typi- 
cally not much wind, the fresh water tends to sit over the top of 
the denser sea water. It doesn’t mix. 

What happens then is that the oxygen in the lower part of this 
gradually gets depleted by biological activity and you get an oxy- 
gen-free zone, effectively a dead zone in the deep water. Clearly, 
anything that is down there or should be down there no longer ex- 
ists. In warming scenarios, this dead zone sets up earlier and it 
gets bigger. 

But the actual occurrence of that dead zone forces other things 
to happen. Animals that typically would go into that dead zone or 
into those deeper waters which are typically cooler, lose this lower 



 


temperature refuge. I gave the example of striped bass, an abso- 
lutely magnificent fish. We know that about  percent of the 
striped bass in the Chesapeake Bay are infected with a bacterium 
called mycobacterium. This is typically at very low levels and it 
doesn’t manifest itself, it doesn’t alter the health of the animal. 

If, however, you force these animals into the shallow waters in 
the summer where it is warmer, one of the things that we have a 
strong evidence trail for at this point in time, is that that disease 
starts to proliferate. You only have to push the temperature up a 
little bit, and what you see is , ,  percent of these magnifi- 
cent fish occurring on anglers’ lines with large red lesions on them. 
They are really rather painful to look at. 

This is the result of a small temperature change. But it is this 
chain-like effect that starts with stratification and increased tem- 
perature. 
