declined from -% in the s to just over % through the late s and early s and 

 



 


then increased to -% through the mid-to-late s (Stirling et al. ), The proportion of 
yearlings that had already been weaned in the annual capture samples fluctuated greatly, but 
overall the proportions of independent yearlings declined from about % in   to  -% 
since , however, there was no statistically significant trend between the proportion of lone 
yearlings and the time of break-up in the same year (Stirling et al. ). 

In  and  radio-collared females arrived on shore later than in other years (Stirling et al. 
). In , break-up occurred three weeks later than usual, probably due to the short-term 
cooling effect of the eruption of Mount Pinatubo, and radio-collared animals arrived later based 
on a later break-up (Stirling et al. ). The additional feeding opportunities resulted in both 
males and females being in better condition than in other years (Stirling et al.  ), Both cub 
production and survival of cubs was significantly greater in the following year (Stirling et al. 
). Following , condition of males and females, cub production rates, and the proportion 
of lone yearlings began to decline again (Stirling et al, ). 

The Western Hudson Bay population had far higher natality than any other polar bear population 
in the early to mid s (Stirling et al. ). In some of those years, females successfully 
weaned up to approximately % of their cubs at . years of age, as opposed to the . years of 
age that is the norm in other populations that have been studied (Stirling et al. ). In the late 
s and early s, a long-term decline in both natality and condition of adult males and 
females was observed (Stirling et al. ). Stirling et al. () cautioned that, although 
downward trends in the population had not been detected, if trends continued in the same 
direction “they will eventually have a detrimental effect on the ability of the population to 
sustain itself” Population level declines have now been determined based on a recent analysis of 
an ongoing mark-recapture population study and the earlier predictions of Stirling et al () 
have been proven. Between  and , the number of polar bears in the Western Hudson 
Bay population declined from , to , a reduction of about % (Regehr et al., in prep,). 
This decline appears to have been initiated by the progressively earlier sea ice breakup resulting 
from climate change. Progressive declines in the condition and survival of cubs, subadults, and 
bears  years of age and older, probably initiated the decline in the size of the Western Hudson 

 



 


Bay population. Once the population began to decline, the existing harvest was no longer 
sustainable and this also contributed to further reduction in the population (Regehr et al., in 
prep.). 

Starting in the s, Schliebe et al. (a) reported an increasing trend of use of coastal areas 
in the .southern Beaufort Sea by polar bears during the fall open water period. Weekly aerial 
surveys were flown during the interval from when polar bears first appear in coastal areas until 
polar bear numbers have decreased as they return to sea-ice environments as it develops near 
shore. An analysis of the number of bears using coastal habitats and the distance to the pack ice 
was conducted. The study period included record extreme minima ice conditions for the month 
of September in four of the six years (Schliebe et al. a). Food sources in the form of 
bowhead whale carcass remains from native subsistence hunting were available in all years of 
the study. In all years, the number of bears on shore increased to a certain date and then 
decreased as pack ice became available near-shore. There was a significant relationship between 
the mean distance to ice edge and the numbers of bears observed on the coast. As distance to ice 
increased, the number of bears near shore increased; conversely as ice advanced toward shore the 
number of bears near shore decreased. These results suggest that environmental factors, possibly 
similar to those that operated in Western Hudson Bay, are influencing the distribution of polar 
bears in the southern Beaufort Sea. They also suggest that increased use of coastal areas may 
continue to occur if minimal ice conditions become more common in the future as predicted 
(Serreze et al. , Serreze and Barry ). 

Gleason et al. () analyzed  years (-) of fall bowhead whale aerial survey data in 
the Alaska Beaufort Sea. In addition to bowhead whale observations, other important 
environmental data and other marine mammal sightings were also recorded. Annual surveys 
were conducted roughly between Sept.  and October "’. The northern extent of the surveys 
was generally between ° and “’ N latitude, between I°- ° W. Their study was 
divided into three periods (-, -, and -). The September distribution 
of polar bears during the three periods changed from bears being primarily associated with 
offshore ice (%) during -, to a distribution predominated by observations on land 


 



 


(%) and in open water (%) during -. These findings are consistent with the lack of 
pack ice (concentrations >%) caused by a retraction of ice in the study area during the latter 
period (Stroeve et al. , Comiso a, b, , ). 

For analysis of long-term changes in sea ice dynamics, Gleason et al. () selected two km^ 
blocks, one near Barrow and one near Kaktovik, as representative subsamples for a more detailed 
analysis. Ice type and concentration for September and October for each block over the three 
previously described periods were evaluated. Ice types were classified as old (multi-year), new 
(first year), and no ice. The most obvious change in trend of ice types for both Barrow and 
Kaktovik was an increase in the “no ice” category and a decline in the “old” and “new” ice types. 
Further analysis of the percentage of ice present (<%, -%, >%) within the km^ 
blocks over the study confirmed a strong trend of declining ice coverage in September for both 
Barrow and Kaktovik during -. The results for October, although less dramatic, were 
consistent with the trend of declining ice coverage. 

Gleason et al. () findings are consistent with those reported by Schliebe et al. (a), and 
confirm a notable increasing trend in use of coastal areas by polar bears in the southern Beaufort 
Sea in recent years. The proximate cause for changes in polar bear distribution are thought to be 
retraction of pack ice far to the north for greater periods of time in the fall, and later freeze-up of 
coastal waters. The long time series of data for their study is unique to the southern Beaufort Sea 
population of polar bears. Other populations exhibiting larger numbers of polar bears onshore 
include Chukchi Sea, Baffin Bay, Davis Strait, and the Western Hudson Bay. Similar long-term 
datasets are not available to show if pack ice position or other environmental factors are 
influencing the distribution of bears in these populations. Dumer et al. () evaluated habitat 
selection of radio-collared adult female polar bears occupying the southern Beaufort Sea. The 
authors found a general shift to the north and east in distribution of polar bears during summer 
and fall periods over time. Models used also indicated that during the study, polar bears used ice 
habitat over relatively shallow water close to an ice-water interface characterized by high total 
ice concentration. 


 



 


Indications of potential distribution changes have been noted during a similar period of time for 
the northern coast of Chukotka (Kochnev ) and distribution changes have been noted on 
Wrangel Island, Russia (Ovsyanikov pers. comm.)- Kochnev () reports that in the autumn 
seasons of , , , , , and  the ice edge retreated - km to the north 
and to the west of Wrangel Island. During these years walruses occupied coastal haulout sites in 
substantial numbers for protracted periods of time. Walrus carcasses on the beaches became a 
food-source for polar bears and was the main factor attracting bears to these locations (Kochnev 
  ). Following a walrus mortality event such as a stampede, the number of bears increased and 
usually reached a peak in the second half of October. 

The relationship between number of bears present and walrus carcasses continued to exist until 
the freezing of the sea. When bears reached their maximum density in the study areas before sea 
froze over and the level of walrus mortality was low, bears usually consumed available food and 
departed when sea ice began to consolidate. The relationship between the maximum number of 
polar bears, the number of dead walruses, quantity of accessible food, and the distance of the ice- 
edge from Wrangel Island was evaluated. The regression analysis revealed that the strongest 
correlation was between bear numbers and distance to the ice-edge, although there were also less 
strong relationships with the number of walrus carcasses present, and walrus biomass availability 
(Kochnev ). 

In Baffin Bay, traditional Inuit knowledge studies and anecdotal reports indicate that in many 
areas that greater numbers of polar bears are being encountered on land during the summer and 
fall open water seasons. Interviews were conducted with elders and senior hunters in the three 
Nunavut communities that harvest polar bears from the BB population (Dowsley ). 
Interviews focused on changes in the polar bear population, observations on the climate during 
the past - years, and people’s views of bear management. Details of the interview and 
