• temperature: global mean temperatures have continued to increase with the 
warmest three years of the last century all occurring since ; 

• precipitation: globally, precipitation is continuing to increase. However, we have 
now shown that the spatial and temporal distribution of precipitation is chang- 
ing in some regions of the world, e.g., in the U.S. there is now evidence of more 
precipitation in winter and an increase in heavy precipitation events in sum- 
mer. 

• sea level: the latest analysis confirms earlier conclusions that sea level has risen 
- cms over the last  years. 

. Attribution of the observed changes in climate: 

• in contrast to the first assessment report, the second assessment report con- 
cluded that the observed changes in the Earth’s climate over the last  years 
could not be ascribed to natural phenomena alone, and concluded that there 
was now a discernible human influence on the Earth’s climate. 

. Projected changes in atmospheric composition, climate and climate-related pa- 
rameters: 

• atmospheric composition: the emissions scenarios work has become more sophis- 
ticated, but the bottom line conclusion largely remains the same, i.e., there is 
a wide range of plausible future greenhouse gas emissions, which primarily de- 
pends on population and economic growth, technological advances and govern- 
ance structures. 



 


• climate sensitivity: projected changes in climate depend upon projected changes 
in atmospheric composition (greenhouse gases and aerosols) and the sensitivity 
of the climate models to changes in atmospheric composition, i.e., the response 
function, which we have termed the climate sensitivity factor. In spite of our 
improved understanding of the climate system, there has been no change in our 
estimate of the climate sensitivity factor since the first assessment report, i.e., 
global mean surface temperatures are projected to increase from . -. degrees 
Centigrade at equilibrium in a doubled carbon dioxide world, with the best esti- 
mate being . degrees Centigrade. 

• aerosols: the “cooling” role of aerosols was not recognized in the first assessment 
report, but was in the second assessment report. 

• temperature: projected changes in global mean surface temperature in  
have varied from the first assessment report until now, but well within the un- 
certainty range and because of known factors. The business as usual best esti- 
mate projection for changes in global mean surface temperature in  was . 
degrees Centigrade, within a range of . -. degrees Centigrade (the business 
as usual greenhouse gas scenario coupled with the range of climate sensitivity). 
In the second assessment report, the business as usual best estimate projection 
for a change in global mean surface temperature in  was . degrees Centi- 
grade within a range of .-.  degrees Centigrade (four greenhouse gas sce- 
narios coupled with the range of climate sensitivity). If the latest IPCC emis- 
sions scenarios are used in conjunction with a range of climate models the pro- 
jected changes in mean surface temperature in  would be from about .- 
. degrees Centigrade (six greenhouse gas scenarios coupled with the range of 
climate sensitivity). The decrease in the business as usual best estimate projec- 
tion for changes in global mean surface temperature in  between the first 
and second assessment report was due to lower projections of chlorofluorocarbon 
emissions (Montreal Protocol) and carbon dioxide emissions and the inclusion 
of sulfate aerosols in the models (sulfate aerosols tend to cool the atmosphere 
and hence partly offset the warming effect of the greenhouse gases). 

• precipitation: projections of changes in precipitation have consistently shown an 
increase in global precipitation, with increases in the tropics, mid- and high-lati- 
tudes and decreases in the sub-tropics. The exact changes are model dependent. 

• sea level: projected changes in global mean sea level in  have varied slight- 
ly from the first assessment report until now, but well within the uncertainty 
range and because of known factors. The business as usual best estimate projec- 
tion for changes in global mean sea level in  was  cms, within a range 
of - cms. In the second assessment report, the business as usual best esti- 
mate projection for a change in global mean sea level in  was  cms within 
a range of - cms. If the latest IPCC emissions scenarios are used in con- 
junction with a range of climate models the projected changes in mean sea level 
in  would be from about - cms. The changes in projected sea level 
occur primarily because of changes in temperature projections, as well as in 
some cases because of small changes in the glacier, ice sheet and ocean models. 

Question . You mentioned in your statement that the time to reverse the human- 
induced changes in the climate and the resulting environmental damages would not 
be years to decades but centuries to millennia. Is it reasonable to make any major 
conclusions on the future based upon models and data collection systems that may 
need further refinement? 

Answer. Yes. While recognizing there are uncertainties associated with precisely 
quantifying changes in climate at the regional and global scale, and hence the asso- 
ciated impacts on human health, socio-economic sectors and ecological systems, stat- 
ing that the time to reverse human-induced changes in the climate and the result- 
ing environmental damages would not be years to decades but centuries to millennia 
is a robust conclusion. The conclusion primarily rests on an understanding of the 
lifetime/adjustment time of carbon dioxide, the major anthropogenic greenhouse gas. 
The lifetime of carbon dioxide is governed by the exchange of carbon dioxide be- 
tween the atmosphere and the deep waters of the oceans. Whilst there is a rapid 
equilibration (less than five years) of carbon dioxide between the atmosphere and 
the surface waters of the oceans, it takes much longer (more than a century) for 
carbon dioxide in the atmosphere to equilibrate with the deep oceans. Our under- 
standing of this feature of the carbon cycle is based on models that have been field- 
tested against tracer data, e.g., the rate of uptake and diffusion into the deep oceans 
of atmospheric chlorofluorocarbons and radio-active carbon (formed during tbe atom- 
ic bomb tests). 



 


The small portion (-%) of human-induced changes in climate that can be at- 
tributed to short-lived gases, i.e., methane (a lifetime of about a decade) and tropo- 
spheric ozone (a lifetime of a few days) can be reversed much quicker. Conversely, 
reductions in sulfate aerosol precursor emissions (i.e., sulfur dioxide) would lead to 
a rapid increase in climate change because of the very short lifetime (days). 

Question . Would you describe some of the technologies that can be used to miti- 
gate climate change. 

Answer. The IPCC Second Assessment Report concluded that there is a wide range 
of technologies that already exist that can be used to cost-effectively mitigate cli- 
mate change. However, before listing some of them it is important to note that cost- 
effective mitigation of climate change (Article  of the UNFCCC) will be most effec- 
tive through a combination of changes in both the policy framework and the fuller 
utilization of a wide of technologies in energy supply, energy demand and the agri- 
cultural/forestry sectors. In addition it should be recognized that stabilization of 
greenhouse gas concentrations in the atmosphere (Article  of the UNFCCC) will 
require the development and market penetration of new and improved technologies, 
hence the need for increased public and private sector funding for R&D. 

All of the policy and technology options listed below are discussed in significant 
detail in IPCC assessments and Special Reports, e.g., technology transfer and land- 
use, land-use change and forestry. 

Policy Framework: It is important to get the policy framework correct in order to 
stimulate the utilization of “climate-friendly” technologies and strategies, domesti- 
cally and internationally. For example, if there are policies that distort the market, 
e.g., fossil fuel subsidies, they both discourage the efficient use of energy and the 
penetration of modern renewable energy technologies. An appropriate policy frame- 
work, augmented by education and training programs, would combine: 

• command and control, e.g., energy efficiency standards, energy taxes; 

• market mechanisms, e.g., domestic and international emissions rights and 

project-based carbon offset trading; removal of subsidies that increase green- 
house gas emissions; incentives for the use of new technologies during market 

build-up; 

