land for long periods they will consume coastal marine and terrestrial plants and other terrestrial 
foods (Russell  , Derocher et al.  ) but the significance of other terrestrial foods to polar 
bears may be limited (Lunn and Stirling , Ramsay and Hobson , Derocher et al. ). 
Lunn and Stirling () found polar bears using the dump in Canada's Churchill area did not 
have increased survival or reproductive success. Although polar bears will use supplemental 
food sources if available they are not necessary for their survival. 

Other studies (Iverson et al. ) indicate that polar bears may shift feeding preferences, 
presumably based on the availability of seal species. Overall, polar bears are most effective as 
predators of young ringed seals, possibly because young seals are naive with regard to predator 
avoidance. In spring, polar bears may concentrate on capturing new-born ringed seal pups 
(Smith and Stirling , Smith ). Predation on pups may be extensive regionally. Hammill 
and Smith ( p. ) estimated that polar bears annually kill up to % of new born seal pups 
in a study located between Cornwallis Island and Prince of Whales Island, in the Barrow Strait, 
Canada, Northwest Territories (NWT). Beyond the pupping season, polar bears mainly prey on 
young seals from the first two year classes (Stirling et al. a, Smith ). 


 



 


Polar bears have high digestive efficiency for protein (%) and fat (%) comprising an 
average energy utilization of % ofthe food consumed (Best , Stirling ). Sufficient 
nutrition is critical and may be obtained and stored as fat when prey is abundant. On average an 
adult polar bear needs approximately  kg (. lbs) of seal fat per day to survive (Stirling ). 
This nutrition must be obtained, and stored as fat, primarily during times of the year when prey is 
abundant and available (Stirling ), They prefer the fat of seals to muscle and other tissues 
and consume it first (Stirling ). Because over half of the calories in a whole seal carcass 
may be in the fat (Stirling and McEwan ), a bear that quickly consumes the fat has 
maximized its caloric return. Also, the digestion of fat releases water (Nelson et al. ) while 
digestion of meat/protein requires water. By eating fat, bears maximize water intake and 
minimize the energetic cost of associated with digesting ice and snow (Nelson ). 

In the Beaufort Sea, polar bears have developed a habit of gathering at the butchering sites of 
bowhead whales (Balaena mysticetus) that are killed by local native people. The value of this 
alternate food is apparently great, as nearly every bear seen near whale carcasses in autumn is 
large and appears to be in good condition. (Miller et al. ). 

G. Reproduction 

Polar bears are characterized by a late age of sexual maturity, small litter sizes, and extended 
parental investment in raising young, factors that combine to contribute to a very low 
reproductive rate. Intrinsic rates of recruitment are difficult to estimate for the species. In the 
Southern Beaufort Sea the maximum rates of increase per annum was estimated as % (Angliss 
and Lodge ), and for Baffin Bay, without a harvest, the maximum rate of increase was 
estimated to be .% per annum (Taylor et al. ). Reproduction in the female polar bear is 
similar to that in other ursids. They enter a prolonged estrus between March and June, when 
breeding occurs. Ovulation is thought to be induced by mating (Wimsatt , Ramsay and 
Dunbrack , Derocher and Stirling ). Lono () reported that breeding pairs were 


 



 


observed as early as  March and as late as  June. Histological evidence of testes and ovaries 
indicates that breeding could last into July (Ijsne ). Rosing-Asvid () found that the 
peak of mating season for polar bears in Greenland was between late March and end of May, 
Implantation is delayed until autumn, and total gestation is - days (Uspenski ), 
although during most of this time, active development of the fetus is suspended. The timing of 
implantation, and therefore the timing of birth, is likely dependent on body condition of the 
female, which depends on a variety of environmental factors. In East Greenland, the peak of the 
mating season was apparently somewhat earlier and shorter, from late March to May, than 
reported for Svalbard (Rosing-Asvid et al. ). 

The exact timing of birth may vary across the range of polar bears. Harington () reported 
births as early as  November with a median date of  December. Derocher et al. () 
reported that births of Hudson Bay bears probably occur from mid-November through mid- 
December. Messier et al. () suggested that polar bears give birth by  December. In the 
Beaufort Sea many pregnant females did not enter dens until late November or early December 
(Amstrup and Gardner ) and a later date of birth is assumed. Newborn polar bears are 
helpless, have hair, but are blind and weigh only . kg (Blix and Lentfer ), Cubs grow 
rapidly, and may weigh - kg by the time they emerge from the den in the spring. Young 
bears will stay with their mothers until weaning, which occurs most commonly in early spring 
when the cubs are . years of age. Female polar bears are available to breed again after their 
cubs are weaned. Therefore, in most areas, the minimum successful reproductive interval for 
polar bears is  years. 

Age of maturation in polar bear populations appears to be largely dependent on numbers and 
productivity of ringed seals. For example, in the Beaufort Sea, ringed seal densities are lower 
than in some areas of the Canadian High Arctic or Hudson Bay. As a possible consequence, 
female polar bears in the Beaufort Sea usually do not breed for the first time until they are  
years of age (Stirling et al. , Lentfer and Hensel ). This means they give birth for the 
first time at age . In contrast, in many areas of Canada females reach maturity at age  and 


 



 


produce their first young at age  (Stirling et al. b, , , Ramsay and Stirling , 
, Fumell and Schweinsburg ). 

Derocher et al. () calculated an average age of first breeding in the Hudson Bay area of . 
years. Cub production, assessed by estimated pregnancy rates, remained high between  and  
years of age and declined thereafter (Derocher et al. ). Average age of first reproduction 
increased and pregnancy rates declined in the s in Hudson Bay with corresponding declines 
in population size (Stirling et al. , Regehr et al., in prep.). 

. Litter size and production rate 

Just as with age of first reproduction, litter size and litter production rate vary by geographic area 
and are expected to change with population size relative to carrying capacity. Furthermore, litter 
size may change in response to hunting pressure, environmental factors and other population 
perturbations. Litters of two cubs are most common. Litters of three cubs are seen sporadically 
across the Arctic, and most commonly reported in the Hudson Bay region (Stirling et al. b, 
Ramsay and Stirling , Derocher and Stirling ). The average litter size encountered 
during multiple studies throughout the range of polar bears varies from  . to  . cubs. Evidence 
of a link between availability of seal prey and reproduction in polar bears has been documented 
for areas in the northerly parts of their range. Body weights of mothers and their cubs decreased 
markedly in the mid-s in the Beaufort Sea following a decline in ringed and bearded seal 
pup production (Stirling et al,  ,  b, Kingsley  , DeMaster et al.  , Stirling et al. 
, Amstrup et al. ). Declines in reproductive parameters varied by region and year with 
the severity of ice conditions and corresponding reduction in numbers and productivity of seals 
(Amstrup et al. ). 

In the Beaufort Sea, females produce a litter of cubs at an annual rate of . litters per adult 
female (Amstrup ). In early years in Hudson Bay, females produced a litter of cubs at the 
rate of , litters per adult female (Derocher and Stirling ). Annual litter production rate in 


 



 


the Hudson Bay region declined from . litters/female in the period - to . 
litters/female during - (Derocher and Stirling ). 

Polar bears may “defer” reproduction in favor of survival when foraging conditions are difficult 
(Derocher et al. ). A complete reproductive effort is energetically expensive for polar bears. 
When energetically stressed, female polar bears may forgo reproduction rather than risk 
incurring the energetic costs and consequent reduced physical fitness of a potentially 
unsuccessful reproductive process. The reproductive cycle lends itself to convenient early 
termination and may occur without extensive energetic investment on the part of the female 
(Ramsay and Dunbrack , Derocher and Stirling ). Persistent deferral of reproduction 
could cause a declining population trend in populations with an intrinsically low rate of growth. 

