
Cub survival 

Short 

Decline, Increased variation 

Reproductive rates 

Short 

Variable, Increased variation 

Bear-human interactions 

Variable 

Increase 

Den areas 

Medium 

Change in areas and substrates 

Growth rates 

Medium 

Variable 

Prey composition 

Medium 

Change in species, utilization, age of prey 

Population boundaries 

Medium 

Mixing of adjacent populations 

Population size 

Medium 

Variable 


 




 


Intraspecific aggression 

Variable 

Increased 

Cannibalism 

Variable 

Possible increase 

Adult survival 

Long 

Decline, Increased variation 


' Short = < years, Medium = - years. Long = > years. Time frame of impact will vary 
between populations and is dependent upon rate of change in a given population. 

. Conclusion 

Worldwide, habitat loss is the primary cause of species extinction (Primack ). For polar 
bears, documented changes to habitat include seasonal retraction of sea ice in the fall, thinning 
and fragmentation of sea ice, and earlier spring breakup. While not all changes occur evenly 
throughout the Arctic, many changes are widespread. As the PBSG, the scientific advisory body 
to lUCN for polar bear, summarizes on their website, “[t]here is little doubt that polar bears and 
other ice-inhabiting marine mammals in the Arctic, are being, or will be, negatively affected by 
the effects of climate change via changes to their habitats” (Aars et al. ). 

According to the ACIA, “the reduction in sea ice is very likely to have devastating consequences 
for polar bears, ice-dependent seals, and local people for whom these animals are a primary food 
source” (ACIA ). The ACIA concludes that “polar bears are unlikely to survive as a species 
if there is an almost complete loss of summer sea-ice cover, which is projected to occur before 
the end of this century by some climate models. The loss of polar bears is likely to have 
significant and rapid consequences for the ecosystems that they currently occupy.” (ACIA ). 

Overall, polar bear scientists conclude that the “future persistence of polar bears is tenuous” 
(Derocher et al. ), reinforcing their earlier warnings that “ultimately, if sea ice disappeared 
altogether, polar bears would become extinct” (Stirling and Derocher ). The ACIA has also 
concluded that “polar bears are unlikely to survive as a species if there is an almost complete loss 
of summer sea-ice cover, which is projected to occur before the end of this century by some 
climate models.” (ACIA ). However, this opinion is not universal as other polar bear 

 




 


biologists believe that it is likely, even with the total loss of summer sea ice, that a small number 
of polar bears would survive semi-indefinitely provided there is still some ice cover during the 
winter and marine mammals continued to be available for capture or scavenging. Although this 
situation would be difficult for the bears they believe that the bears are unlikely to go extinct. As 
a species, polar bears have survived at least two warming periods, the Eem Interglacial period 
(  , -   ,  years BP), and the Holocene “climate optimum” (ca  - BP) 
(Dansgaard et al. , Dahl-Jensen et al. ). Results from two ice-cores drilled in central 
Greenland revealed that the climate was much more variable in the past and some of the 
historical shifts between the warm and cold periods were relatively rapid suggesting that the 
recent relative climate stability seen during the Holocene may be an exception (Dansgaard et al. 
). The impacts of these global warming periods on polar bears and the Arctic sea-ice habitat 
are unknown. 

Observations of changes related to climate change are mounting on many fronts. As one recent 
report noted “If current trends continue, polar bears and other species that require a stable ice 
platform for survival could become extinct by the end of the century” (Rosentrater ). 

A recent study of the Bering Sea, one of the most productive marine ecosystems on the planet, 
concluded that “[a] change from arctic to subarctic conditions is underway in the northern Bering 
Sea” (Grebmeier et al. ). This is being caused by warmer air and water temperatures, and 
less sea ice. Even bottom water temperatures are demonstrably increasing. The impacts include 
the decline of the prey base of benthic (bottom) feeding walrus, endangered sea ducks (i.e. 
spectacled eiders - Somaieria fischeri), and gray whales (Eschrichlius wbustus) (Grebmeier et 
al, ), Some pelagic (open sea) species like pollock {Theragra chalcogramma), on the other 
hand, are increasing their range (Grebmeier et al. ). “These observations support a continued 
trend toward more subarctic ecosystem conditions in the northern Bering Sea, which may have 
profound impacts on Arctic marine mammal and diving seabird populations as well as 
commercial and subsistence fisheries” (Grebmeier et al. ). 


 



 


B. Overutilization for commercial, recreational, scientific, or educational 
