 


of the proposed new dirty coal plants would be uncompetitive with cleaner energy 
sources. 

. REENGAGE IN INTERNATIONAL CLIMATE NEGOTIATIONS. As the 
world’s largest contributor to climate change, the U.S. has a responsibility to 
participate in global efforts to reduce greenhouse gas pollution. The U.S. should 
assume a leadership role in the negotiation of future international binding 
emission reduction targets. 

REDUCE OUR DEPENDENCE ON OIL 


We can reduce our dependence on oil, maintain our mobility and provide consumers with 
lasting relief at the pump if we make a national commitment to oil savings through 
efficiency, renewable fuels and transportation alternatives such as transit. We have the 
technology today to cut our oil use by at least  percent by . But it won’t happen 
without strong federal leadership that gives our manufacturers, fanners and entrepreneurs the 
signal to invest in prompt development and production of clean, oil-saving technologies, 
which would give consumers the choices they need to play an active role in securing our 
energy future. 

 . GIVE CONSUMERS A CHOICE OF VEHICLES THAT GO FARTHER ON 
A GALLON OF GAS. We need common sense steps to improve the fuel economy 
performance for cars and trucks by reforming and raising fuel economy standards. 
The technology exists today to make all vehicles average  miles per gallon fleet 
wide within ten years. This would save more oil than the United States currently 
imports from the entire Persian Gulf and could extract from the Arctic National 
Wildlife Refuge, combined. In addition, we should extend consumer tax credits for 
hybrid vehicles, and give automakers and suppliers incentives to retool and invest 
in production of hybrids and the cleanest, most efficient diesel vehicles. 

. DEVELOP RENEWABLE FUELS THAT ARE CLEANER AND CHEAPER 
THAN OIL. To make sure that the rush to biofuels doesn’t turn into a quest for 
fool’s gold, and that any domestic alternatives provide real benefits beyond the 
gasoline and diesel we use today, we must integrate environmental performance 
standards into the production of homegrown fuels. We must establish incentives 
and requirements to put the infrastructure in place to get alternative fuels into 
drivers’ tanks, and make cellulosic biofuels comparable in price to gasoline. 
Equally critical will be the creation of credible standards and accompanying 
verification systems that ensure that we grow, harvest and process all feed stocks 
for biofuels in a sustainable fashion. Production of biofuels must not threaten 
sensitive lands and wildlife habitats. Biofuels, if developed carefully and 
sustainably, will not only help protect the environment, but also enhance rural farm 
economies. 



 


. PROMOTE PUBLIC TRANSPORTATION. For every $ the federal 
government spends on highways, only $ is invested in public transportation. We 
should expand the use of public transportation by building new systems, providing 
incentives for transit use, and locating development around existing transit lines. 

. STOP LEAKS IN FUEL ECONOMY STANDARDS. Convert loopholes for 
gas guzzlers into incentives for better gas mileage by eliminating tax breaks for 
luxury SUV’s and creating incentives for fleet owners to use the most 
fuel-efficient vehicles. Require fuel flexibility as a standard feature for new cars 
and trucks. Eliminate the “dual fuel vehicle” credits that erode the fuel savings 
benefits of biofuels. 

HARNESS CLEAN. RENEWABLE. HOMEGROWN ENERGY 

 . ESTABLISH NATIONAL RENEWABLE ENERGY STANDARD. A 
renewable energy standard, similar to those adopted by  states and the District 
of Columbia, should apply to utilities across the country that would require a 
minimum percentage of the nation’s electricity to come from renewable sources. 

. PROMOTE FARM-BASED CLEAN ENERGY RESOURCES. Expand, 
improve and fully fund federal programs to help rural America provide clean 
energy that increases farm incomes, provides rural economic development, 
creates jobs and helps protect our environment 

. INCENTIVES FOR RENEWABLE ENERGY TECHNOLOGIES. 

Consistent, long-term tax incentives for the installation of renewable energy 
technologies would provide the certainty necessary for investors. 

. PUT RENEWABLE ENERGY FIRST. To meet demand for electricity, require 
utilities to prioritize renewable energy development over the construction of 
conventional power plants. 

. KNOCK DOWN BARRIERS TO RENEWABLE ENERGY. Eliminate 
regulatory requirements that discourage both residential and large Industrial 
renewable energy producers from coimecting to the electricity grid by adopting 
policies such as net metering and reasonable interconnection standards. 

SAVE ENERGY 

. ESTABLISH AN ENERGY EFFICIENCY RESOURCE STANDARD. An 
energy efficiency resource standard should apply to electric and natural gas 
utilities nationwide that would require these utilities to save a minimum 
percentage of the energy used in the homes and businesses they serve. This 
requirement could be met by the utilities implementing energy efficiency 



 



WILDLIFE 


FEDERATION 


National Wildlife Federation 
Nationwide Opinion Survey of Hunters and Anglers 
March/April  


Contact: 

Ben McNitt () - 



 


Responsive Manaeement 


 


Responsive Management conducted this national survey of hunters and anglers on behalf of the 
National Wildlife Federation. The survey was administered in March through April, , A 
total of , telephone interviews were completed:  interviews with those who fished only, 
 interviews with those who hunted only, and  interviews with those who both fished and 
hunted. The interviews were only of those  years of age and older. 

For the survey, telephones were selected as the preferred sampling medium because of the 
universality of telephone ownership. To ensure the integrity of the telephone survey data, 
Responsive Management has interviewers who have been trained according to the standards 
established by the Council of American Survey Research Organizations, Interviews were 
conducted Monday through Friday from : a,m. to : p,m., Saturday noon to : p,m,, and 
Sunday from : p,m, to : p,m., local time, A five-callback design was used to maintain the 
representativeness of the sample, to avoid bias toward people easy to reach by telephone, and to 
provide an equal opportunity for all to participate. When a respondent could not be reached on the 
first call, subsequent calls were placed on different days of the week and at different times of the 
day. The software used for data collection was Questionnaire Programming Language .. 

The analysis of data was performed using Statistical Package for the Social Sciences software as 
well as proprietary software developed by Responsive Management. The data were weighted to 
