IrKreaie during summer m areas with reduced ke cover and kicreased wktd 
in regions affected by l>fC. modifrcaUMit to the THC will chu^ge the strer^ of tiie currents 
Fronts are often tied to topograpfy but witis altered current Rows, miqr rapld^ position 

With decreasing i^ duration arid area) Mt^t, mote areas to be expc^ed to dkect sunll^t 
Substantial irkreases over High levels on shaves arfd in deep arctic basins,' 

the shelf regt^s due to retreat higher lev^ d.ie to deeper mliwf layer In areas of 

of the sea ke b^nd (he shelf reduced Ice cover 

break 


Summary Statements 

Excerpted from ACIA, : 

Changes in climate that have already taken place are manifested in the decrease in extent and 
thickness of Arctic sea ice, permafrost thawing, coastal erosion, changes in ice sheets and ice 
shelves, and altered distribution and abundance of species in polar regions (high confidence). 
Climate change in Polar Regions is expected to be among the largest and most rapid of any 
region on the Earth, and will cause major physical, ecological, sociological, and economic 
impacts, especially in the Arctic, Antarctic Peninsula, and Southern Ocean (high confidence). 
Polar Regions contain important drivers of climate change. Once triggered, the changes may 
continue for centuries, long after greenhouse gas concentrations are stabilized, and cause 
irreversible impacts on ice sheets, global ocean circulation, and sea-level rise (medium 
confidence). (ACIA ) 


 



 


Excerpted from ACIA, : 

Changes in the Arctic are very likely to have significant impacts on the global climate system. 

For example, a reduction in snow-cover extent and a shrinking of the marine cryosphere would 
increase heating of the surface, which is very likely to accelerate warming of the Arctic and 
reduce the equator-to-pole temperature gradient. Freshening of the Arctic Ocean by increased 
precipitation and runoff is likely to reduce the formation of cold deep water, thereby slowing the 
global thermohaline circulation. It is likely that a slowdown of the thermohaline circulation 
would lead to a more rapid rate of rise of global sea level, reduce upwelling of nutrients, and, 
exert a chilling influence on the North Atlantic region as Gulf Stream heat transport is reduced. It 
would also decrease the rate at which CO  is transported to the deep ocean. Finally, temperature 
increases over permafrost areas could possibly lead to the release of additional CH into the 
atmosphere. If seabed temperatures rise by a few degrees, hydrated CH  trapped in solid form 
could also escape into the atmosphere (ACIA ). 

. Biological effects on polar bears 

Polar bears are completely dependent upon Arctic sea-ice habitat for survival. They need sea ice 
as a platform from which to hunt their primary prey, ringed seals, to make seasonal migrations 
between the sea ice and their terrestrial denning areas, and for resting and mating. 

Lentfer () first noted that a general warming trend had been observed in the Arctic prior to 
the s, and that the polar bear could be adversely impacted by warming via changes in the sea 
ice and snow cover. Lentfer () hypothesized that a general warming of the Arctic could 
adversely affect denning since alteration in ice conditions could result in fewer bears reaching 
some preferred denning areas. Vibe () indicated that to successfully den and produce 
offspring bears and ringed seals require relatively stable climates with an absence of periods of 
thawing and melting of snow during the winter. Warming trends would reduce the extent of 
suitable denning areas or access to them. Loss of ice cover, a possibility described by Budyko 
(), was believed to result in a severe impact on denning and the food chain supporting the 

 



 


polar bear, Stirling and Smith () documented a decline in the survival rate of ringed seal 
pups, on the coast of southeastern Baffin Island, due the consequences of unusually warm 
temperatures and rain events which melted their pupping lairs thus exposing them to predation 
by polar bears and thermoregulatory stress. IPCC () reported that most of the warming that 

Ih 

occurred during the  century, came during two periods, from -, and from - 
. During an  year period, Parkinson () noted that annual variability was high, both in 
the sea ice season length and monthly distribution. Climatic warming is likely to result in greater 
inter-annual variability and thus the response of polar bear populations is also likely to be highly 
variable. 

For polar bears and other species, the evaluation and quantification of cause and effect 
relationships between climate change and specific life history parameters or population status 
and trend are extremely difficult and require long time series of data that are only available for a 
few populations. In the absence of lengthy time series of data on polar bears scientists have been 
required to sample key parameters over time or compare these parameters to averaged 
benchmarks for other population or populations, acknowledging that natural variation related to 
system carrying capacity and environmental factors are inherent within each of the population 
units. 

Observed and predicted changes in ice cover, characteristics, and timing have profound effects 
on polar bears. Sea ice is a highly dynamic habitat with different types, forms, stages, and 
distributions that all operate as a complex matrix in determining biological productivity and use 
by marine organisms, including seal species. Polar bear use of sea ice is not uniform and their 
preferred habitat is the annual ice located over continental shelf and inter-island archipelagos that 
circle the Arctic Basin. Ice seals demonstrate a similar preference to these ice habitats. 

Hudson Bay in Canada is considered an area that typifies change in the Arctic due to its 
relatively southern location and occurrence on a divide between a warming and a cooling region 
(AMAP ). it is an ideal area to study the impacts of global climate change, Hudson Bay 


 



 


has the most significant long term time series of data on the ecology of polar bears and the site of 
the first documented evidence of major and ongoing impacts to polar bears from global warming, 

Stirling and Derocher () predicted an array of impacts to polar bears from global warming, 
including reduced abundance of and access to seals and effects on the marine ecosystem that 
influence productivity. Stirling and Derocher () noted that changes in polar bear parameters 
such as declining body condition, lowered reproductive rates, and reduced cub survival were 
present in the Western Hudson Bay population, but at that time the changes could not be linked 
to global warming. In subsequent years, a multi-disciplinary research continued to document the 
relationships between climate, sea ice, and physiological and demographic parameters of polar 
bear (Stirling et al. , Derocher et al. , Stirling and Parkinson ) as well as similar 
relationships for other species such as thick-billed murres (Uria lomvia) (Gaston et at, ). 
Using data from a -year period, Stirling et al. () established a statistically significant link 
between global warming and observed impacts to polar bear physical and reproductive 
parameters, including body condition and natality. 

Hudson Bay is a relatively closed system and is ice-free in the summer and freezes over in the 
winter (Parkinson et al. , Gough et al. ). Typically it is completely covered in ice from 
January to May and is ice-free from mid-August to late October (Parkinson et al. , Gough et 
al. ), with intermediate levels of ice forming or breaking up in the intervening periods. 
Break-up begins first in James Bay, at the southern end of Hudson Bay close to the western 
shoreline, due to warm winds, and also in the eastern region of Hudson Bay, from spring runoff 
(Gough et al. ). The last place to breakup in the spring, however, is often the southwestern 
region of Hudson Bay (Gough et al. ), part of the Southern Hudson Bay polar bear 
population’s territory and south of the terrestrial denning area of the Western Hudson Bay polar 
bear population. Gough et al. () found that the trend towards earlier break-up of the ice in 
the southwestern region of Hudson Bay and the northwestern region of James Bay was consistent 
with the results of Stirling et a!. () and Derocher et al. (). 

a. Increased polar bear movements or travel 


 
