(decades to millennia) associated with the climate system. Decisions taken during 
the next few years may limit the range of possible policy options in the future be- 
cause high near-term emissions would require deeper reductions in the future to 
meet any given target concentration. Delaying action might reduce the overall costs 
of mitigation because of potential technological advances but could increase both the 
rate and the eventual magnitude of climate change, and hence the adaptation and 
damage costs. 

Policymakers will have to decide to what degree they want to take precautionary 
measures by mitigating greenhouse gas emissions and enhancing the resilience of 
vulnerable systems by means of adaptation. Uncertainty does not mean that a na- 
tion or the world community cannot position itself better to cope with the broad 
range of possible climate changes or protect against potentially costly future out- 
comes. Delaying such measures may leave a nation or the world poorly prepared to 
deal with adverse changes and may increase the possibility of irreversible or very 
costly consequences. Options for adapting to change or mitigating change that can 
be justified for other reasons today (e.g., abatement of air and water pollution) and 
make society more flexible or resilient to anticipated adverse effects of climate 
change appear particularly desirable. 

If, actions are not taken to reduce the projected increase in greenhouse gas emis- 
sions, the Earth’s climate is projected to change at an unprecedented rate with ad- 
verse consequences for society, undermining the very foundation of sustainable de- 
velopment. Adaptive strategies to deal with this issue need to be developed, recog- 
nizing issues of equity and cost-effectiveness. 

While there is no debate that protection of the climate system will eventually 
need all countries to limit their greenhouse gas emissions, the Framework Conven- 
tion on Climate Change recognizes the principle of differentiated responsibilities, 
and also recognizes that developed countries and countries with economies in transi- 
tion should take the lead in limiting their greenhouse gas emissions given the his- 
torical and current emissions of greenhouse gases, and their financial, technical and 
institutional capabilities. Current and historical emissions of greenhouse gases arise 
mainly from developed countries and countries with economies in transition, i.e., 
emissions in developing countries are much lower, both in absolute and per capita 
terms. Even though it is well recognized that emissions from developing countries 
are increasing rapidly due to increases in population and economic growth, and are 
likely to surpass those from developed countries within a few decades (absolute 
terms, not per-capita), their contribution to global warming will not equal that of 
developed countries until nearly  because the climate system responds to the 



 


cumulative emissions of greenhouse gases not the annual emissions. It is also quite 
clear that increased energy services in developing countries are critical in order to 
alleviate poverty and underdevelopment, where . billion people live on less than 
$ per day,  billion people live on less than $ per day, and  billion people are 
without electricity. Hence the challenge is to assist developing countries expand 
their production and consumption of energy in the most efficient and environ- 
mentally benign manner. Financial instruments such as the Global Environment 
Facility and promoting market mechanisms such as emissions trading and joint im- 
plementation can assist in this endeavor. In addition, an increased commitment to 
energy R&D for energy efficient technologies and low-carbon technologies would not 
only allow the U.S. to meet it’s energy needs in a more climate friendly manner, 
but it would also provide a large market in developing countries for U.S. exports. 

Mr. Chairman, members of the Committee, I appreciate the opportunity you have 
provided me to be able to discuss these important issues with you today. Thank- 
you. 

The Chairman. Dr. Christy, can you further discuss the reasons 
why we are not experiencing the rate of temperature increase in 
the upper altitudes that computer models may be predicting? 

Dr. Christy. OK. You are asking for the “why” of this issue, and 
I do not have an answer for why, here. I would like to say that the 
disparity is greatest in the tropical regions, and this lower tropo- 
spheric layer of the atmosphere is far below what ozone depletion 
would impact. In fact, I have checked specifically to make sure 
that — that the temperature rise at  millebars — what would that 
be? About — about ten miles or so. 

The temperature even in the upper troposphere at  millebars 
is actually slightly warmer than it is in this bulk of the atmosphere 
below that we are measuring in terms of trends. So I do not have 
an answer for “why.” I am skeptical about ozone depletion as part 
of the cooling effect on that particular layer (i.e., the lower tropo- 
sphere. 

The Chairman. Well, do you disagree with Dr. Mahlman’s asser- 
tion that the increasing greenhouse gas effect is due to human ac- 
tivities? 

Dr. Christy. Oh, no. I do not disagree with that at all. 

The Chairman. Thank you. 

Dr. Mahlman, Dr. Trenberth’s statement says that the main rea- 
son tropospheric temperatures are not keeping pace are because of 
stratospheric ozone depletion and increases in cloud cover. Do your 
models confirm those events? 

Dr. Mahlman. We have done independent calculations of the ef- 
fect of the reduced ozone levels in the lower stratosphere, both in 
the tropical regions and in higher latitudes. 

And we calculate a double effect from that. One is that the re- 
duced ozone produces a reduced downward welling of infrared radi- 
ation, therefore cooling the troposphere. 

But we also see that that depleted ozone in the lower strato- 
sphere is transported downward and making lower ozone levels in 
the upper troposphere. Both of these effects produce cooling as 
counterbalance to the warming effect. So it is a real effect. 

Part of the problem is that we do not have really good ozone pro- 
file data, because some of the best measurements of ozone profiles 
have literally disappeared over the last  years and not to be re- 
placed. And so it is hard to really pin that down. 

There are also the uncertain effects, in my view, of this -year 
time series of the quantitative effects of the El Chichon and 



 


Pinatubo volcanoes, whether these would also lead to a cooling ef- 
fect in the upper troposphere that would add to the ozone effect. 

There is also the issue of “What are the errors in the repaired 
satellite data and the repaired radiosonde data?” Both Dr. Christy 
and Dr. Trenberth can comment on that as well. 

But as Dr. Trenberth quite properly pointed out, neither of these 
are well-posed measuring systems that are designed to produce ac- 
curate monitoring of the climate in three dimensions in the atmos- 
phere. 

So we are really suffering from significant data problems wheth- 
er that residual difference is physically robust or not. If I were 
forced to put it on Jerry’s betting odds scale, so to speak, I would 
guess that it is a two out of three chance that there is a robust dif- 
ference. But I think there is a significant uncertainty in how big 
that difference is. 

The Chairman. If other panel members wish to make comments 
on the questions that I direct to the witnesses, please feel free to 
do so. 

Dr. Trenberth, you heard me say at the beginning of this hearing 
that there is no such thing as a dumb question, right? If evapo- 
ration is taking place as the result of this and that evaporation, as 
you mentioned, is taking place in the oceans, why is the sea level 
rising? Is it simply because of the melting of the icecaps? 

