 


may be used for sport hunting and quotas may be divided into smaller quotas for certain areas. 
Quotas are distributed among local authorities who administer permit issuance and distribution 
and establish controls to ensure that the allocated quota is not exceeded. Hunting is allowed only 
between  September and  June, except in two areas where hunting is allowed between  
October and  July. 

Greenland harvests bears from the Kane Basin, BB, Davis Strait, and Eastern Greenland 
populations (Born and Sonne ). A current concern is that the total harvest of polar bears in 
Greenland increased significantly during -, due to an increase in the catch from the BB 
population (Born and Sonne ), which is shared with Canada. 

Norway 

Norway and Russia share jurisdiction over the BS population of polar bears. Management in 
Norway is the responsibility of the Ministry of the Environment. All hunting has been banned 
since , in response to the  Polar Bear Agreemen! that calls for hunting by Natives only. 
Because no Native people live in Norway, no indigenous hunting is allowed. Bears may only be 
killed in self-defense, protection of property, and “mercy” kills. 

A rapid increase in tourism in Svalbard has led to an increase in the numbers of polar bears killed 
in defense of life and property;  bears were killed in Svalbard in - (PBSG ). The 
actual annual kill is, however, relatively low, 

Russia 

Russia is responsible for management of polar bears occurring in the BA, CS, KS, and LS 
populations through the Ministry of Natural Resources. Management of the BA and KS 
populations is shared with Norway, and management agreements for them have been in place 
since  (PBSG ). 


 



 


Polar bear hunting in Russia has been banned since ; some animals are killed in defense of 
life, and a few cubs are taken annually for zoos. Illegal harvest is occurring in the Chukchi Sea 
region with limited ability for monitoring or enforcement (PBSG ), and there is significant 
interest in re-opening a hunt by Russian indigenous peoples. Over-harvest of the CS population 
resulting from illegal hunting in Russia, combined with legal subsistence harvest in Alaska, is a 
conservation concern. 

In , The Agreement on the Conservation and Management of the Alaska-Chukotka Polar 
Bear Population (Bilateral Agreement) was signed in partnership with the U.S. It establishes a 
conservation program for the CS population of polar bears that would allow for hunting by 
Native people under a quota system, along with harvest monitoring and enforcement. The 
Chukotka Union of Marine Mammal Hunters and the Alaska Nanuuq Commission represent 
indigenous hunters in Russia and the U.S., and they are developing a Native-to-Native agreement 
to help implement the terms of the Bilateral Agreement. On December , , the U.S. 
Congress passed legislation to implement the Bilateral Agreement and the Service anticpates 
working with our Russian partners towards full implentation of the provisions of the Bilateral 
Agreement. 

The PBSG (Aars et al. ) recognized the immediate need to coordinate and regulate harvest 
of the shared CS population of polar bears. The lack of a valid population estimate and concern 
for unsustainable levels of harvest, as well as the need to coordinate and conduct research, led 
the PBSG to recommend that the U.S. and Russia immediately enact and enforce the terms of the 
Bilateral Agreement. 

United States 

Prior to the  s the vast majority of polar bear hunting was done by Alaska Natives for 
subsistence purposes. Economically, polar bear hunting and the commercial sale of skins became 
increasingly important to Alaskan Natives when whaling began in the s. Trophy hunting 
using aircraft began in the late s. In the s State of Alaska hunting regulations became 

 



 


more restrictive and in , aircraft-assisted hunting was stopped altogether. Between  
and  , an average of  polar bears was harvested per year, resulting in a decline in polar 
bear populations in Alaska (Amstrup et al. ). 

In , the MMPA was passed which ended all polar bear hunting, except by coastal dwelling 
Alaska Natives for subsistence and handicraft purposes. The MMPA also prohibits the 
commercial sale of any marine mammal parts except when they have been significantly altered 
into handicrafts by Alaska Natives. No sport hunting is allowed. 

In the U.S. polar bears occur only in Alaska and are delineated as the CS and SB polar bear 
populations (Paetkau et al. , Amstrup et al , Amstrup et al. , Cronin et al. ). 
The Service is responsible for polar bear management and implementation of the MMPA. Under 
the MMPA, non-wasteful subsistence harvest by Alaska Natives cannot be restricted unless a 
population is designated as depleted (it is below its OSP level). The Service is engaged in 
cooperative management of polar bears with the Alaska Nanuuq Commission, a non-profit 
organization that represents interests of Alaska Native polar bear users. 

For the SB population, hunting is regulated voluntarily through an agreement between the 
Inuvialuit of Canada and the Inupiat of Alaska. The North Slope Borough/Inuvialuit Game 
Council Agreement of IS established a Joint Commission and Technical Advisory Committee 
to oversee polar bear management of the SB population, and calls for management based on 
sustainable yield. It also calls for protection of females with cubs and denning bears, prohibits 
hunting using aircraft or large motorized vessels, and establishes (annually reviewed) harvest 
quotas and hunting seasons. Since development of this agreement, the harvest has generally 
remained below MSY (Brower et al. ). A similar agreement is being worked on for the CS 
population (the Bilateral Agreement) shared with Russia, which will include implementation of a 
quota system. 


The MMPA was amended in  to provide for the import of sport-hunted polar bear trophies 
legally taken by the importer from Canada. Prior to issuing a permit for import of such trophies, 

 



 


the Service must make specific determinations regarding the status and management of polar 
bears population in Canada. In , the SB, NB, MC, VM, and WH populations approved for 
import of polar bears trophies. In , LS and NW were added; in  MC was removed from 
the list in light of new information indicating that the population was severely depleted. At 
present (), the Service is considering removing WH from the list. 

. Harvest by Population 

For harvest management purposes, the world’s polar bears are divided into  populations, or 
stocks, based primarily on geographic core areas of use. Their status is presented in Table I . 
Additional harvest information for each population is described below and included in Table . 

a. East Greenland 

The current size of the EG population is unknown; a population estimate of , polar bears has 
been proposed (Lunn et al.  in PBSG  Greenland Research Report p.). 

The population is hunted by residents of eastern and southwestern Greenland. From -, 
the annual harvest averaged  bears (PBSG  p.). During - harvests averaged 
 bears per year (Bom and Sonne  Greenland Research Report to PBSG, p.). No 
significant trend in the annual harvest was noted in - (Bom and Sonne , Greenland 
Research Report to PBSG, p.). 

b. Barents Sea (BA) 

The current size of the BA population is estimated at , animals based on a  aerial 
survey (Aars et al. , Norway Management and Research Report to PBSG, p. ). Historically 
the population was believed to be depleted by over-harvest until a total ban on hunting in  in 
Russia and in  in Norway allowed the population to increase (Prestrud and Stirling , 
Derocher ). The population is not currently harvested except for some polar bears taken in 

 
