bears is relatively rare compared to other bears. Polar bears feed primarily on fat which is 
relatively free of parasites, except for Trichinella (Rogers and Rogers , Forbes ), 
Lentfer () reported that % of the polar bears tested from Alaska had Trichinella larvae in 
the masseter muscle tissue. Rogers and Rogers (  ) found that of the  endoparasites found in 


 



 


captive polar bears, only Trichinella had been observed in wild animals. Trichinella has been 
documented in polar bears throughout their range and although infestations can be quite high 
they are normally not fatal (Rausch , Dick and Belosevic , Larsen and Kjos-Hannssen 
, Taylor et al. , Forbes ). Although rabies is commonly found in Arctic foxes, 
there has been only one confirmed instance of rabies in polar bears (Taylor et al. ). In a 
recent study in Svalbard, Norway, antibodies to the rabies virus were not detected (Tryland et al. 
). Follmann et al. () initially reported the presence of morbilllivirus in polar bears from 
Alaska and Russia and four morbilliviruses, canine distemper (CDV), dolphin morbillivirus 
(DMV), phocine distemper (PDV), and porpoise morbillivirus (PMV), were later identified 
(Garner et al. ). More recently, the presence of CDV, DMV, PDV, and PMV was detected 
in % of the Alaskan polar bears tested (n=) (Kirk, pers. comm.). Epizootics including mass 
mortalities in marine mammals, particularly seals, have been attributed to this group of 
morbilliviruses (Duignan et al. , Duignanetal. , Mamaev et al.l, Visser et al. , 
Kennedy , Duignan et al. , Garner et al. ). The bears that were positive for DMV, 
PDV, or PMV had higher titers for CDV (Kirk, pers. comm.), which suggests that that the source 
is likely from a terrestrial origin (Garner et al. ). 

Antibodies to the protozoan parasite. Toxoplasma gondii, were found in % of serum samples 
from Alaskan polar bears (n=) (Kirk, pers. comm.). Toxoplasmosis has been suspected as a 
risk factor increasing the susceptibility of southern sea otters (Enhydra lulris) to infection (Miller 
et al. , Krueder et al. ). It is currently unknown whether or not the pre.sence of 
Toxoplasma gondii is a health concern for polar bears. 

It is unknown whether polar bears are more susceptible to new pathogens due to their lack of 
previous exposure to diseases and parasites. Many different pathogens and viruses have been 
found in seal species that are polar bear prey (Duignan et al. , Measures and Olson , 
Dubey et al. , Hughes-Hanks et al. ), so the potential exists for transmission of these 
diseases to polar bears. As polar bears become more stressed they may eat more of the intestines 
and internal organs than they do presently, thus increasing their potential exposure to parasites 
and viruses (Derocher et al. , Amstrup et al. b). It has also been well documented that 

 



 


populations or individuals that are stressed are more susceptible to effects of disease. There is 
also the potential for pathogens to expand their range northward from more southerly areas as 
areas in the Arctic get progressively warmer (Harvell et al. ). For example, Echinococcus 
multilocularis was recently found in brown lemmings (Lemmus trimucronatus) along the Arctic 
coast in Barrow, Alaska, which represents a northern expansion of this disease vector (Holt et al. 
). Ecninococcus granulosis is the wolf-ungulate version and may be more of threat to polar 
bears scavenging caribou (Rangifer larandus) since scavenging these carcasses has been 
documented on Svalbard (Deroeher et al. a) and Wrangel Island (Belikov ). 

. Intraspecific Predation 

Intraspecifie killing has been reported among all North American bear species. Reasons for 
intraspecific predation in bears species is poorly understood but thought to include population 
regulation, nutrition, and enhanced breeding opportunities in the case of predation of cubs. 
Although infanticide by male polar bears has been well documented (Hannsson and Thomassen 
, Larsen , Taylor et al. , Deroeher and Wiig ), it is thought that this activity 
does not account for large percentage of the cub mortality. By killing cubs sired by other males 
the adult male eliminates potential competition with their own offspring and may also create an 
opportunity to breed with the female whose cubs he killed, thus producing his own cubs 
Swenson et al. ). It is thought that this behavior increases the male’s relative fitness in the 
population. However, for this to be successful a male has to recognize his own cubs and have a 
reasonable opportunity to breed with a female whose cubs he kills when she comes back into 
estrus. Another potential reason for infanticide relates to density dependent mechanisms of 
population control as this behavior seems to occur more frequently with increasing population 
size (Deroeher and Wiig ). 

Cannibalism has also been documented in polar bears (Deroeher and Wiig , Amstrup et al. 
b). Amstrup et al. (b) observed three instances of intraspecific predation and 
cannibalism in the southern Beaufort Sea during the spring of . The first was the first 
documented predation of an adult female in a den, the second was of a female and newly 


 



 


emerged cub from a den, and the third involved a yearling male. In a combined  years of 
research by the senior investigators similar observations had not taken place. Active stalking or 
hunting preceded the attacks and both of the killed bears were eaten. Adult males were believed 
to be the predator in the attacks. Amstrup et al. (b) indicated that in general a greater portion 
of polar bears in the area where the predation occurred were in poor physical condition compared 
to other years. The authors hypothesized that adult males may be the first to show the effects of 
nutritional stress caused by significant ice retreat in this area (Skinner et al.  , Comi.so and 
Parkinson , Stroeve et al. ) because they feed less during the spring mating season and 
enter the summer in poorer condition than other sex/age classes. Derocher and Wiig () 
documented a similar intraspecific killing and consumption of another polar bear in Svalbard, 
Norway, which was attributed to relatively high population densities and food shortages. Taylor 
et al. () documented that a malnourished female killed and consumed her own cubs, and 
Lunn and Stenhouse () found an emaciated male consuming an adult female polar bear. 

The potential importance of cannibalism and infanticide for population regulation is unknown. 
Given our current knowledge of disease and predation, we do not believe that these factors 
currently are having any major population level effects. However, increased cannibalism in 
polar bears was postulated and thought to be a result nutritional stress brought on by climate 
change (Derocher et al. ). 


D. Adequacy of existing regulatory mechanisms 
. Description of International Agreements and Oversight 

a. International Agreement on the Conservation of Polar Bears 

Canada, Denmark on behalf of Greenland, Norway, the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, and 
the U.S. signed the Agreement on the Conservation of Polar Bears { Polar Bear Agreement) 


 



 


in   (Appendix  ). The  Polar Bear Agreement requires signatories to protect the 
ecosystems and habitats used by polar bears and to promote polar bear protection efforts through 
coordinated national measures. The  Polar Bear Agreement represented the first effort by 
five circumpolar nations to address a circumpolar conservation issue (Prestrud and Stirling , 
Stirling ). 

In , the U.S. Senate unanimously provided its advice and consent to the Polar Bear 
Agreement and by  all five parties had ratified the Polar Bear Agreement, The Polar Bear 
Agreement, initially in force for five years, became permanent upon agreement by the five 
parties in . Article II of the Polar Bear Agreement requires each country to “take appropriate 
action to protect the ecosystem of which polar bears are a part, with special attention to habitat 
components such as denning and feeding sites and migration patterns,” and to “manage polar 
bear populations in accordance with sound conservation practices based on the best available 
scientific data.” Article VI of the Polar Bear Agreement requires each country to “enact and 
enforce such legislation and other measures as may be necessary” to implement the Polar Bear 
Agreement. Each party must enact implementing legislation where necessary. The Agreement, 
relies on the efforts of each jurisdiction to implement conservation programs, and does not 
preclude a party from establishing additional controls. 

The Marine Mammal Protection Actofl (MMPA, U.S.C.§  e/ se?.), as amended, is 
the primary legislation through which the U.S. meets the obligations of the Polar Bear 
Agreement, The MMPA addresses domestic conservation of polar bears and other marine 
mammals under the jurisdiction of the U.S. 
