
But the Inuit have a day to day reality and a history of living 
with bears, of bear hunting and in some cases being hunted by the 
bears over the last , years. Polar bears are a powerful symbol 
and a meaningful component of Inuit culture. Now, they have be- 
come a meaningful component of their economic lives. The Inuit 
manage their polar bears well and with deep understanding. They 
have made use of, sometimes modifying, the best scientific data 
presented as well. They kill approximately  polar bears each 
year and this hunt has great meaning to them. 

They also sell a much smaller number, between and  percent 
of these hunts, to sportsmen, like some of the individuals have 
mentioned here, the sporting tradition. I too am a sportsman. I will 
never hunt a polar bear, probably, and have really no desire to. But 
some do. This brings in crucial dollars to the Inuit culture, between 
$, and $. million per year. The hardest hunt on earth, 
conducted on dog sleds in sub-zero weather,  to  day hunts, 
which is truly a pivotal — it is like going back in time, is the way 
it is described. 

Under this regime, polar bears have been existing for, well, at 
the levels of , to ,, is what the data says, since , 
which is about as far back as the truly trustworthy data goes. Ordi- 
narily, I would recommend a prudent and precautionary principle. 
However, this impinges so heavily on individual cultures that I 
think we need to take a second look at the listing of ESP species. 

My third point is recommendation, and I have five quick ones. 
First, continue to build on the excellent nodes of polar bear re- 
search science that are ongoing right now. These include people 
like USGS’s Steven Amstrup, Canadian Wildlife Services’ Ian Stir- 
ling, University of Alberta Andy Derocher, Nunavut biologist Mitch 
Taylor. These folks are asking the right questions for us to under- 
stand and make informed decisions. 

Second, I would suggest we fund a wider study of sub- popu- 
lations to bring them to the management forefront of science. 
Third, hold off on top-down policies like Endangered Species Act at 
this time. They are redundant, cumbersome, divisive, and appear 
indefensible scientifically when they are moving this forecast out 
 years. They may backfire, as well. We need to avoid simple re- 
ductionist black and white statements, although the media and the 
court of law love this approach. We live in a an area of shades of 
gray on this issue. 

Fourth, empower bottom-up policy that involves traditional eco- 
logical knowledge, hunter trapper organizations, in addition to the 
excellent work by the polar bear technical committees. And finally, 
fifth, use and modify existing management structures to protect 
critical habitat. And there are many of these. 

All of these suggestions are compatible with simultaneously re- 
ducing emissions. Senator Boxer, you will be pleased to know that 
the Society of Wetland Scientists, on which I serve, will have a car- 
bon neutral annual meeting in Sacramento this year. And I voted 
for that. I support that. 

We need to be aware that treating polar bear issues is treating 
the symptoms of climate change, though, and not the disease. Polar 



 


bears are a response variable, not a driver in this case. As symbolic 
as they might be, we need to keep that in mind. 

Thank you very much. 

Senator Lieberman. Thanks, Dr. Foote, for your testimony. I ap- 
preciate it. 

Our final witness on this panel is Dr. Brendan Kelly, who is an 
Associate Professor of Marine Biology and the Associate Vice Presi- 
dent for Research at the University of Alaska. For  years. Dr. 
Kelly has studied Arctic wildlife, especially ice-associated marine 
mammals. 

Dr. Kelly, thanks for making the trip, and we look forward to 
your testimony now. 

STATEMENT OF BRENDAN P. KELLY, ASSOCL\TE VICE 
PRESIDENT FOR RESEARCH, UNIVERSITY OF ALASKA 

Mr. Kelly. Thank you. Senator Lieberman and members of the 
committee. I appreciate the opportunity to testify this morning. 

My own university training includes a bachelor’s degree from the 
University of California, a master’s degree from the University of 
Alaska and a Ph.D from Purdue University, all in biology. But my 
real world teachers were Yupik and Inupiaq Eskimo hunters. For 
the past  years, I have studied Arctic wildlife, especially ice-asso- 
ciated marine mammals, whales, seals and walruses. 

The Arctic ecosystem is dominated by seasonal sea ice, which at 
least earlier in my career covered as much as  million square kil- 
ometers. That ice strongly influences the climate, oceanography 
and biology of the Arctic ocean and surrounding lands. One con- 
sequence of our warming climate is the melting of that sea ice. 

The ecological implications start with a specialized type of algae 
adapted to very low light levels and able to grow in and on that 
sea ice. Blooms of those algae on the under-surface of the ice are 
the basis for an elaborate food web leading through zooplankton 
and fish to seals, whales, polar bears and humans. 

The ice also strongly influences winds and water temperature, 
both of which are key determinants of upwelling, whereby nutrient 
rich waters are brought up to depths where there is sufficient sun- 
light for phytoplankton to make use of those nutrients. 

The Bering Sea produces our Nation’s largest commercial fish 
harvest, as well as supporting subsistence economies of Alaska Na- 
tives. Ultimately, the fish populations depend on plankton blooms, 
which in turn are controlled by the extent and location of the sea 
ice in the spring. 

Still higher in the food web are walruses and seals, for which the 
ice provides an important resting place. In fact, the greatest num- 
ber of seal species occurs in the ice-covered polar seas. Seals and 
walruses have played and continue to play key roles in Eskimo 
subsistence economies. How those marine mammals will be im- 
pacted by climate change reflects their species-specific relationships 
to ice and snow. 

I would like to illustrate with two examples. Walruses feed on 
clams and other bottom-dwelling organisms. Over a nursing period 
of two or more years, the females alternate their time between at- 
tending their calf on the ice and diving to the bottom to feed them- 
selves. The record ice retreat observed in recent summers has ex- 



 


tended the ice north of the shallow continental shelf. The result is 
the ice surface on which the calves are nurse is over water too deep 
for the female walruses to feed. The female thus must choose be- 
tween feeding their calves or themselves. 

Ringed seals can dive and feed at greater depths. And their vul- 
nerability to climate change involves their dependence on the snow 
cover on the surface of the ice. Ringed seals give birth in snow 
caves excavated above breathing holes they maintain in the sea ice. 
The snow caves protect the pups from extreme cold, and to a cer- 
tain extent, from predators. As the climate warms, however, snow 
melt has been arriving increasingly early in the Arctic. And the 
