



Nancy Knowiton Ph.D 
Director 

Center for Marine Biodiversity and Conservation 
John Dove Isaacs Professor of Natural Philosophy 
Scripps Institution of Oceanography 


jc. 

O 


Joseph K. Sheldon, Ph.D. 

Distinguished Professor of Biology and 
Environmental Science 


Messiah College 



Professor of Environmental Studies 
The Au Sable Institute of Environmental 
Studies 


James Gustave Speth J.D., M.Litt. 

Dean, and Sara Shalienberger Brown Professor 
in the Practice of Environmental Policy 
Yale School of Forestry and Environmental 
Studies 



Ill 



Rev. Eric Steinkamp Ph.D. 

Chair of the Department of Natural Sciences and 

Math and Professor of Environmental Sciences 

Northwest University 

Professor of Environmental Studies 

The Au Sable Institute of Environmental Studies 


ti 


Loren Wilkinson Ph.D. 

Professor of Philosophy and Interdisciplinary 
Studies 

Regent College 


Edward O. Wilson Ph.D. 

University Research Professor Emeritus 
Harvard University 



Ken Wilson 

Vineyard Church of Ann Arbor 


Senior Pastor 


Institutional affiliation is given for identification purposes only. All signatories do so as individuals 
expressing their personal opinions and not as representatives of their organizations. 



 




m 


ASSOCIATION of 
FISH ^WILDLIFE 
AGENCIES 


The voice of fish and wildlife agencies 

Hill of the Scites 

 North Capitol Street, NW 

Suite  • Washington. DC.  

Phone; -- 

Fa*. -- 

E-mail; iafo@fishwildlife.org 

www.fihwildlife.org 


Honorable Joseph Lieberman 
Chairman 

Subcommittee on Private Sector & Consumer Solutions to 
Global Warming and Wildlife Protection 
Committee on Environment and Public Works 
US Senate 

Washington, DC  
Dear Senator Lieberman: 

On behalf of America's state fish and wildlife agencies I want to thank you for including 
provisions in the “Climate Stewardship and Innovation Act of ” (S.) to allocate a 
portion of the funds from auctioned emissions allowances to fish and wildlife adaptation 
activities through the Wildlife Conservation and Restoration Program. 

Pervasive impacts from climate change will have landscape-level effects on fish and 
wildlife well into the future. Alteration of habitat, disruption to migratory patterns, 
changes in predator-prey interactions, and the spread of invasive species and wildlife 
diseases represent a few of the ways in which an altered climate will disrupt fish and 
wildlife populations. The pressures of climate change only increase the need for pro- 
active conservation and management of fish and wildlife and their habitat in order to 
ensure their continued survival. Funding for fish and wildlife conservation is an 
essential element of any overall adaptation assistance package. When fish and wildlife 
are pushed to the brink, other conflicts over scarce resources are frequently 
exacerbated. Dedicating a portion of adaptation assistance for practical, preventive 
actions to conserve fish and wildlife resources can help ameliorate larger conflicts. 

We share your belief that the most effective way to moderate the effects of climate 
change on fish and wildlife is by dedicating funds from the auction of emission 
allowances to the Wildlife Conservation and Restoration Program (WCRP). Established 
