
I would ask that my written testimony be included for the record. 

The Chairman. Without objection, the entire statement of you 
and the other witnesses will be included in the record. 

Dr. Lane. Thank you. I will summarize three issues in my oral 
statement very briefly: First, what we know about the Earth’s cli- 
mate and how it is changing; second, the remaining difficult sci- 
entific questions that we must address; and finally, how our re- 
search program is going after these issues. 

Let me start with the area of scientific consensus. First, human 
activities has significantly increased atmospheric carbon dioxide. In 
the past century, atmospheric CO  has risen  percent. The con- 
centration of carbon dioxide is now higher than at any time over 
the past , years. 

Second, the surface of the Earth is warming. The Earth’s surface 
has warmed significantly over the last century. The oceans are 
warming as well, and evidence is strong that the temperatures of 
the late th Century are without precedent in the last several cen- 
turies, the ’s are the warmest decade on record, and  was 
the warmest year in , years. 

Third, the Earth’s global average surface temperature will con- 
tinue to rise during the next century. Greenhouse gases in the at- 
mosphere will increase the surface temperature of the Earth. Glob- 
al temperatures are projected to increase two to six and a half de- 
grees Fahrenheit over the next  years. 

Rising temperatures will increase rates of evaporation and lead 
to more total precipitation. Sea level will rise as warming expands 
the ocean water. Finally, these changes in temperature, precipita- 
tion, and sea level will affect the natural environment and human 
society. 

The ideal ranges for plants and animals will change, and in some 
cases the effects of other environmental stresses and urban and 
rural areas will be amplified. 

Let me now move to the areas of remaining uncertainty. The key 
questions I think are: How fast will temperatures change over the 
next century, and how will the impacts of this change vary across 
different regions of the world? 

Differences in future climate projections largely stem from dis- 
agreements over so-called feedback effects. For example, will more 
water in the atmosphere increase warming by acting as a green- 
house gas, or result in more low clouds that will reflect sunlight 
away from the Earth? Will aerosols, small particles, reflect incom- 
ing sunlight, or will they absorb heat and contribute to warming 
effects? 

We do not know the exact answers to these questions, but our 
estimates of future average temperature increases in the range of 
two to six and a half degrees Fahrenheit include all of these uncer- 
tainties. 



 


We know the amount of carbon dioxide the global biosphere 
takes up and releases each year varies widely, but we do not know 
why. And although evidence suggests that plants and vegetation in 
the northern hemisphere are currently taking up substantial 
amounts of carbon dioxide, we do not know whether this capacity 
can be maintained or even increased over the long term. 

And though we often discuss global climate change, many impor- 
tant policy questions will have a regional focus. For instance, how 
will climate change affect rainfall in the southwest, fisheries in the 
northwest, or the distribution of maple trees in the northeast? We 
need to know how these changes will affect agriculture, tourism, 
and local economies. 

Finally, Mr. Chairman, I would like to comment on our efforts 
to answer these questions. Federal agencies that participate in the 
U.S. Global Change Research Program conduct research on the 
mechanisms of the Earth’s climate system, on the future course of 
climate change, and the potential impacts of climate change on the 
environment and human society. 

The research agenda for the Global Change Research Program 
has been developed in cooperation with the scientific community, 
including the National Academy of Sciences. 

Over the last decade, the Global Change Research Program has 
had a strong focus on the physics and chemistry of the atmosphere 
and the oceans, including reducing uncertainties about the rule of 
aerosols and water in the atmosphere. 

Recently, the Global Change Research Program has broadened 
its scope, and I would like to highlight three new priorities. First, 
we are completing the first U.S. national assessment of the poten- 
tial consequences of climate variability and change. 

This assessment is examining the potential ecological and socio- 
economic impacts of climate variation and change in the United 
States and the ways we might prepare for them. 

Second, our new carbon cycle science initiative will evaluate the 
potential for the Earth’s forests, the agriculture regions, and wet- 
lands, to take up and store carbon. 

And finally, new research under the Global Change Research 
Program umbrella will focus on how water moves through the land, 
the atmosphere, and the ocean, and how climate change may in- 
crease or decrease regional availability of this critical global re- 
source. 

Mr. Chairman, I thank you again for the opportunity to testify 
today. Your sponsorship of the Global Change Research Seminar 
Series clearly shows your interest in climate science. And I am con- 
fident that together we can continue to increase our understanding 
of these important issues that will help us make sound policy deci- 
sions for our nation. 

I will be happy to answer any questions you have. 

The Chairman. I thank you, Dr. Lane, and I did read your entire 
statement which I think is very illuminating. 

[The prepared statement of Dr. Lane follows:] 



 


Prepared Statement of Dr. Neal Lane, Assistant to the President for 
Science and Technology, Office of Science and Technology Policy 

Thank you for this opportunity to discuss with you the Administration’s science 
and technology programs that are relevant to the understanding of climate change. 
I know the Members of this Committee share my strong belief that America’s world- 
leading science and technology enterprise must be sustained and nurtured. While 
we sometimes differ on precisely how and where to invest our taxpayers’ funds, we 
share a bipartisan understanding that the future prosperity of this country depends 
on continued strong federal support for all areas of scientific inquiry. 

Today I come before you to suggest that we can bring that same common appre- 
ciation for science to an area of considerable policy disagreement — the issue of cli- 
mate change. Whatever your policy views may be on the wisdom of the Kyoto Pro- 
tocol, I respectfully suggest that supporting scientific research on climate change 
and its potential impacts is in our national interest. The President’s FY budget 
requests substantial funding for the U.S. Global Change Research Program, as has 
every budget submitted by this Administration and those of President Reagan and 
