world have become increasingly intense over the past  years, a trend attributed to warmer 
ocean temperatures fueled by global warming (Emanuel, ; Webster, et a/., ). 

The rise in severity of storms not only affects vulnerable human populations but wildlife 
and their habitats as well. Increased storm surge and mean tide levels could alter 
disturbance regimes in shallow coastal waters that in turn would influence the composition 
and productivity of sea grasses and benthic fauna vulnerable to changes in sedimentation 
patterns, current velocity and turbidity (Inkley et al., ). 

Fish and Wildlife of the American West 


Global warming is already having a significant impact on fish and wildlife habitat across 
the American West, and studies show that the effects will become even more extensive in the 
coming decades if global warming pollution continues unabated. One of the greatest 
concerns about global warming in the West is the impact on the region’s water resources. 
Winter snowpack accounts for  percent of the water supply in the West and is the 
primary source of water in many areas in dry summer months as the snow melts in high 
altitude mountains (Glick, ). Global warming is expected to contribute to a significant 
reduction in average snowpack across the region, as well as earlier spring snowmelt. 
Mountains in the Pacific Northwest are projected to lose as much as  

percent of average snowpack by ; the Central Rocky Mountains could lose up to  
percent by ; and the Sierra Nevada range could lose up to  percent of snowpack 
within the next  years (McCabe and Wolock, ). 

Another serious consequence of global warming in the West is an increase in the incidence 
and severity of wildfires, a problem made even worse by decades of fire suppression, 
extensive grazing and other factors. New research reveals that wildfires in western forests 
have become much more frequent and larger since the mid-s, a trend that corresponds 
with warmer springs and the expansion of summer dry periods (Westerling, ). Across 
the region, there has been a four-fold increase in the number of major fires each year and a 
six-fold increase in the area of forest burned since  compared to the period between 
-. These recent trends have occurred during a period when land use practices have 
not changed significantly from the period prior to the shift, which underscores the role that 
climate-related variables are playing in wildfire activity in the region. This trend will 
continue if global warming continues unabated, with devastating consequences for people 
and wildlife alike. One study, for example, projects that the overall area of acreage burned 
will double in size across   western states if the average summertime temperature 
increases . degrees Fahrenheit between -  (McKenzie, et al., ). 



 


Economic Importance of Wildlife 

Fish and wildlife play an integral role in the U.S. economy. In , more than  million 
adults participated in hunting, fishing and wildlife watching, spending more than $ 
billion and supporting more than . million jobs across the nation (U.S. FWS, ). With 
these numbers, the economic importance of hunting, fishing and wildlife watching is 
comparable to that of the seventh largest corporation in America, with nearly as many 
employees as the U.S. computer industry (NWF & lAFWA, ). 

Beyond hunting, fishing and wildlife watching, which focus directly on fish and wildlife 
resources, abundant fish and wildlife enhances all outdoor activities. A recent study by 
the Outdoor Industry Foundation revealed that active outdoor recreation, which includes 
camping, fishing, hunting, paddling, hiking and wildlife viewing, contributes a total of 
$ billion annually to the U.S. economy, supports . million jobs ( in  U.S. jobs), 
generates $ billion in federal and state tax revenue and stimulates  percent of all 
consumer spending. To date, no one has estimated what percentage of this economic 
activity would be lost under various global warming scenarios. However, the EPA 
estimates that potential economic losses to U.S. cold-water recreational fishing alone 
from global warming could be $ . billion to $ billion yearly. (Julius, ) 

Global warming is projected to have devastating impacts on coral reefs which support a 
commercial and recreational fishing industry around the world worth billions of dollars. 
The reefs of the Florida Keys alone generated $. billion in tourism revenues in -. 
(Scott, ) Global warming has placed coral reefs, their fish and wildlife, and their 
economic benefits in serious jeopardy. 

Conserving wildlife and ecosystems has many economic benefits to people beyond those 
that are quantified in the marketplace. Ecosystems perform fundamental life support 
services without which human civilizations would cease to thrive. (Daily et al., ) 

These include the purification of air and water, detoxification and decomposition of 
wastes, regulation of climate, regeneration of soil fertility and production and maintenance 
of biodiversity. (Boyd et al., ; Salzman et al., ; Daily et al., ) Agricultural, 
pharmaceutical, commercial fishing and numerous other industries that draw on natural 
resources sectors depend on healthy ecosystems. For these industries, which represent 
large portions of the economy, face potentially significant potential for disruption of 
current harvesting practices and livelihoods under global warming scenarios. (Malcolm et 
al, ) 

A significant reduction in the ability of the pharmaceutical industry to harvest wild plants for 
research also would have large negative consequences for medical practices. Of the top 
  prescription drugs used in the United States,    are derived in whole or in part from 
plants and other natural sources. Nine of the top ten drugs are based on natural plant 
products. The commercial value of pharmaceuticals in the developed nations exceeds $ 
billion per year. (Daily et al., ) 

The agricultural sector also has much to lose if global warming scenarios unfold as 
projected and wildlife declines. One third of human food is derived from plants pollinated 
by wild pollinators. If birds, bats, butterflies and other natural pollinators decline because of 



 


a transfomation in how we produce and use energy is a cornerstone for building a safer 
climate future. We can diversify our energy sources with clean alternatives such as wind 
and solar power as well as with a new generation of advanced, sustainably managed 
biofuels crops. As we wean ourselves from our over-reliance on oil and coal, we can 
greatly improve our energy security and stabilize energy prices to avoid the radical jolts we 
have experienced at the gas pump. We can also keep more of America’s hard-earned 
money here to bolster our economy rather than shoveling it overseas. 

The Apollo Alliance, a coalition of national labor unions and other partners, has 
estimated that a bold program of investments in clean-energy technology will create more 
than  million high-wage jobs in construction, manufacturing and industrial machinery by 
 and expand the economy by $ billion. These estimates echo the findings of a 
government commission which, in , determined that clean energy investments are 
critical to help U.S. firms “capture much of the $ trillion which will be spent worldwide 
for energy supply technologies over the next  years.” 

By applying today the same leadership to global warming that Congress applied to other 
air and water pollution threats in the past. Congress can secure our environmental and 
economic future. Since the Clean Air Act was signed in , America has cut in half the 
emissions of the six common air pollutants for which air quality standards have been 
established. What has been good for our environment has been good for our economy, 
which has almost tripled during that time. Cleaning up our environment has created new 
opportunities for entrepreneurs and engineers. America’s environmental technology 
global warming, yields of important crops would likewise decline. In the United States 
alone, the value to the agricultural industry of native pollinators sustained by natural 
habitats is estimated in the billions of dollars per year. The agricultural industry is also 
heavily dependent on abundant wildlife and h^thy ecosystems for pest control. Roughly  
percent of potential crop pests are controlled by natural enemies such as birds and spiders. 
Wildlife species save farmers billions of dollars annually by protecting crops and reducing 
the need for chemical control. (Daily et al., ) 

Solving Global Warming 

The action we take to solve global warming can simultaneously drive a transformation in 
how we produce and use energy, yielding far-reaching benefits for our economy, for our 
energy security and independence from foreign oil, and for the health of children 
jeopardized by air pollution. 

The National Wildlife Federation asks Congress to act now to set enforceable, 
science-based goals to reduce U.S. global warming pollution, bolstered with new laws to 
promote renewable energy and more energy efficient vehicles, appliances and buildings. 
The Agenda for a Clean Energy Future to Combat Global Warming, supported by the 
National Wildlife Federation and  other leading conservation and environmental groups, 
is attached (and available online at www.saveourenvironment.org). 



 

