matter of what the U.S. does or what this Committee does. It is 
what the whole planet does. 

And, in that sense, it seems so overwhelming that we, therefore, 
do not have to do very much. And, of course, in this problem, like 
many other problems, a non-decision is a decision in the sense that 
we all are implicitly agreeing to keep increasing emissions of CO  
into the atmosphere. 

The Chairman. Dr. Trenberth. 

Dr. Trenberth. Yes. Thank you. Climate change is not nec- 
essarily bad. When you deplete the ozone layer, the consensus was 
that this was a universally bad thing and, therefore, a coordinated 
activity could occur. But warming in wintertime can be beneficial 
for some things, for instance. 

The real problem, which I do not think is adequately appreciated, 
is that change by its very nature can be disruptive and tends to 
be disruptive. And even though we may be changing in some areas 
to a climate that is better in some sense, it is not going to stay 
there. It is going to continue to change. 

In fact, we are entering a period of instability in our climate, and 
we are not going to know just what the climate is going to be next 
year or for the next  years, and actually this puts an imperative 
on making better climate predictions so that we will have those 



 


predictions to be able to base decisions upon, because we will not 
be able to use the climate of the past to make those decisions. 

And this applies in so many parts of society and activities that 
we have, such as planning of dams and especially water resources. 
And I personally think the main pressure points on society will be 
changes in precipitation, changes in extremes, managing water and 
water resources, portable water in particular, and the effects of 
changes in the extremes on society and on the environment. 

Unfortunately, our data bases for those are not as good as they 
are for mean global temperature. As I mentioned before, a one-de- 
gree change in global mean temperature translated locally does not 
mean much. But, in fact, this record has included things like the 
Little Ice Age, which caused major disruptions in Europe. 

And so regionally, the manifestations of this can, indeed, be very 
great and profound. And so getting these aspects across to the gen- 
eral public and to policymakers is not an easy thing to do. 

The Chairman. Dr. Christy. 

Dr. Christy. I agree with Dr. Trenberth, who actually is my 
former advisor when I was back in graduate school. And I usually 
have a difficult time to be more skeptical than he is, but sometimes 
I can. 

In Alabama, the temperature has fallen over the last  years, 
so people right there are not going to be very concerned about glob- 
al warming when the temperature in their local region has not 
warmed at all. The second thing 

The Chairman. If the Gulf shores is inundated, at least in the 
southern part of the state there remains some concern. 

Dr. Christy. I repeatedly advise people who are interested in 
beach-front property that I do not care about six inches of rise rel- 
ative to hurricanes. It is the next hurricane that is going to visit 
the area that is the problem, and they should stay away from the 
beach for that reason. 

Cheap energy means longer and better lives. And I have seen 
that. I was a missionary in Africa, and I saw people who literally 
died when energy costs increased because they just lived right on 
the edge of existence. So I would be very concerned about increas- 
ing the cost of energy for the poor people of Alabama, and those 
around the world. 

And in agreement with everyone here, if there is some way to 
keep energy cheap and not produce CO  , I am all for it. That is 
fine, if we can do that. 

Now, lastly, fortunately in this business, C  itself is plant food. 
It is not toxic. CO  does not bother us, and it invigorates the plant 
world. The plant world you see around you evolved at a time when 
there was ten times as much C  as there is now. So that is one 
thing that we can be thankful for, at least in terms of the toxicity 
that CO  is harmless. 

It is the climate change issue, the secondary effect of C  that 
is of concern to us all. 

The Chairman. Dr. Watson. 

Dr. Watson. My comment would be, simply, most scientists are 
concerned about climate change. Most governments are concerned 
about climate change, which is why most of them signed the Kyoto 
Protocol. 



 


Some businesses are becoming more concerned about climate 
change. Shell and B.P. in Europe, others in the U.S. have all now 
got internal trading systems, and they have got their own targets, 
and they are very similar to Kyoto. 

One of the big problems, however, is what differentiates this 
from the ozone issue. In both cases ozone depletion and global 
warming is largely being caused by emissions from the rich coun- 
tries, the U.S. and Europe, Japan. 

With ozone depletion, the impact is skin cancer on light-skinned 
people. Americans cared about it. So did the Europeans. 

The major impact of global warming will be on developing coun- 
tries and especially the poor in developing countries. The U.S. will 
be hit, but the biggest impact is on developing countries. So it does 
not hit home in quite the way skin cancer did with the ozone issue. 

But the basic point is — and that is why Shell and others are 
starting to act — there are cost effective solutions, especially when 
we use the so-called flexibility mechanisms, emissions trading 
internationally and project-based joint implementation. 

There are distributionable issues. The coal industry is not going 
to be a winner. The renewable energy industry will be a winner, 
and even the gas industry. So there are distributionable issues and 
political forces at play, especially in the U.S. and in, say, Australia, 
where there is a lot of cheap coal reserves. 

There is no question we can de-carbonize the energy system in 
the next  years. We do not need to do it in  years. We have to 
have a long-term strategy to de-carbonize our energy system. 

And the population issue is also a manageable issue. If we follow 
the Cairo principles of culturally acceptable forms of contraception, 
education especially of girls and empowerment of women, we can 
actually start to lower the projections of population. 

And the latest projections suggest that there could well be a sta- 
bilization around  billion people, only  percent more than now 
and starting to decrease by the end of the next century. 

So these are indeed solvable issues, but it takes political will and 
