
Answer. Actually, there has not been much doubt about this in the scientific com- 
munity for over a decade. For the dominant greenhouse gas, carbon dioxide, we can 
directly calculate the changes in atmospheric fossil fuel carbon from year to year 
by measuring the amount of the isotope, carbon-. This isotope is produced in the 
atmosphere by bombardment from high energy solar cosmic rays. Once created in 
the atmosphere, carbon- decays with a half life of about  years. Because of 
this, fossil carbon in the form of coal, oil, and natural gas that has been buried for 
a hundred million years is devoid of the carbon-  isotope. As more fossil carbon 



 


is injected into the atmosphere, the carbon- isotope has become progressively 
more deficient relative to the non-radioactive carbon-  form. 

Thus, we are not debating whether humans have substantially modified the car- 
bon dioxide amounts in the atmosphere. They have. The real science issue is focused 
on how much climate change will occur. Beyond the science, people are concerned 
about who or what would be the most impacted, and who will “pay” the near-term 
costs of mitigating carbon dioxide emissions, or the delayed costs of dealing with the 
impacts of climate change upon essentially all life forms on earth. 


Response to Written Questions Submitted by Hon. John McCain to 
Dr. Kevin E. Trenberth 

Question . The national Research Council’s report mentioned a substantial dis- 
parity between satellite data and surface temperature trends. Can you summarize 
the extent of the disparity? 

Answer. Over the  years  to , the linear temperature trend for the sur- 
face is estimated to be . to .°C in contrast to . to .°C for the satellite data. 
While uncertainty exists in the exact trend number at about the .°C/decade level 
(owing to how the spatial coverage of data is handled, how global averages are com- 
puted, treatment of missing data, begin and end points, etc.), the difference is large 
enough that it is significant. It was labeled a “disparity” by the report as opposed 
to a “discrepancy” as the latter implies something amiss, whereas the report as- 
sesses that it is likely mostly real and arises because the two measurements are 
of different physical quantities. 

Question . The National Research Council report noted that at the outset none of 
the temperature measurements systems were specifically designed for long-term cli- 
mate monitoring. Can you discuss the design life for these instruments and how it 
compares to the actual life? Also, what are the implications of this extended use on 
the accuracy of the measurements? 

Answer. At the surface, measurements are made with individual thermometers at 
many sites around the world. As well as calibration of the thermometers, the siting 
and exposure to the atmosphere must be standardized and should not change in 
time if climate trends are to be correctly monitored. Changing thermometers is not 
an issue, as they are quite accurate. Of more concern are changes in the way and 
time of day they are read, and changes in exposure (such as trees or buildings 
changing nearby, or building a city around the site; this latter point is the “urban 
heat island effect”). Movements of sites for convenience, such as from city sites to 
the airport, are a substantial problem and this and other changes in practice, can 
be overcome as long as parallel measurements are maintained for at least a year, 
but often this has not been done. 

For the atmosphere above the surface, radiosonde packages of instruments are 
used. The package is flown on a balloon and is regarded as expendable and only 
used once. As a result the package must be as inexpensive as possible, which has 
led to compromises in quality. Changes to new improved technology can appear as 
a spurious change in climate unless such changes are measured and adjusted for. 
Mostly this has not been the case. 

For satellites and their platform of instruments, the typical design life is about 
 or  years. Problems arise with occasional loss of a satellite upon launch or pre- 
mature failure of one or more instrument components. As the design for the NOAA 
series of satellites is to have two satellites in orbit at all times (one in the morning 
and one in the afternoon), there is some overlap expected from one satellite to the 
next. There have been times, however, notably in  and  when NOAA- was 
the only satellite flying, that the overlap at both ends was too short to reliably splice 
the record from one satellite to the next. Normally this is done by matching records 
between overlapping satellites. The difficulty of doing this is compounded by the fact 
that the orbits of the satellites are not stable. Instead they tend to drift, both 
through orbital decay and in local crossing time. This latter effect means that meas- 
urements are made at slightly different times each day. For instance, NOAA- 
drifted from an equator crossing time of  p.m. to after  p.m. from  to . 
The difference in temperature between these times of day is considerable and ap- 
pears as a climate change over time unless corrected for. Corrections are indeed 
made for this but they are likely to be imperfect and leave residual effects that may 
be significant over land where the diurnal temperature changes are large. Orbital 
decay also has effects by altering the geometry of any measurements that are not 
directed in the vertical (which is most of them), and this alters the interpretation 
of the measurements, which is recently being allowed for. On-board calibration of 



 


the instrument itself helps to minimize effects of instrumental drift and changes in 
exposure of the instrument to the sun as the orbit changes and with time of year, 
which otherwise would also be considerable. Attempting to allow for such effects has 
been fully tried only recently but the adjustments are empirical, so again residual 
errors are probable, although these are believed to be small. 

Question . Dr John Wallace, who served as Chairman of the National Research 
Council’s Panel on Reconciling Temperature Observations, is quoted as saying that 
“There really is a difference between temperatures at the two levels that we don’t 
fully understand.” Do you agree with that statement and, if so, can you comment 
on the level that we don’t understand? 

Answer. I agree with the statement, although I also think it does warrant clarifica- 
tion. We have hypotheses about the nature of the differences but proving them or 
narrowing the possibilities down is difficult. Firstly, there are many differing influ- 
ences on the temperatures at different levels in the atmosphere. At the surface it 
matters a great deal whether the surface is land or ocean, and over land whether 
the surface is wet or dry and how much vegetation is present. These influences are 
much less further aloft. Direct radiative heating within the atmosphere matters a 
great deal in the troposphere, and so it is important to known the spatial distribu- 
tion and vertical profiles of greenhouse gases (water vapor, carbon dioxide, methane, 
etc., and especially ozone), aerosols and clouds. The radiative properties of the 
aerosols (how absorbing versus reflecting/scattering) are affected by the relative hu- 
midity and are poorly known and highly heterogenous in space and time. Similarly 
for clouds, the water content and size of droplets in clouds are needed to charac- 
terize their radiative effects. Secondly, the models we have that translate the 
forcings just mentioned into a vertical temperature profile also contain uncertainties 
and imperfections. Some of the processes believed to be important, such as convec- 
tion, are either not well enough understood or are very difficult to model accurately 
because, for instance, of horizontal and vertical resolution of the model. Thirdly, 
there are likely to be some remnant errors in the observations that also add to un- 
certainties. 

Climate models need to be further improved (especially in how they handle con- 
vection and clouds), the changes in distributions of greenhouse gases, aerosols, and 
clouds, and their radiative properties need to be much better known to narrow the 
uncertainties, and further improvements are desirable in the observational record. 

Question . The National Research Council report stated that increases in the num- 
ber of small particles called aerosols often mask the greenhouse effect, and that 
stratospheric depletion contributes to cooling of the upper troposphere and strato- 
sphere. How much cooling is taking place as a result of these aerosols? 

Answer. Aerosols vary enormously in space and time because they are washed out 
of the atmosphere by rain, and so their lifetime is typically  to  days. This is 
the reason they vary so much spatially and they tend to be greatest in concentration 
near their source. The sources vary greatly around the world. Some aerosols (con- 
taining soot for instance) absorb solar radiation and produce heating, but the most 
pervasive ones in the Northern Hemisphere make up the milky white haze that you 
see from airplane windows crossing North America and these sulfate aerosols cause 
cooling by reflecting the sun’s rays back to space. The cooling from sulfates is be- 
lieve to be about -. W m-  (plus or minus %) which converts to about a cooling 
of roughly .°C over the past century. A bigger effect may come from the changes 
in clouds from aerosols. Aerosol particles encourage more cloud droplets to form, 
which makes a cloud brighter and more reflective. Low cloud is known from obser- 
vations to have increased but how much of this increase is due to aerosols is un- 
