


 


defense of life and property (Gjertz and Persen , Gjertz et ai, ,  in PBSG  p. 
). Since  through April  a total of  bears were killed in defense and one illegal kill 
(Aars et al. ). 

c. Kara Sea (KS) 

The size of the KS is unknown. Harvest is limited to defense of life kills and some illegal 
harvest that is not thought to be having a population-level effect (PBSG  p.). 

d. Laptev Sea (LA) 

The size of the LA population is unknown but has been estimated to be -, polar bears 
(PBSG  p.). Known harvest is limited to defense-of-life kills and some illegal harvest not 
thought to be having a population-level effect (PBSG  p.). 

e. Chukchi Sea 

The current size of the CS population is unkown; the best available information indicates it may 
be comprised of approximately , animals (PBSG  p.). The Chukchi population is 
hunted by Yupik and Inupiat Natives in Alaska as hunting is illegal in Russia. No harvest quota 
has been set in Alaska and an unquantified level of illegal harvest is occurring in Russia although 
a minimum of  bears are estimated to be harvested and in some years the estimates have 
exceeded  animals. Between the s and s the Alaska harvest declined by % 
(Schliebe et al.l in PBSG  p.). In /,  bears were harvested in Alaska from 
this sub-population (Schliebe et al. , Alaska PBTC report, p. .). The combined Alaska- 
Chukotka harvest is believed to exceed sustainable levels. 

f. Southern Beaufort Sea (SB) 


 



 


Amstrup et al. () estimated the SB population size to be , animals in , Recent 
analysis (Amstrup et al. in prep.) of a -year capture and recapture study completed in  
indicates that this population has declined to about ,. Although it appears that harvest levels 
were sustainable in the past, primarily because hunters harvested fewer animals than the quota 
allowed, adjustments in the harvest level may be necessary in the future. 

The harvest quota for the SB is  animals ( for Alaska and  for NWT) and this population 
is harvested by Native subsistence hunters from Alaska and NWT. In /, the harvest in 
Alaska and NWT was  bears (Schliebe et al. , NSB-IGC Report) and  bears 
respectively (Branigan and Stirling , NSB-IGC Report p. ). A joint users-group agreement 
sets harvest quotas and includes provisions to protect bears in dens and females with cubs. 
Hunters and scientists meet annually to review harvest levels. 

g. Northern Beaufort Sea (NB) 

The size of the NB population was estimate as , animals in  and the harvest was 
thought to be occurring at a sustainable level (PBSG  p. ). In  mark-recapture work 
was begun to reassess population size and this work is ongoing. 

The NB sub-population is harvested by hunters from Nunavut and NWT. The harvest quota is  
bears for Nunavut and  from NWT (Dycket al. , Nunavut Report to PBTC p.  , NWT 
Report to PBTC,  p.). The - harvest was four bears from Nunavut and  bears 
from NWT (PBTC ). 

h. Viscount Melville Sound (VM) 

The current size of the VM population was estimated to be  animals in  (Aars et al, 
). 


 



 


This population is harvested by hunters from NWT and Nunavut. In February , the NWT 
portion of the VM quota was increased to  bears annually (PBSG  Canadian Management 
Report P, ). An increase of  bear (from  to ) was implemented for Nunavut in the / 
season (Dyck et al. , Nunavut Report to PBTC p.l). The - harvest was  bears 
by NWT and  bears by Nunavut hunters (PBTC ). In , the Wildlife Management 
Advisory Council (NWT) and the Inuvialuit Game Council (Nunavut) initiated discussions to 
develop an inter-jurisdictional user agreement between NWT and Nunavut hunters (PBSG  
Canadian Management Report, p. ) because both groups hunt from the NB and VM polar bear 
sub-populations. 

i. Norwegian Bay (NW) 

The size of the NW population was estimated at  animals in  (M. Taylor unpubl. data in 
PBSG  p., Aars et al. ), This population’s low numbers and low reproductive rate 
make it susceptible to any increase in harvest or mortality. This population is harvested by 
hunters from Nunavut, with the harvest quota set at four animals. The - harvest was 
four bears (PBTC ). 

j. Lancaster Sound (LS) 

The size of the LS population was estimated at , bears in  (PBSG  p. ). 

The population is harvested by Nunavut hunters. A quota increase of  bears (from  to ) for 
Nunavut was implemented in / (Dyck et al. , Nunavut Report to PBTC p.l). The 
- harvest was  bears (PBTC ). 

k. M’Clintock Channel (MC) 

The size of the MC population is estimated at  bears (PBSG  Canadian Research Report 
p.). The population is harvested by Nunavut hunters. The harvest quota is set at  bears (PBSG 
 Canadian Research Report p.). Recent modeling indicates that this sub-population may 

 



 


have been historically harvested at a level resulting in gradual depletion over a long time {>  
years) (PBSQ  Canadian Research Report p.). The population is estimated to have 
declined by approximately / of its original size. Local hunters suggest that declining 
environmental conditions or disturbance may also be factors causing a reduction in population 
numbers. A long period of reduced harvest is needed if the MC sub-population is to recover to 
its former numbers. 

l. Gulf of Boothia (GB) 

The population was estimated at , bears, based on a - mark/recapture study (PBSG 
 Canadian Research Report p.). The population is harvested by Nunavut hunters. A quota 
increase of  bears (from  to ) for Nunavut was implemented in / (Dyck et al. 
, Nunavut Report to PBTC p.l). 

m. Foxe Basin (FB) 

The FB population was estimated to consist of approximately , animals in  (M. Taylor, 
unpublished data in PBSG  p.). The method used to estimate the population size utilized 
tetracycline marking (Taylor and Lee ) and recovery of marked animals through the harvest. 
No published report of the results is available. Polar bears are harvested by Nunavut, Quebec, 
and Ontario hunters, Nunavut hunters take the majority of bears from this sub-population. A 
quota increase of  bears (from  to  ) for Nunavut was implemented in / (Dyck et 
al, , Nunavut Report to PBTC p.l). No harvest quotas exist for Quebec and Ontario 
hunters. Neither Quebec nor Ontario reported harvests from this population in - 
(PBTC , ). In the past, the Service was concerned that no restrictions on hunting cubs, 
females with cubs, and denning bears were in place in Quebec and Ontario, however, all parties 
are monitoring their respective harvests and sharing data (Testa  p. ). A formal harvest 
agreement among jurisdictions is needed. 

n. Western Hudson Bay (WH) 

