in the Indian Ocean where the aerosols turn out to be quite dark 
and pollution is very heavy. It looks as if those aerosols are actu- 
ally not reflecting light very well. 

They are heating up. They themselves then, in their interaction 
with the clouds, are causing the clouds to dissipate, and that is 
having a warming effect. We need to understand that — my guess 
is that those are areas: clouds, ice, which I did not mention, and 
aerosols, in which we would be able to make significant progress 
in the next few years, but I would concede to my experts on the 
subject for their estimate. 

The Chairman. Senator Kerry, thank you for being here. 

STATEMENT OF HON. JOHN F. KERRY, 

U.S. SENATOR FROM MASSACHUSETTS 

Senator Kerry. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you very 
much for having this hearing and for your willingness to open up 
the dialogue with respect to this issue. I have been interested in 
and have been involved in this issue for a long period of time now. 

In my responsibilities as a Senator I had the privilege of joining 
Vice President Gore, Tim Wirth, John Chafee, and others as a 
member of the delegation down in Rio for the first Earth Summit 
when President Bush embraced the early findings of scientists re- 
garding global warming. 



 


I subsequently have been at the Buenos Aires followup meeting, 
and I was working with Stu Eisenstat and others in Kyoto where 
the negotiations took place. Stu, I think, did a very brilliant job in 
helping develop the Kyoto Treaty. 

And I must say, Mr. Chairman, I have been a little bit dumb- 
founded and somewhat disturbed by the level of skepticism that ex- 
ists, and has existed over a long period of time, in the U.S. Con- 
gress with respect to this issue. 

We may not have definitive answers for every model, as to ex- 
actly what forest may move, or precisely how much the sea may 
rise in a particular area over what period of time, but we have — 
correct me if I am wrong, Dr. Lane — absolutely definitive science 
to tell us that the ocean is rising, and that there are a number of 
pollutants that we emit. 

I mean, there is a health issue here, not just a question of the 
effect of global warming. Over the last years, the science just keeps 
getting stronger, and stronger, and stronger, reinforcing the theo- 
ries. The world has, frankly, moved more rapidly than the United 
States. 

And in answer to your question — a couple of weeks ago, we had 
a dinner with the Deputy Prime Minister John Prescott, who heads 
up negotiations for Great Britain, and with the Dutch, and others 
here in Washington, talking about the next meeting that will take 
place in Berlin. There are great concerns about the United States’ 
lack of response. 

Frankly, the lack of response by the United States is signifi- 
cantly impeding our capacity to bring less developed countries into 
the equation. I am all for the Senate Resolution passed in the 
th Congress, which supports this goal of the Kyoto Protocol. If 
we let Mexico, and Korea, and India, and China proceed to develop 
without being participants, they can negate every gain that we 
take in the United States. So, this is a global problem. 

But right now, there is such antipathy directed at the United 
States for our lack of seriousness about this, that few people are 
willing to join us in a serious dialogue until we demonstrate a little 
bit of leadership. 

Let me just say, Mr. Chairman, that the science — and we will 
hear this from two of our witnesses this morning — on a scale of vir- 
tual certainty from one to ten, it is ten out of ten. It is virtually 
certain that some changes indicative of climate change are now 
happening. 

And, Dr. Lane, you will confirm, as every scientist here will, that 
the half life of carbon dioxide and of the other greenhouse gas 
emissions is such that if we just went cold turkey today and 
brought our levels down to the  baseline where we are sup- 
posed to be according to the Rio voluntary agreements, we would 
still have  years of global warming effects that are going to occur 
because the gases have long half lives. Therefore, the danger of 
global warming is going to continue no matter what we do today 
even if we are successful at reducing emissions. 

The complexity of global warming can be so daunting that it 
partly is a turn-off to people. They do not want to cope with it or 
try to grapple with it because the problem is quite enormous. 



 


Now again, I say, I know we do not have certainty in the model, 
and, to a degree, people fight about the trivial matters. Do we 
know whether or not Florida is by year such and such absolutely 
going to lose the Miami beaches? No, we cannot say exactly what 
year or when, but we have absolute certainty as to the rise in sea 
level, a range that is disastrous. Take even the bottom line of the 
range — we know it is disastrous. 

Now, we know the worldwide rise in temperatures at the earth’s 
surface is real. We know it has accelerated in recent decades. The 
independent scientific panel organized by the National Academy of 
Sciences concluded in a major report issued this February that they 
now have that sort of certainty. They estimate the increase in tem- 
peratures in the past century between . and . degrees Fahr- 
enheit. That is a -percent increase from earlier projections that 
reflect record shattering high temperatures in the late ’s. 

We now have learned how to deal with the disparity between the 
satellite findings of the upper atmosphere versus what we have on 
earth, and it sort of makes sense that it is going to be warmer 
down here than it is up there in terms of the ratio of impact. 

And I might say, Mr. Chairman, this sounds sort of fundamental, 
but it really goes to the bottom of this. The theory about this was 
found by a fellow named Arhenius in , and it has progressed 
since then. 

And every prognostication of the early scientific data on this has 
been eclipsed by the subsequent findings of fact. Each time it has 
blown away the theory in terms of being more serious than people 
thought. 

But the fact is that life exists on earth because we have a green- 
house effect. Were it not for the existence of the greenhouse effect, 
we would not have plant life and human life. 

And it is common sense that if you are emitting gases into that 
atmosphere that are trapped, it will have a long-term impact on 
weather and other things. 

Well, we now find that for the third year in a row we have set 
a record for winter warmth. The -month period of December  
through February of  was the warmest winter season in the 
contiguous  states in the entire  years that we have recorded 
the data. 

That slightly surpassed the record set just one year ago, and that 
slightly surpassed the record set the prior year. So we have the 
