servation system that can provide consistent, long-term data on the many param- 
eters of the climate system. Thus, a diverse approach that supports modeling, obser- 
vations, research and analysis, and assessment is needed. Each of these activities 
relies upon and informs the others. 

Question . What are some of the lessons learned from the first National Assess- 
ment? 

Answer. The “U.S. National Assessment of the Potential Consequences of Climate 
Variability and Change” is now nearing completion. We have learned a number of 
lessons related to process, research needs, and potential impacts. Related to process, 
I want to be on record in expressing sincere appreciation for the overwhelming sup- 
port received in this effort. Stakeholders were very forthcoming in sharing their in- 
sights and concerns, which were critical in providing direction. Individuals from aca- 
demia, industry, and non-governmental organizations demonstrated exceptional 
willingness to serve by volunteering their time to be chapter authors, technical re- 
viewers, and advisors to the process. 

In terms of research needs, work on the Assessment revealed a number of key 
priorities for further work. It became clear that we need more basic knowledge 
about how natural ecosystems and managed ecosystems such as agriculture and 
managed forests will respond to changes in climate and in atmospheric CO  con- 
centration. Since many of the resources and ecosystems that will be affected by cli- 
mate change, such as water and forests, are intensely managed, it is crucial that 
we understand better how present and potential future management practices could 
either compound or mitigate the effects of climate change and other environmental 
stresses. Finally, since the degree of impacts will inevitably depend on the actual 
rate and character of climate change, it is important to continue working to reduce 
uncertainties in our knowledge and projections of climate. This will require further 
improvement in climate models and our understanding of past climate variation, 
further development of methods to refine regional-scale projections, and crucially, 
better understanding of the socioeconomic drivers of potential climate change, such 
as population, demographics, income levels, and energy use patterns. 

Question . The National Research Council report entitled “Global Environmental 
Change: Research Pathways for the Next Decade” stated that the USGCRP must 
be revitalized, focusing its use of funds more effectively on the principally unan- 
swered scientific questions about global environmental change. What has been the 
USGCRP reaction to this point? 

Answer. As noted in my testimony and in the answer to question , the USGCRP 
relies on input from both participating federal agencies and the broader scientific 
community to set research priorities and devise appropriate strategies for address- 
ing critical issues. With guidance from the “Pathways” report, USGCRP research 
has been organized into a set of “program elements,” including a Carbon Cycle 
Science initiative established in FY, and a Global Water Cycle initiative in- 
cluded in the FY budget request: 

• Understanding the Earth’s Climate System 

• Biology and Biogeochemistry of Ecosystems 

• Composition and Chemistry of the Atmosphere 

• Paleoenvironment/Paleoclimate 

• Human Dimensions of Global Change 

• Carbon Cycle Science 

• The Global Water Cycle 

The “Pathways” report is also a basis for current efforts to develop a new -year 
strategic plan for the USGCRP. 



 


Question . Can you summarize how USGCRP has been meeting the requirements 
of Section  of the Global Change Research Act of  (P.L. -)? 

Answer. The creation of a comprehensive research plan was one of the most impor- 
tant early tasks of the USGCRP. The  edition of Our Changing Planet had two 
volumes, one of which was titled Our Changing Planet. The FY Research Plan. 
This -page document was a detailed and comprehensive scientific strategy for 
the USGCRP. The ongoing consideration and revision of the plans set forth in this 
document has been an important topic for the USGCRP agencies as they engage in 
their yearly program planning and budget processes, and updates to these plans 
have been included in the subsequent editions of Our Changing Planet. 

The progress that has been made in many areas of global change science, and the 
advice received in a number of major studies from the National Academy of 
Sciences, including the Pathways report, has resulted in a major effort to define a 
new long-term strategy for the USGCRP. This process has been underway for sev- 
eral years, and we anticipate that a draft will be submitted for public comment and 
NRC review later this fall. The draft will cover all the areas outlined in Section  
of the U.S. Global Change Research Act. 

Question . Given that USGCRP is ten years old, do you believe it’s an appropriate 
time for a new ten-year plan? 

Answer. Absolutely. The process of review and program improvement is continuous. 
The next important step in this process will be the completion of a new long-term 
plan later this year. This plan will be submitted to the National Research Council 
for review. The NRC Committee on Global Change Research, the follow-on com- 
mittee to the “Pathways” report, is working with the USGCRP agencies to construct 
a reasonable schedule for review of progress in responding to the recommendations 
of the Pathways report and the new long-term plan. 


Response to Written Questions Submitted by Hon. John McCain to 
Dr. Jerry Mahlman 

Question . You mentioned in your statement that important uncertainties remain 
due to deficiencies in our scientific understanding and in computer power. Can you 
explain how an increase in computing power will enable you to reduce some of the 
uncertainty in your models? 

Answer. Increases in computer power and increases in ability to process very large 
volumes of data play an important role in reducing the scientific uncertainty in un- 
derstanding human-caused climate warming. 

First, increased computational power allows the climate models to resolve regional 
details far better. For example, today’s long-running atmosphere-ocean-climate mod- 
els represent the entire state of Arizona with one or two computational points. A 
factor of  increase in computer power allows Arizona and its complex topography 
and climate zones to have  or so points. 

Second, it has been found advantageous to increase understanding of computer 
model experiments by running multiple versions, each under somewhat different cir- 
cumstances. This allows a clearer view of what we do and do not understand well. 

Third, much of the remaining scientific uncertainty in this problem arises from 
incomplete information about key physical processes, such as clouds, turbulence, se- 
vere storms, complex land-surface biosphere/climate interactions, etc. Greater com- 
putational power allows inclusion of considerably more complete physical processes 
and their possible roles in either decreasing or increasing our best estimates as to 
how much or how soon significant warming will occur, and how specific regions will 
be affected. 

Fourth, greater computational power allows the major national climate modeling 
centers to interact more productively with colleagues in government, academia, and 
private industry, simply because more experiments can be run at greater fidelity, 
with more talented scientists evaluating the results from a wider range of perspec- 
tives. 

Question . You mentioned that climate modeling efforts must receive resources that 
are in balance with broader scientific programs. What are your current funding lev- 
els and what level would you recommend? 

Answer. The current total funding for NOAA’s Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Labora- 
tory (GFDL) is about $M in Fiscal Year , of which $M is in base funds, 
and most of the remainder in HPCC/IT interagency program funds. I believe it is 
fair to say that, thanks to a genuine FY and  commitment from Congress, 



 
