longer be able to exist in New England. That is not great news for lovers of maple 
sugar or autumn foliage. It is even worse news for those organisms that depend of 
the sugar maple as part of the northeastern deciduous forest. 

One of the biggest problems plants and animals will face is the highly modified 
landscape of modern times. In many instances landscapes will represent obstacles 
to organisms as they attempt to disperse and track their required conditions. In the 
case of organisms near the tops of mountains or on low islands, there will be no- 
where to go but into thin air regardless of whether they are modified by human ac- 
tivity or not. This has already been noted in pika populations on individual moun- 
tains in the American west () and foreseen for the key deer with sea level rise 
(  ). 

If this is the case with current climate change, there could be profound effects if 
climate change is allowed beyond that which is already programmed by current lev- 
els of greenhouse gas concentrations. This has led to a projection of extinctions from 
climate change (). I am not here to defend the exact number, but the general 
point is that it is a large number if climate change is allowed to go on business as 
usual. 

The question then is where is the danger zone in climate change which should 
be avoided. Where to stop short? All biologists who have looked at the question be- 
lieve that double pre-industrial CO  would be disastrous for plants, animals, and 
ecosystems. There is some consensus among the conservation organizations that  



 


parts per million should be the limit. I for one think that is probably too generous, 
impractical as that may seem with our current level being at . Now there is dis- 
cussion around what is worse for wildlife: to go into the danger zone and then come 
down to something like  or below, or whether that brings dangers in itself. 

What is abundantly clear is that the living world on which we depend is far more 
sensitive than almost anything else to climate change. Life on earth is sending an 
urgent warning signal that climate change needs to be engaged with — and with an 
urgency and scale hitherto not contemplated. 


Statement of Roger Mann, Director for Research and Advisory Services, 

School of Marine Science, Virginia Institute of Marine Science, College 

OF William and Mary 

Mr. Chairman, members of the committee, it is a pleasure to be here today in re- 
sponse to your invitation to provide testimony on Global Warming and Wildlife. 

My name is Roger Mann. I am a Professor of Marine Science and Director for Re- 
search and Advisory Services at the School of Marine Science, Virginia Institute of 
Marine Science, College of William and Mary. I have been a researcher examining 
natural ecosystems and their management for both ecological services and sustained 
harvest of commercially valuable products for over  years. While my primary 
focus has been on estuarine and coastal systems it is impossible to examine such 
systems without an appreciation of the biolo^ of the complex watersheds that are 
the source of the rivers that feed these estuarine and coastal systems. Today I focus 
my remarks on the magnitude of predicted global warming events, and discuss wild- 
life impacts using examples from my adopted home State, the Commonwealth of 
Virginia. 

Global warming is a real phenomenon. Worldwide projections of temperature rise 
over the next century vary between .° C and .° C. A current scientific challenge 
is to refine models that were designed to make predictions at the global level and 
make them amenable to predictions at the regional level. There are roughly twenty 
different global models operating on about  supercomputers around the world that 
are focusing on these problems. At the regional level the models do a better job of 
predicting temperature than they do of predicting rainfall. The scenarios for Vir- 
ginia in the coming century predict temperature increases from .° C to as high 
as .° C clustered in the summer months, but the accompanying overall rainfall 
patterns vary between drier and wetter in total amount, sometimes with a wetter 
spring but drier fall months, and often with more extreme rainfall events. Fresh 
water supply dominates much of what we see in wildlife biology. These warm and 
wet, or warm and dry scenarios have clear implications for change in natural popu- 
lations in Virginia and elsewhere. 

I argue that Virginia is an excellent example of a natural laboratory in which to 
study the impacts of global warming, that impacts are becoming evident in all nat- 
ural systems within the State, and that they are cause for concern. Virginia sits at 
a number of important biogeographic boundaries where animal and plant species, 
both terrestrial and aquatic, change in north-south and east-west directions. Cli- 
mate, and particularly temperature, is a causative agent in determining these 
boundaries. A simple viewing of a weather map on the evening news illustrates the 
role of climate. In the winter the jet stream can dip in a southerly direction and 
cold air moves in from the mid-west and southern Canada. As the jet stream moves 
north, warmer air displaces the cold air. By contrast, summer weather is dominated 
by warm, humid air masses from the Gulf of Mexico. Gradual changes in the dura- 
tion and extensions of these respective air masses in a north to south direction 
translates into shorter and warmer winters and/or longer and wetter summers. 
Again, both have implications for the natural populations. 

A transect from west to east across the landscape of Virginia includes the forested 
foothills of the Appalachians, the coastal plains that support a mixture of forestry 
and agriculture, freshwater wetlands whose values as filters of water have only re- 
cently been fully appreciated, tidal salty estuaries feeding the Chesapeake Bay with 
its fringing marshes, coastal barrier islands and the inner continental shelf. Re- 
markable diversity exists both along the transect and within each habitat type. In- 
deed, it is the rich biodiversity within local habitats that contribute to their sta- 
bility. The plant and animal communities that occupy these habitats have evolved 
over geological time. The complex interaction between these community members is 
all important, and if there is a single message that I leave with you today it is that 
destabilizing the relationships between just a few of these contributing species can 
have a domino like effect resulting in large and deleterious impacts on the entire 
community. Consider as an analogy a spider’s web, all parts contributing to stability 



 


in function. But break a limited number of strands and the web is weakened. Just 
a few more strands and the web collapses. A universal concern among biologists 
throughout the Commonwealth of Virginia is that global warming will unravel just 
a few of those strands with cascading impacts. 

Let me walk you from the Appalachians to the ocean shelf and provide just a few 
examples of our concern. 

• As summer temperatures increase there is expectation that forest species typ- 
ical of the Appalachian foothills will move north and to higher altitude. Warmer 
temperatures in combination with lower rainfall favor conditions that promote fires 
and increase the probability that stressed trees will eventually succumb to insect 
and disease problems — especially so when insect species can migrate faster than 
trees. 

• All plants respond on a seasonal basis to both temperature and day length in 
their annual cycles of growth and reproduction. Changing the synchrony of these 
events by elevating temperature in a fixed sequence of day lengths can be expected 
to disrupt the equilibrium in forest communities. Insects play important roles in for- 
est ecosystems as both food for higher tropic levels, such as birds and small mam- 
mals, and as destructive agents of trees. Warmer temperatures will both increase 
the range of destructive insects and alter insect life cycles; for example reducing - 
year life cycles to -year with obvious doubling of the impact on the host trees. Such 
situations have already been documented in western States where warming has al- 
lowed the pine borer beetle to move to higher latitudes and attack stands of 
lodgepole and ponderosa pines. Pine beetles now attack white bark pines, essential 
habitat for grizzly bears. 

• Changes in physical forest structure by the death of trees creates fragmentation 
of the footprints of forest growth on larger spatial scales. Disturbance at the edge 
of forested areas provides opportunity for invasive species, usually non-native to the 
Commonwealth but introduced over time either intentionally or by accident, to es- 
tablish a foothold and eventually expand their range with displacement of native 
species. Non-native plant species often remain green through warmer periods that 
stress native forest plants, compounding their advantage in warmer conditions. In- 
deed, invasive species such as the Tree of Heaven (Ailanthus altissima), Japanese 
Honeysuckle (Lonicera japonica) and the Multiflora Rose (Rosa multiflora) have 
been documented to make up one half of the biomass in some stressed and invaded 
forest communities in Virginia. Changes in forest composition may pose grave prob- 
