the den by the female throughout the winter (Derocher et al. ). Changes in amount and 
timing of snowfall could also impact the thermal properties of the dens (Derocher et al. ). 
Since polar bear cubs are born helpless and need to nurse for three months before emerging from 
the den, major changes in the thermal properties of dens could negatively impact cub survival 
(Derocher et al. ). For example of the importance of dens was the fate of two polar bear 
cubs that were born unexpectedly to a captive female in December,  in an outdoor 


 



 


uninsulated cage when the temperature was approximately -°. Both cubs died within two days 
(Blix and Lentfer ). 

Finally, unusual rain events are projected to increase throughout the Arctic in winter (ACIA 
), and increased rain in late winter and early spring could cause ringed seal den collapse 
(Stirling and Smith ). Den collapse following a warming period was observed in the 
Beaufort Sea and resulted in the death of a mother and her two young cubs (Clarkson and Irish 
). After March  brought unseasonable rain south ofChurchill, Manitoba, researchers 
observed large snow banks along creeks and rivers used for denning that had collapsed because 
of the weight of the wet snow, and noted that had there been maternity dens in this area the bears 
likely would have been crushed (Stirling and Derocher ). 

d. Open water swimming 

Monnett and Gleason () observed  live polar bears during aerial surveys in September 
-. Of thesel (.%) were in open water, which was defined as greater than  km north 
of the Alaska Beaufort Sea coastline or barrier islands. No polar bear carcasses were observed 
during this period. During aerial surveys in early September ,  polar bears were seen and 
of those ( .%) were in open water variable distances from the sea ice and land. In 
September , the sea ice edge was - km from shore representing record minimal ice 
conditions. On surveys following a major regional storm with wind speeds recorded at - 
km/hr and seas estimated at  meters, four dead polar bears were seen floating in open water and 
it is presumed that the animals drowned. In general, wave height (sea state) increases as a 
function of the amount of open water surface area. Spatial extrapolation of these data indicated 
that as many as  bears may have been swimming in the area and that  bears may have died 
as a result of the high offshore winds. This suggests that the survival rate of swimming bears 
under these conditions was low (/ = %). No detection correction factors for bears present 
but not observed were incorporated into the analysis, therefore the estimates could be considered 
an underestimate of the actual number affected. Swimming and floating bears are difficult to see 
from survey altitudes of  m under ideal conditions and some may have sunk or drifted out of 

 



 


the study area so the number of deaths due to the combination of ice and storm conditions was 
likely much larger. Monnett and Gleason () speculate that mortalities due to offshore 
swimming during late-ice (or mild ice) years may be an important and unaccounted source of 
natural mortality given energetic demands placed on individual bears engaged in long-distance 
swimming. This evidence suggests that drowning-related deaths of polar bears may increase in 
the future if the observed trend of regression of pack ice and/or longer open water periods 
continues. The effect of ice reduction and increases in areas of open water wilt cause an increase 
in the size of waves since fetch is gathered over greater distances than in a marine environment 
where there is no sea ice to buffer wave action (Monnett and Gleason ). Evidence of such 
mortality has also been reported by Julian Dowdeswell, Head of the Scott Polar Research 
Institute of England, who observed one exhausted and one apparently dead polar bear stranded at 
sea east of Svalsbard in . 

Derocher () indicates that as sea ice becomes more unstable due to decreased ice thickness 
and increased winds, some bears near the edge or southern limit of the pack ice may lose contact 
with the main body of ice and drift into areas from which return may be difficult. This has 
occurred in Southwest Greenland and Newfoundland. 

e. Demographic Effects on Polar Bear 

Derocher et al. () predict a cascade of demographic impacts on polar bear populations as a 
result of global warming. Polar bear characteristics, including specialized diet, habitat 
specialization, large body size, low fecundity, long lifespan, low genetic variability, and 
sensitivity to events that alter adult female survival rates, are all associated with high extinction 
risk (McKinney  , Bessinger , Owens et al. ). In general, Derocher et al. () 
predict demographic impacts that will adversely affect female reproductive rates and juvenile 
survival first and will only affect adult female survival rates under severe conditions. 

Physical condition of polar bears has been shown to determine the welfare of individuals, and 
ultimately, through their reproduction and survival, the welfare of populations (Stirling et al. 


 



 


, p. ; Regehr et al. in prep). Declines in fat reserves during critical times in the polar 
bear life cycle are likely to lead to an array of impacts (Derocher et al. ). Because female 
polar bears accrue body fat throughout their lives until approximately  years of age, the age of 
first successful reproduction could be delayed as growth rates and fat stores of females are 
reduced (Derocher et al. ). A decline in body condition will reduce the proportion of 
pregnant females that are able to initiate denning (Derocher et al. ). Females with lower fat 
stores will likely produce more single cub litters, fewer cub$ overall, as well as lower cub body 
weights and lower survival rates (Derocher and Stirling ). This is because body mass in 
adult females is correlated with cub mass at den emergence which is in turn correlated with cub 
survival (Derocher and Stirling  ), A higher proportion of females that do initiate denning are 
likely to abandon the effort mid-winter (Derocher et al. ). Insufficiency of maternal 
resources or poor hunting conditions in the early spring after den emergence could lead to 
increased cub mortality (Derocher et al. ). For example, researchers believe that young cubs 
are unable to survive immersion in icy water for more than approximately  minutes (Blix and 
Lentfer ; Larsen ). This is because young cubs have little insulating fat, and the fur of 
polar bear cubs loses its insulating value when wet (though the fur of adults sheds water and 
recovers its insulating properties quickly), and therefore core body temperature drops rapidly in 
young polar bear cubs when they are immersed in icy water (Blix and Lentfer ). If declining 
sea ice forces females to swim from den areas to pack ice, cub mortality could increase due to 
hypothermia (Derocher et al. ). In addition, sea ice conditions that include broken and more 
fragmented ice may require young cubs to enter water more frequently and for more prolonged 
periods of time. 

Reductions in sea ice, as discussed above, will alter ringed seal distribution, abundance, and 
availability for polar bears. Such reductions will, in turn, decrease polar bear body condition 
(Derocher et al. , p, ). Derocher et al. (, p. ) projected that most females in the 
Western Hudson Bay population may be unable to reach the minimum  kg ( lbs) body 
mass required to successfully reproduce by the year . 


 



 


Furthermore, with the extent of winter sea ice projected to be reduced in the future, 
opportunities for increased feeding to recover fat stores during this season may be limited. 
Mortality of polar bears is thought to be the highest in winter when fat stores are low and 
energetic demands are greatest. Pregnant females are in dens during this period using fat 
reserves and not feeding. Polar bears hunt seals at their breathing holes, however, increased 
open water or fragmented ice will provide seals alternatives to establishing breathing holes, 
likely reducing their availability to polar bears and decreasing bear hunting success 
(Derocher et al. , p. ). 

Derocher et al. () cautions that reduced reproductive rates in females may be difficult to 
measure, and that declines will likely be highly variable (Derocher et al. ). In general, 
Derocher et al. () predict demographic impacts will adversely affect female reproductive 
rates and juvenile survival first while adult female survival would be affected under more severe 
conditions. Time lags in the system may initially obscure trends, but if conditions decline 
sufficiently adult survival may be impacted and sudden population declines could occur 
(Derocher et al. ). Because researchers believe mortality of polar bears is already highest in 
winter when fat stores are low, and because polar bears already use winter dens when necessary 
to conserve fat stores, Derocher et al. () believe it is unlikely that the impacts described 
above could be compensated for with increased feeding in winter. 

In general, Derocher et al. (, p.  ) predict demographic impacts will adversely affect 
