increase. In addition, substantial reductions of northern sea ice are expected. 
Precipitation is expected to increase significantly in higher northern latitudes. 
This effect mainly occurs because of the higher moisture content of the warmer 
air as it moves poleward, cools, and releases its moisture. 

Probable Projections 

The following have a greater than two out of three chance of being true: 

• Model studies project eventual marked decreases in soil moisture in response 
to increases in summer temperatures over northern mid-latitude continents. 
This result remains somewhat sensitive to the details of predicted spring and 
summer precipitation, as well as to model assumptions about land surface proc- 
esses and the offsetting effects of airborne sulfate particles in those regions. 

• Climate models imply that the circum-Antarctic ocean region is substantially 
resistant to warming, and thus little change in sea-ice cover is predicted to 
occur there, at least over the next century or two. 

• The projected precipitation increases at higher latitudes act to reduce the 
ocean’s salinity and thus its density. This effect inhibits the tendency of the 
water to sink, thus suppressing the overturning circulation. 

• Very recent research  suggests that tropical storms, once formed, might tend 
to become more intense in the warmer ocean, at least in circumstances where 
weather and geographical (for example, no landfall) conditions permit. 

• Model studies project that the standard deviations of the natural temperature 
fluctuations of the climate system would not change significantly. This indicates 
an increased probability of warm weather events and a decreased probability 
of cold events, simply because of the higher mean temperature. 

Incorrect Projections and Policy Implications 

There are a number of statements in informal writings that are not supported by 
climate science or projections with high-quality climate models. Some of these state- 
ments may appear to be physically plausible, but the evidence for their validity is 
weak, and some are just wrong. 

There are assertions that the number of tropical storms, hurricanes, and typhoons 
per year will increase. That is possible, but there appears to be no credible evidence 
to substantiate such assertions. 


 T. R. Knutson, R. E. Tuleya, Y. Kurihara, in preparation. 



 


Assertions that winds in midlatitude (versus tropical) cyclones will become more 
intense do not appear to have credible scientific support. It is theoretically plausible 
that smaller-scale storms such as thunderstorms or squall lines could become 
stronger under locally favorable conditions, but the direct evidence remains weak. 

There is a large demand for specific climate change predictions at the regional 
and local scales where life and life support systems are actually affected. Unfortu- 
nately, our confidence in predictions on these smaller scales will likely remain rel- 
atively low. Much greater fidelity of calculated local climate impacts will require 
large improvements in computational power and in the physical and biological so- 
phistication of the models. For example, the large uncertainty in modeling the all- 
important responses of clouds could become even harder at regional and local levels. 
Major sustained efforts will be required to reduce these uncertainties substantially. 

Characterizations of the state of the science of greenhouse warming are often 
warped in differing ways by people or groups with widely varying sociopolitical 
agendas and biases. This is unfortunate because such distortions grossly exaggerate 
the public’s sense of controversy about the value of the scientific knowledge base as 
guidance for the policy deliberation process. 

It is clear that much is known about the climate system and about how that 
knowledge is expressed through the use of physically based coupled models of the 
atmosphere, ocean, ice, and land surface systems. This knowledge makes it obvious 
that human-caused greenhouse warming is not a problem that can rationally be dis- 
missed or ignored. However, the remaining uncertainties in modeling important as- 
pects of the problem make it evident that we cannot yet produce a sharp picture 
of how the warmed climate will proceed, either globally or locally. 

None of these recognized uncertainties can make the problem go away. It is vir- 
tually certain that human-caused greenhouse warming is going to continue to un- 
fold, slowly but inexorably, for a long time into the future. The severity of the im- 
pacts can be modest or large, depending on how some of the remaining key uncer- 
tainties are resolved through the eventual changes in the real climate system, and 
on our success in reducing emissions of long-lived greenhouse gases. 


Response to Written Questions Submitted by Hon. John McCain to 
Dr. John R. Christy 

Question . You mentioned in your statement that  percent of the atmospheric 
mass that was projected by computer models to warm significantly has not. How 
significant is this  percent? Are you saying that the claims of global warming are 
based on less than half of the affected mass? 

Answer. To the layman, global warming is something that happens at the surface 
of the Earth, i.e. the surface temperature. Much has been made about the fact the 
surface temperature has increased in the past  years. At the same time, the bulk 
of the atmosphere, from the surface to  miles up, has experienced little change in 
that time. The significance here is that all climate models show that with enhanced 
greenhouse gasses, the surface temperature will rise and that the deeper layer will 
rise even more. The fact this bulk-layer has not risen indicates that the surface 
warming of the past  years is not human-induced warming (if models are correct) 
or that the climate system is not well-represented in the present models. I believe 
there are significant shortcomings in the present models with regard to distributing 
heat throughout the bulk of the atmosphere, and that this may lead to predictions 
of surface warming that are too high. 

Question . Your written statement has suggested that no model is perfect because 
the weather system is incredibly complex. Furthermore, you stated that the goal of 
models is to provide information on changes in large-scale features. Given the in- 
creases in computing power, can we ever expect to have models provide information 
on smaller scale features? 

Answer. I do not see, with either improved computing power or with improved mod- 
els, the ability to predict with confidence what the climate will be in specific regions. 
At this point we are unable to do so for the next ten days, much less for the next 
ten years or next ten decades. Since local precipitation is more critical than tem- 
perature for human and other biological systems, predictions of changes in rainfall 
would be of great value if we could have confidence in them. However, the present 
set of climate models predicts a range of precipitation changes in any given region 
so wide (e.g. much more, more, same, less, much less) as to be of no use for policy 
decisions. Thus, establishing regulations that increase the cost of energy to people 
(with a greater impact on poorer people) will be done so to deal with a “global aver- 
age,” for which the local impacts are essentially unpredictable. Even so, reductions 



 


in CO  through regulation will be so tiny as to have microscopic effect on the global 
average temperature. A global economic depression (with associated loss of living 
standards, health, security etc.) would most likely do more to reduce CO  increases 
than regulation. Even this would have relatively no impact on the path of the 
present global average climate. 

Question . Your written testimony referred to a recent report which stated that 
January through March of this year was the hottest ever recorded. The satellite 
data showed that the atmospheric temperature above the U.S. mainland was indeed 
higher than average. However, most of the globe experienced lower than average 
temperatures. Does this suggest that what we may be experiencing is not global 
warming, but a shifting of the temperature patterns? 

Answer. The key point here is that the news media broadcast widely the report of 
“warmest ever” surface temperatures over the lower- states. This was then linked 
as evidence to human-induced global warming. The global picture, however, indi- 
cated the warm temperatures over the U.S. were only part of a typical weather pat- 
tern that has alternating regions of warm and cold. The U.S. was in a very warm 
spot, but most regions experienced cooler than average tropospheric temperatures 
