
Mr. Foote. Senator Warner, you may have some border issues 
getting into Canada with the recent flux of movement back and 
forth. So I am going to nominate Dr. Kelly to be our tour guide for 
the Arctic, where you can talk to the ultimate old- timers, the 
Inupiat and the Nuvialuit individuals whose direct linage goes 
back , years in close concert with climate change and polar 
bears. 

Mr. Kelly. Senator Warner, I would be happy to introduce you 
to some elders, that is how the natives refer to the old- timers, as 
you put it 

Senator Warner. You ought to hear what they call me around 
here. 

[Laughter.] 

Mr. Kelly. Well, these are gentlemen 

Senator Lieberman. We call him Senator, or Mr. Chairman. 

Senator Warner. The old bull they turned back into the back  
acres here recently. Go ahead. 

[Laughter.] 

Mr. Kelly. I would be happy to introduce you to a gentleman 
who received shotguns from their fathers as well and have fond 
memories of learning to hunt from their fathers. And I think you 
would be impressed to hear their descriptions of the changes in 
their environment in their lifetime. And to see the sadness in their 
eyes when they talk about the likelihood that their children will 
not experience it the way they did, because the changes are so pro- 
found. I think I detected a bit of disinterest in going to the Poles 



 


again on your part, but I think you would find these people very 
eloquent in their explanations of what is really happening. 

Senator Warner. I thoroughly enjoyed both of my trips, both to 
the North and South Pole. But that is when I was Secretary of the 
Navy, had my own plane and my own submarine to punch up 
through the ice. It was a little easier. 

[Laughter.] 

Mr. Kelly. I can’t compete with that. 

Senator Warner. Well, there we are. I think we have a chal- 
lenge. 

Senator Lieberman. Yes. 

Senator Warner. And I want to get into some other questions, 
but you go ahead and then 

Senator Lieberman. Oh, you go right ahead. 

Senator Warner. Well, I wanted to come back. 

Senator Lieberman. Let me just say what a pleasure it is going 
to be to work with you on this Subcommittee. I am already enjoy- 
ing it. So thank you for your interest. 

Senator Warner. This is an exciting panel. Some of these sci- 
entists are going to come in here and we are going to have to get 
anti-doze pills. 

[Laughter.] 

Senator Warner. We really need, there is nothing like getting 
out of Washington. We all think this is the pinnacle of all knowl- 
edge. Well, it isn’t. We have to get out and do a little hands-on. 

Senator Lieberman. Yes, sir, I totally agree. I want to respond 
briefly before you do your questions, and we will start the clock 
back at seven minutes. 

It is a great idea. Senator Boxer, before she left, said she is plan- 
ning a trip to Greenland. I think it would be a great thing just to 
start in Virginia for a day, right next door, easy enough to get 
there and then we will systematically visit the other spots. Thank 
you for that suggestion. 

Senator Warner. Thank you. Well, let’s see what we can do, be- 
cause I just think that we need anecdotal, I mean, all of this sci- 
entific data, and I don’t disparage scientists, but to get our atten- 
tion of our colleagues, just get them to go back and talk to their 
own constituents. Just ask all the other  Senators to pack up and 
make their own inquiries. 

I am fascinated with Dr. Mann’s story about the dead zones in 
Chesapeake Bay. As I have traveled here in the last couple of 
years, I have been hearing about hat. Is there any evidence, now 
let me give you a point, I was privileged to get through a piece of 
legislation here recently to provide a little modest Federal funding 
to support going back and taking Captain John Smith’s diaries and 
go up to all the inlets in . He kept prolific diaries. 

Do you have any record of the dead zones being detected years 
back, or is it a phenomena that has come on here in the past  
or  years or whatever period of time? 

Mr. Mann. I think the problem with most of the things in science 
is that you actually don’t know if things are there until you actu- 
ally go and look. I also have looked at some of John Smith’s diaries, 
and they are wonderful natural history records. 



 


The problem with the dead zone though is that you really have 
to go out into the Chesapeake Bay and take instrumentation that 
you can put to the bottom to measure the oxygen. Unfortunately, 
John Smith didn’t have such instrumentation available. 

Senator Warner. But he could have seen the striped bass with 
these lesions on them, which you and I have seen. 

Mr. Mann. He could have seen if they had been there. In fact, 
they have really become more prevalent over the last decade or so. 
Prior to that, mycobacteriosis, or myco, as it is common called, was 
not something that was very prevalent and it didn’t cause much 
concern. When it did arrive on the proverbial scene, it was really 
quite widespread and it was a very sudden event. I think lots of 
individuals were worried about what this might be. A certain 
microorganism called physteria was originally invoked. It turns out 
not to be the case. 

But I think the striped bass observations over the past decade 
are very typical of the sorts of things that we expect to see, not just 
in aquatic systems, but everywhere else, as my colleagues here 
have pointed out, significant changes can occur and nothing ap- 
pears to happen. Then you pass thresholds which affect the biology 
of the animal very significantly, and then terrible things happen. 
The coral reefs are a good example. Most organisms that live on 
coral reefs live very near that temperature maximum. But gen- 
erally, the temperature doesn’t go past it, so you don’t see them ac- 
tually changing. You push the temperature up a little bit and lots 
of things go wrong very quickly. 

So I think when you look at these particular canaries, if you like, 
you will start to see very large numbers of them. Several of my col- 
