meetings as well. Although in recent years, the PBAC meetings have invited the participation of 
nongovernment groups, such as the Inuvialuit Game Council and the Labrador Inuit Association, 
for their input at the management level, they have for the most part not attended. The annual 
meetings of the PBTC provide for continuing cooperation between jurisdictions and for 
recommending management actions to the PBAC (Calvert et al. ). The NWT Polar Bear 
Management Program (GNWT) manages polar bears under the Northwest Territories Act 
(Canada). The  “Order-in-Council” granted authority to the Commissioner in Council 
(NWT) to pass ordinances that are applicable to all people to protect polar bear, including the 
establishment of a quota system. The Wildlife Act, , and Big Game Hunting Regulations 
provide supporting legislation which addresses each polar bear population. The Inuvialuit and 
Nunavut Land Claim Agreements supersede the Northwest Territories Act (Canada) and the 
Wildlife Act. The Government of Nunavut passed a new Wildlife Act two years ago and has 
management and enforcement authority for polar bears in their Jurisdiction. Under the umbrella 
of this authority, polar bears are now comanaged through wildlife management boards made up 
of land claim beneficiaries and territorial and federal representatives. One of the strongest 
aspects of the program is that the management decision process is integrated between 
Jurisdictions and with local hunters and management boards. A main feature of this approach is 
the development of Local Management Agreements between the communities that share a 
population of polar bears. Management agreements are in place for all Nunavut populations. The 
MOUs are signed between the communities, regional wildlife organiztions, and the Government 
of Nunavut (Department of Environment) but not by the Nunavut Wildlife Management Board 
(NWMB). Consequently these MOUS are not binding on the NWMB and as such the NWMB 
are not bound to them and can step outside the management agreements. For example a 
moratorium might be in the MOUs but it could be over-ruled by the NWMB. In the case of 
populations that Nunavut shares with Quebec and Ontario (neither of which is approved under 
the criteria specified in this rule), the management agreement is not binding upon residents of 
communities outside ofNunavut Jurisdiction. The GNWT uses these agreements to develop 
regulations that implement the agreements. In addition to regulations to enforce the agreements, 
there is strong incentive to comply with the management agreements since they are developed 

 



 


co-operatively between the government and the resource users who directly benefit from the 
commitment to long-term maintenance of the population. The interest and willingness of 
members of the community to conform their activities to observe the law, reinforces other law 
enforcement measures. Regulations specify who can hunt, season timing and length, age and sex 
classes that can be hunted, and the total allowable harvest for a given population in Polar Bear 
Management Areas, The Department of Environment in Nunavut and the Department of 
Environment and Natural Resources in the NWT has officers to enforce the regulations in most 
communities of the NWT. The officers investigate and prosecute incidents of violation of 
regulations, kills in defense of life, or exceeding a quota (USE WS ). 


c. Russia 

Polar bears are listed in the second issue of the Red Data Book of the Russian Federation (). 
The Red Data Book establishes official policy for protection and restoration of rare and 
endangered species in Russia. Polar bear populations inhabiting the Barents Sea and part of the 
Kara Sea (Barents-Kara population) are designated as Category IV (uncertain status); polar bears 
in the eastern Kara Sea, Laptev Sea and the western East-Siberian Sea (Laptev population) are 
listed as Category  (rare); and polar bears inhabiting the eastern part of the East-Siberian Sea, 
Chukchi Sea, and the northern portion of the Bering Sea (CS population) are listed as Category 
V (restoring). The main government body responsible for management of species listed in the 
Red Data Book is the Department of Envoronment Protection and Ecological Safety in the 
Ministry of Natural Resources of the Russian Federation. Russia Regional Committees of 
Natural Resources are responsible for managing polar bear populations consistent with federal 
legislation (Belikov et al. ). 

Polar bear hunting has been totally prohibited in the Russian Arctic since  (Belikov et al. 
). The only permitted take of polar bears is catching cubs for public zoos and circuses. 
CITES Appendix II regulations are followed for polar bear. There are no data on illegal trade of 
polar bears, and parts and products derived from them, although considerable concern persists 


 



 


for unquantified levels of illegal harvest that is occurring In the Russian Arctic, Natural 
Protected Areas (NPAs) have been established that protect marine and associated terrestrial 
ecosystems including polar bear habitats. In the Russian Arctic, Wrangel and Herald Islands 
have special conservation status as places with high concentrations of maternity dens and/or 
polar bears. Wrangel and Herald Islands were included in the Wrangel Island State Nature 
Reserve (zapovednik) in . Also a decree of Russian Federation Government in  
established a -nm marine zone was added to the Wrangel Island State Nature Reserve which 
was extended to -nm marine protected zone in   by a decree from the Governor of 
Chukotsk Autonomous Okruga (Belikov et al. ). The Franz Josef Land State Nature Refuge 
was established in . Special protected areas are proposed in the Russian High Arctic: the 
Novosibirsk Islands, Severnaya Zemlya, and Novaya Zemlya. Within these protected areas, 
conservation and restoration of terrestrial and marine ecosystems, and plant and animal species 
(including the polar bear), are the main goals. In  the Nenetskiy State Reserve, which covers 
  ,ha and includes the mouth of the Pechora River and adjacent waters of the Barents Sea, 
was established. In May  the federal law “Concerning territories of traditional use of nature 
by small indigenous peoples of North, Siberia, and Far East of the Russian Federation” was 
passed. This law established areas for traditional use of nature (TTUN) within NPAs of federal, 
regional, and local levels to support traditional life styles and traditional subsistence use of 
nature resources for indigenous peoples. This law and the Law “Concerning natural protected 
territories” () regulate protection of plants and animals on the TTUNs. The latter also 
regulates organization, protection and use of other types of NPAs: State Nature Reserves 
(including Biosphere Reserves), National Parks, Natural Parks, and State Nature Refuges. 

Special measures on protection of polar bears or other resources may be governed by specific 
regulations of certain NPAs. Outside NPAs protection and use of marine renewable natural 
resources are regulated by federal legislation. Acts of the President of the Russian Federation, 
regulations of State Duma, Government, and Federal Senate of the Russian Federation, and 
through regulations issued by appropriate governmental departments. The most important federal 
laws for nature protection are: “About environment protection” (), “About animal world” 
(), “About continental shelf of the Russian Federation” (), “About exclusive 


economical zone of the Russian Federation” (), and “About internal sea waters, territorial 

 



 


sea, and adjacent zone of the Russian Federation” (). All these laws protect important polar 
bear denning and feeding habitat. 

d. Norway 

According to the Svalbard Treaty of February , , Norway exercises full and unlimited 
sovereignty over the Svalbard Archipelago. The Svalbard Treaty applies to all the islands 
situated between ° and ° East of Greenwich and between ° and ° latitude North and 
includes the waters up to four nautical miles offshore. Beyond this zone, Norway claims an 
economic zone to the continental shelf areas to which Norweigian Law applies. Therefore under 
Norweigian Game Law, all game, including polar bears, are protected unless otherwise stated 
(Derocher et al. b). The main responsibility for the administration of Svalbard lies with the 
Norwegian Ministry of Justice. Norwegian civil and penal laws and various other regulations are 
applicable to Svalbard as well. The Ministry of Environment deals with matters concerning the 
environment and nature conservation. The Governor of Svalbard (Sysselmannen), which has 
management responsibilities for freshwater-fish and wildlife, pollution and oil spill protection, 
environmental monitoring, and is is the cultural and environmental protection authority in 
Svalbard (Derocher et al. b). Polar bears have complete protection from harvest under the 
Svalbard Treaty (Derocher et al. b). 

Approximately % of the land area of Svalbard is totally protected, including all major regions 
of denning by female bears; however, protection of habitat is only on land and to  nautical miles 
offshore. Marine protection was increased in  when the territorial border of the existing 
protected areas was increased to  nautical miles (Aars et al. ). Norway claims control of 
waters out to  nautical miles and regard polar bears as protected within this area. 

In , the Norwegian Parliament passed anew Environmental Act for Svalbard which went 
into effect in July . This Act was designed to ensure that wildlife is protected, with 
exceptions made for hunting. The regulations included specific provisions on harvesting, 
motorized traffic, remote camps and camping, mandatory leashing of dogs, environmental 


 
