of the sea ice melt season is increasing at a rate of approximately . days per decade. This 
result is different from Comiso’s () previous estimates for sea ice in that ocean areas that 
become ice-free in spring and summer are included in the analysis. Comiso () states that the 
relatively high value is probably an important reason for the current rapid decline of the 
perennial ice cover. Note that a longer melt period means a shorter ice growth season which also 
means less extent and thickness of the ice cover. 

Further support for extended melt periods comes from Belchansky and Douglas () based on 
passive microwave satellite retrievals (SSM/I) (Stroeve et al. ). Belchansky and Douglas 
() found that “consecutive year changes (-) in January multiyear ice volume were 
significantly correlated with duration of the intervening melt season.” 

In , NSIDC reported that for -, melt began earlier on average in all four years, and 
was most widespread in  and  (NSIDC ). The  melt season arrived the 
earliest, occurring approximately  days before the mean melt onset date (NSIDC ). 

Early onset of melt can have other consequences as well. For example, according to Derocher et 
al. (), in the Western Hudson Bay, break-up of the annual ice is now occurring 
approximately , weeks earlier than it did  years ago (Stirling et al.  , Stirling and 


 



 


Parkinson . Stirling and Lunn, unpubl. data). An advanced date of ice break-up in recent 
years may also be inferred from qualitave evaluation of satellite data for the Arctic. 

The longer melt season is linked to a shorter ice season throughout much of the seasonal sea ice 
region. Maps of the trend in ice-season length from  through  as determined from 
satellite data show the ice season decreasing by as much as  days per year in the eastern Barents 
Sea and by lesser amounts throughout much of the rest of the Arctic (Parkinson a). 

Land-fast ice . Fast ice grows seaward from a coast and remains in place throughout the winter. 
Typically, it is stabilized by grounded pressure ridges at its outer edge, and therefore extends to 
the draft limit of such ridges, usually about  to  m. Fast ice is found along the coasts of 
Siberia, the White Sea, northern of Greenland, the Canadian Archipelago, Hudson Bay, and 
western and northern Alaska. 

Poivnvas . Polynyas are semi-permanent open water regions ranging in area up to thousands of 
square kilometers. Flaw leads occur at the border of fast ice when offshore winds separate the 
drift ice from the fast ice. Polynyas and flaw leads are environmentally important for several 
reasons (AMAP ); 

• they are areas of high heat loss to the atmosphere; 

• they typically form the locus of sea-ice breakup in spring; 

• they are often locations of intense biological activity; and 

• they are regions of deep-water formation. 

Other Observed Changes in Arctic Climate 

Observed recent trends for various snow and ice parameters of the Arctic cryosphere (taken 
largely from Table . of ACIA ) are briefly summarized as follows: 

Snow cover Snow-cover extent in the Northern Hemisphere has decreased by  

to % since ; trends of such magnitude are rare in Global 


 




 


Climate Model (GCM) simulations. 

Glaciers Glaciers throughout the Northern Hemisphere have shrunk 

dramatically over the past few decades (Dyurgerov and Meier 
 ), contributing about .   to . mm/yr to the average rate of 
sea-level rise in the s. 

Permafrost Permafrost temperatures in most of the Arctic and subarctic have 

increased by several tenths of a degree to as much as  to  “C 
(depending on location) since the early s. Permafrost thawing 
has accompanied the warming. 

River discharge River discharge has increased over much of the Arctic during the 

past few decades and the spring discharge pulse is occurring earlier. 

Breakup and freeze-up Earlier breakup and later freeze-up of rivers and lakes across much 
of the Arctic have lengthened the ice-free season by  to  weeks. 

Global average sea level rose between   and  cm during the th 
century (IPCC ). This change was amplified or moderated in 
particular regions by tectonic motion or isostatic rebound. 

Observations suggest that precipitation has increased by 
approximately  % across the Arctic over the past  years, 
although measurement uncertainties and the sparseness of data from 
certain regions limit confidence in these results . In addition to the 
overall increase, changes in the characteristics of precipitation have 
also been observed. Much of the precipitation increase appears to 
be coming as rain, mostly in winter and to a lesser extent in autumn 
and spring. The increasing winter rains, which fall on top of 
existing snow, cause faster snowmelt. Rain-on-snow events have 
increased significantly across much of the Arctic. For example, 
over the past  years in western Russia, rain-on-snow events have 
increased by  %. 

Projected Changes in Arctic Climate 


Sea-level rise 


Precipitation 


Background . To assess future climate change impacts on ecosystems, possible changes in 
physical climate parameters must first be projected (ACIA ), Physical climate change 
projections must, in turn, be calculated from changes in external factors that can affect the 
physical climate (ACIA ). Physically-based climate models are used to obtain climate 


 



 


scenarios - plausible representations of future climate that are consistent with assumptions about 
future emissions of greenhouse gases and other pollutants (i.e. emissions scenarios) and with 
present understanding of the effects of increased atmospheric concentrations of these 
components on the climate (ACIA ). In its Third Assessment Report, the IPCC () 
produced a Special Report on Emissions Scenarios (SRES) to project a variety of future 
emissions scenarios that encompass a range of possible futures based on how societies, 
economies, and energy technologies are likely to evolve, and can be used to estimate the likely 
range of future emissions that affect the climate (ACIA ), 

Of the various types of climate models, global coupled atmosphere-ocean general circulation 
models (AOGCMs) are widely acknowledged as the principal, and most promising rapidly 
developing tools for simulating the response of the global climate system to increasing green 
house gas (OHG) concentrations. In its Third Assessment Report, the IPCC () concluded 
that state-of-the-art AOGCMs in existence at the turn of the century provided “credible 
simulations of climate, at least down to subcontinental scales and over temporal scales from 
seasonal to decadal”, and as a class were “suitable tools to provide useful projections of the 
future climate” (McAvaney et al. ). 
