and I believe Norway is the leader in this area, where they are tak- 
ing carbon dioxide out of the atmosphere as it is generated, essen- 
tially, and then the technology is to sequester it in the oceans or 
elsewhere. 

I am not an expert in that area, but I did want to get on the 
record that there are, indeed, other technologies, but of course 
there is a cost attached to doing that. 

Senator Brownback. Other policy suggestions, or particularly in 
the carbon sequestration is a — I think that is — that is a key point 



 


of political reality. And one needs to recognize political reality, you 
know, here, as well. 

We can probably spend a great deal of time arguing about how 
global warming is occurring. We could probably spend and probably 
will spend a lot of political time discussing, OK, whether Kyoto is 
a good or bad treaty for us to enter into. And then you are going 
to have the political forces that will line up both ways on that. And 
those are legitimate debates and discussions, and which you are 
going to have them in. 

You could also start to do something right now. And you could 
recognize what the market will bear here and what we can start 
to do, which is, in my way of thinking, probably what we ought to 
be — perhaps we can, first and foremost, starting with now, because 
it starts to eat away, as one of you said — I think it was Dr. 
Mahlman. 

He pointed out that even Kyoto just kind of nips around the 
edges of this. “And we will probably be doing that for the next cen- 
tury,” was the quote of one of you. 

I think there are ways that we can get started on this. I think 
we will need to have the dispassionate dialogue and recognize peo- 
ple’s concerns and political realities, and then say there are ways 
that we can actually — we can move forward and start to address 
the problem now, rather than just having the issues back around. 

Recognizing that that is probably the start of a lengthy process 
of how do we deal with issues like this in ways that are least dis- 
ruptive. 

Dr. Watson. If one simply makes carbon a commodity, just like 
maize or wheat is, then there is real value in carbon. And that is 
how you can then trade carbon either within a company as British 
Petroleum is doing now. You can trade it nationally within the U.S. 
or any other country, like we trade sulphur at the moment. And 
it can be traded internationally. 

As soon as you make carbon a commodity and it has value, then 
it will be a real incentive to farmers, it will be a real incentive to 
foresters, to improve agricultural practices, forestry practices, es- 
sentially be paid for those better management practices, and then 
also get the multiple benefits of increased soil fertility, et cetera. 

So, one of the challenges is putting a policy framework together, 
where one has real value in carbon and will also stimulate research 
and development and will also stimulate energy-efficient tech- 
nologies. There is no question, that the challenge is putting the 
framework together. 

Dr. Bradley. If I could just pick up on a point there, and that 
is that many of these strategies do have multiple benefits. Bob 
talked about the preservation of biodiversity in — clearly, it will be 
more beneficial to the economy if we use less fuel to power our 
automobiles, power our plants and so on. 

It is going to be better, ultimately, if we can do things more effi- 
ciently like that. So, we ought to develop sort of a table of strate- 
gies that have the least political disagreement and the maximum 
collateral benefits that we can imagine, so that we can start chip- 
ping away at this very large issue by taking some of these meas- 
ures. 



 


Senator Brownback. It is picking the low lying fruit as best you 
can. 

Thank you very much. You have been an excellent panel and an 
excellent discussion. I know the Chairman would like to hold addi- 
tional hearings on this. And I think it certainly is warranted. 

The record will remain open for the requisite number of days, if 
you choose to submit additional things for the record. 

The hearing is adjourned. 

[Whereupon, at : p.m., the hearing was adjourned.] 



APPENDIX 


Article Written by Dr. Jerry Mahlman, Director, Geophysical Fluid 

Dynamics Laboratory, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration 

Science Magazine, November ,  

Uncertainties in Projections of Human-Caused Climate Warming 

Mankind’s activities have increased carbon dioxide (CO  ) in the atmosphere. This 
increase has the potential to warm the earth’s climate by the “greenhouse effect”  
in which CO  absorbs infrared radiation and then re-radiates it back toward the 
surface of the planet. Other gases also act as greenhouse gases and may warm the 
climate even further,  although human-produced airborne sulfate particles can 
cause cooling that offsets some of the warming.  Computational models that include 
these factors predict that the climate will warm significantly over the next century. 

These forecasts of likely climate changes have forced a realization that it is nec- 
essary to reduce human-caused emissions of greenhouse gases. But because of the 
potential social disruptions and high economic costs of such reductions, vigorous de- 
bate has arisen about the size and nature of the projected climate changes and 
whether they will actually lead to serious impacts. 

A key element of these spirited — and often acrimonious — debates is the credibility 
(or lack thereof) of the mathematically and physically based climate models  that 
are used to project the climate changes resulting from a sustained buildup of atmos- 
pheric CO  . Some skeptics ask, to put it bluntly, why should we believe such models’ 
attempts to describe changes in such a dauntingly complex system as Earth’s cli- 
mate? The cheap answer is that there are no credible alternatives. But the real an- 
swer is that the climate models do a reasonably good job of capturing the essence 
of the large-scale aspects of the current climate and its considerable natural varia- 
bility on time scales ranging from  day to decades.  In spite of these considerable 
successes, the models contain weaknesses that add important uncertainty to the 
very best model projections of human-induced climate changes. 

I express here a “policy-independent” evaluation of the levels of current scientific 
confidence in predictions emanating from climate models. This climate model uncer- 
tainty is distinct from the high social uncertainty associated with future scenarios 
of greenhouse gas and airborne particle concentrations. I assume that detailed fu- 
ture greenhouse and airborne particle scenarios are part of the policy question and 
thus do not discuss them further. 

A fair-minded and exhaustive attempt to find a broad consensus on what science 
can say about this problem is contained in the most recent  IPCC Working 
Group I Assessment.  Some of my evaluations differ in detail from those of IPCC 
, mostly because of the addition of new research insights and information since 
