that large scale changes in their habitat will impact the population (Derocher et al. ). 
Global climate change poses a substantial threat to the habitat of polar bears. Recent 
modeling of the trends for sea ice extent, thickness, and timing of coverage predicts 
dramatic reductions in sea ice coverage over the next - years (Hassol ). Sea ice 
has declined considerably over the past half century. Additional declines of roughly  - 
% of annual sea ice are predicted by . The summer sea ice is projected to decrease 
by  - % during the same period. In addition the quality of the remaining ice will 
decline. This change may also have a negative effect on the population size (Derocher et 
al. ). The effects of sea ice change are likely to show large difference and variability 
by geographic location and periods of time, although the long term trends clearly reveal 
substantial global reductions of the extent of ice coverage in the Arctic and the annual 
time frames when ice is present. 

While all bear species have shown adaptability in coping with their surroundings and 
environment, polar bears are highly specialized for life in the Arctic marine environment. 
Polar bears exhibit low reproductive rates with long generational spans. These factors 
make facultative adaptation by polar bears to significantly reduced ice coverage scenarios 
unlikely. The effects of the Eemian or Sangamon interglacial period (warming period) 
around    ,BP on the Arctic marine ecosystem and polar bears are unknown. Due to 


 



 


their long generation time and the current greater speed of global warming, it seems 
unlikely that polar bear will be able to adapt to the current warming trend in the Arctic. If 
climatic trends continue polar bears may become extirpated from most of their range 
within  years. 

There is little doubt that in the future polar bears will have access to less sea ice for a 
shorter time period. Also the location of ice that remains may be in areas of lower 
biological productivity. However, only in Western Hudson Bay are data presently 
available to link these ice features with the abundance of polar bears. While some have 
speculated that polar bears might become extinct by the end of the   " century, which 
would indicate a population decrease of > % in  years. Based on a precautions 
attitude to the uncertainty in data a more realistic attitude to the risk involved in the 
assessment make it fair to suspect population reduction of > %. 

Other population stress factors that may also operate to impact recruitment or survival 
include toxic contaminants, shipping, recreational viewing, oil and gas exploration and 
development. In addition to this comes a potential risk of over-harvest due to increased 
quotas or no quotas in Canada and Greenland and poaching in Russia.” 

. Description of Domestic Management Structures 

a. United States 

Marine Mammal Protection Act of , as amended 

The MMPA was enacted in response to growing concerns among scientists and the general 
public that certain species and populations of marine mammals were in danger of extinction or 
depletion as a result of human activities. The goal of the MMPA is to protect and conserve 
marine mammals so that they continue to be significant functioning elements of the ecosystem of 

which they are a part. The MMPA set forth a national policy to prevent marine mammal species 

 



 


or population stocks from diminishing to the point where they are no longer a significant 
functioning element of the ecosystems. 

The MMPA places an emphasis on habitat and ecosystem protection. The habitat and ecosystem 
goals set forth in the MMPA include: () management of marine mammals to ensure they do not 
cease to be a significant element of the ecosystem to which they are a part; () protection of 
essential habitats, including rookeries, mating grounds, and areas of similar significance “from 
the adverse effects of man’s action;” () recognition that marine mammals “affect the balance of 
marine ecosystems in a manner that is important to other animals and animal products” and that 
marine mammals and their habitats should therefore be protected and conserved; and () 
directing that the primary objective of marine mammal management is to maintain “the health 
and stability of the marine ecosystem.” Congressional intent to protect marine mammal habitat is 
also reflected in the definition of terms set out in section of the MMPA. The terms 
“conservation” and “management” of marine mammals are specifically defined to include habitat 
acquisition and improvement. 

The Act includes a general moratorium on the taking and importing of marine mammals, which 
is subject to a number of exceptions. Some of these exceptions include take for scientific 
purposes, for purpose of public display, subsistence use by Alaska Natives, and unintentional 
incidental take coincident with conducting lawful activities. 

Take is defined to include the “harassment” of marine mammals. “Harassment” includes any act 
of pursuit, torment, or annoyance which “has the potential to injure a marine mammal or marine 
mammal stock in the wild” (Level A harassment), or “has the potential to disturb a marine 
mammal or marine mammal stock in the wild by causing disruption of behavioral patterns, 
including but not limited to, migration, breathing, nursing, breeding, feeding, or sheltering” 
(Level B harassment). 

The Secretaries of Commerce and the Interior have primary responsibility for implementing the 
MMPA. The Department of Commerce, through the National Oceanic and Atmospheric 


 



 


Administration (NOAA) has authority with respect to whales, porpoises, seals, and sea lions. The 
remaining marine mammals, including polar bears, walruses, and sea otters, manatees and 
marine otters are managed by the Department of the Interior through the Service. Both agencies 
are “ . . . responsible for the promulgation of regulations, the issuance of permits, the conduct of 
scientific research, and enforcement as necessary to carry out the purposes of [the MMPA]”. 

U.S, citizens who engage in a specified activity other than commercial fishing within a specified 
geographical region may petition the Secretary of the Interior to authorize the incidental, but not 
intentional, taking of small numbers of marine mammals within that region for a period of not 
more than five consecutive years.  U.S.C. § (a)()(A). The Secretary “shall allow” the 
incidental taking if the Secretary finds that “the total of such taking during each five-year (or 
less) period concerned will have a negligible impact on such species or stock and will not have 
an unmitigable adverse impact on the availability of such species or stock for taking for 
subsistence uses. . If the Secretary allows the incidental taking, the Secretary must also 
prescribe regulations that specify () permissible methods of taking, () means of affecting the 
least practicable adverse impact on the species, their habitat, and their availability for subsistence 
uses, and () requirements for monitoring and reporting. The regulations promulgated do not 
authorize the activities themselves, but authorize the incidental take of polar bears in conjunction 
with otherwise legal activities described within the regulations. 

National Environmental Policy Act 

The purpose of the National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) is to consider every significant 
aspect of the environmental impact of programs and actions of the federal government and to 
inform the public that the agency did indeed consider the environmental concerns in its decision- 
making process. An EIS is required for all significant federal actions that could affect the 
environment. For example, the Service’s Office of Marine Mammals Management prepares 
Environmental Assessments when promulgating Incidental Take Regulations and Incidental 
Harassment Authorizations in regard to the incidental taking of small numbers of polar bears 
during oil and gas operations on the North Slope of Alaska. Through these efforts, the Service 


 



 


seeks to ensure that impacts to fish and wildlife resources are adequately described and that 
mitigation needs are met. 

Outer Continental Shelf Lands Act 

