NW population was reduced to  bears ( males and  female) in . This population is 
reported as declining (Aars et al. ). 

. Lancaster Sound (LS) 

 



 


The central and western portion of the LS population region is characterized by high biological 
productivity and high densities of ringed seals and polar bears (Schweinsburg et al. , Stirling 
et al, , Kingsley et al. , Welch et al. ). The western third of this region (eastern 
Viscount Melville Sound) is dominated by heavy, multi-year ice and apparently low biological 
productivity, as evidenced by low densities of ringed seals (Kingsley et al. ). In the spring 
and summer, densities of polar bears in the western third of the area are low, however, as break- 
up occurs, polar bears move west to summer on the multi-year pack-ice. Recent information on 
the movements of adult female polar bears monitored by satellite radio-collars, and mark- 
recapture data from past years, has shown that this population is distinct from the adjoining 
Viscount Melville Sound (VM), M’Clintock Channel (MC), Gulf of Boothia (GB), BB, and 
Norwegian Bay (NW) populations (Taylor et al. b). For PVA in this status report, survival 
rates of polar bears in the NW and LS populations were pooled to minimize sampling errors. The 
current population estimate of , bears is based on an analysis of both historical and current 
mark-recapture data to  (Taylor et al., unpubl. data). This estimate is considerably larger 
than a previous estimate of , that included Norwegian Bay (Stirling et al. ), and was 
considered to be conservative. Taylor et al. (unpubl. data) also estimate a suite of survival and 
recruitment parameters (Table ) that suggest this population has a lower recruitment rate than 
previously estimated. 

. M’Clintock Channel (MC) 

The current population boundaries for the MC population of polar bears are based on recovery of 
tagged bears and movements of adult females with satellite telemetry collars in adjacent areas 
(Taylor and Lee , Taylor et al. b). These boundaries appear to be a consequence of 
large islands to the east and west, the mainland to the south, and the heavy multi-year ice in 
Viscount Melville Sound to the north. A six-year mark-recapture study covered most of this area 
in the mid-s (Furnell and Schweinsburg ). An estimate of  bears was derived from 
the data collected within the boundaries of the MC population, as part of a study conducted over 
a larger area of the Central Arctic (Furnell and Schweinsburg ). More recently, local hunters 

 



 

suggested  might be too high, so the Canadian Polar Bear Technical Committee accepted a 
recommendation to reduce the estimate to . 

Following the completion of a mark-recapture inventory in spring , the population estimate 
was  (Taylor et al., in press). Natural survival and recruitment rates (Table ) were also 
estimated at values lower than previous standardized estimates (Taylor et al. ). The 
Government of Nunavut implemented a moratorium on hunting for the / and 
/ hunting seasons. The current annual quota for MC is  bears. The population is 
regarded as to be severely reduced (Aars et al. ). 

. Gulf of Boothia (GB) 

The boundaries of the GB polar bear population are based on genetic studies (Paetkau et al. 

 ), movements of tagged bears (Stirling et al.  , Taylor and Lee  ), movements of 
adult females with satellite radio-collars in the Gulf of Boothia and adjacent areas (Taylor et al. 
b), and interpretations by local Inuit hunters of how local conditions influence the 
movements of polar bears in the area. An initial population estimate of  bears was derived 
from data collected as part of a study conducted over a larger area of the Central Arctic (Furnell 
and Schweinsburg ). Although population data from Gulf of Boothia were limited, local 
hunters reported that the population was stable or had increased since the time of the Central 
Arctic polar bear survey. Based on Inuit knowledge, recognition of sampling deficiencies, and 
polar bear densities in other areas, in the s an interim estimate of  for the GB population 
was established. 

Following the completion of a mark-recapture inventory in spring , the population was 
estimated to number , bears (Taylor et al., unpubl. data). Natural survival and recruitment 
rates (Table ) were estimated at values higher than the previous standardized estimates (Taylor 
etal. ), 

. Foxe Basin (FB) 

 



 


Based on  years of mark-recapture studies, tracking of female bears with conventional radios, 
and satellite tracking of adult females in Western Hudson Bay and southern Hudson Bay, the FB 
population of polar bears appears to occur in Foxe Basin, northern Hudson Bay, and the western 
end of Hudson Strait (Taylor and Lee ). During the ice-free season, polar bears are 
concentrated on Southampton Island and along the Wager Bay coast and significant numbers of 
bears are also encountered on the islands and coastal regions throughout the Foxe Basin area. A 
total population estimate of ,  bears was developed in  (Taylor, unpubl. data) from a 
mark-recapture analysis based on tetracycline biomarkers (Taylor and Lee ). The marking 
effort was conducted during the ice-free season and distributed throughout the entire area. The 
population estimate is believed to be accurate, but dated. Simulation studies suggest that the 
harvest prior to  reduced the population from about , bears in the early s to about 
, bears in . Harvest levels were reduced in  to permit slow recovery of this 
population, provided that the kill in Qudbec did not increase. 

In December , TEK indicated that the population had increased. After consultations with 
native communities, Nunavut increased the harvest quota to a level consistent with a population 
level of , bears. Co-management discussions with Quebec are ongoing. Survival and 
recruitment rates used for risk assessment are based on the rates obtained for the adjacent BB 
population (Taylor et al. ). 

. Western Hudson Bay (WH) 

The distribution, abundance, and population boundaries of the WH polar bear population have 
been the subject of research programs since the late s (Stirling et al. b, Stirling et al. 
, Derocher and Stirling a .Derocher and Stirling b, Taylor and Lee , Lunn et 
al. ). Over % of the adult population is marked, and there are extensive records from 
capture-recapture studies and tag returns from polar bears killed by Inuit hunters. During the 
open water season, the WH population appears to be geographically segregated from the 
Southern Hudson Bay (SH) population to the east and the FB population to the north. During the 

 



 


winter and spring, the  populations mix extensively on the sea ice covering Hudson Bay 
(Stirling et al. b, Derocher and Stirling , Stirling and Derocher , Taylor and Lee 
). The size of the WH population was estimated to be , bears in autumn, in  and 
  (Derocher and Stirling  a, Lunn et al.  ). At that time, the size of the WH 
population appeared to be stable, and the harvest was believed to be sustainable. 

Over the past three decades, there have been significant declines in the body condition of adult 
male and female polar bears, and in the proportion of independent yearlings captured during the 
open water season in Western Hudson Bay (Derocher and Stirling , , Stirling and 
Lunn  , Stirling et al.  , Lunn and Stirling, unpubl. data). Over the same period, the 
average date of spring break-up of the sea ice in the region has advanced by three weeks (Stirling 
et al. , ), presumably due to increasing spring air temperatures. Warming rates in 
Western Hudson Bay between  and  ranged from a minimum .° C per decade at 
Churchill, Manitoba, to .° C per decade at Chesterfield Inlet, Nunavut (Gagnon and Gough 
), Stirling et al. () documented a significant correlation between the timing of sea ice 
break-up and the body condition of adult female polar bears (i.e. early break-up was associated 
with poor body condition). Stirling et al. () also suggested that the declines in various life 
history parameters of polar bears in Western Hudson Bay were the result of nutritional stress 
associated with the trend toward earlier break-up, which in turn appears to be due to long-term 
warming (Stirling and Parkinson ). 

An updated analysis of capture-recapture data from the WH population was completed in  
(Regehr et al., in prep.). Between  and , the estimated number of polar bears in the WH 
population declined from , to , a reduction of about %. This decline appears to have 
been initiated by progressive declines in the body condition and survival of cubs, subadults, and 
bears  years of age and older, caused by the earlier break-up of spring sea ice. Once the 
