seasonal sea lanes may appear as soon as   due to open water periods. Summertime 

 



 


disappearance of the ice cap could be possible by  if climatic trends continue. These trends 
translate into a possibility that the US Navy will be required to operate in the Arctic. 

Climate models project an acceleration of this trend with periods of extensive melting that will 
spread progressively further away from most Arctic land masses into the spring and autumn, thus 
opening new shipping routes and extending the period that shipping is practical (ACIA ). 

The navigation season is normally defined as the number of days per year when less than % 
ice cover persists. The navigation season for the Northern Sea Route is projected to increase 
from - days per year to - days per year. Since navigation for ships with ice-breaking 
capability is possible in seas with up to % ice coverage, this navigation season may extend to 
  days per year by . 

The Northern Sea Route is the name for the seasonally ice-covered marine shipping routes across 
the north of Eurasia from Novaya Zemlya in the west to the Bering Strait in the east (Brude et al. 
, ACIA ). The Northern Sea Route is administered by the Russian Ministry of 
Transport and has been open to marine traffic of all nations since   (ACIA ). For trans- 
Arctic voyages, the Northern Sea Route represents up to a % savings in distance from northern 
Europe to northeastern Asia and the northwest coast of North America compared to southerly 
routes via the Suez or Panama Canals (ACIA ) 

Regional as well as trans-Arctic shipping along the Northern Sea Route is very likely to benefit 
from a continuing reduction in sea ice, which currently poses major challenges and requires 
specially reinforced ships as well as ice-breakers (ACIA ). The further north the ice edge 
retreats, the further north ships can sail in open water on trans-Arctic voyages, thereby avoiding 
the shallow shelf waters (which require ships of shallow draft, thereby reducing the amount of 
cargo that may be carried and profitability) and narrow straits of the Russian Arctic (ACIA 
). Ships involved in expanded use of the Northern Sea Route would likely use leads and 
polynyas to avoid breaking ice and reduce transit time (USFWS ). Russian scientists cite 
increasing use of a Northern Sea Route for transit and regional development as a major source of 

 



 


disturbance to polar bears in the Russian Arctic (Wiig et al. , Belikov and Boltunov ). 
Commercial navigation on the Northern Sea Route could disturb polar bear feeding and other 
behaviors and would increase the risk of oil spills (Belikov et ai. , especially in winter and 
spring, and heavy shipping traffic could disturb the bears during critical times (USFWS ). 

Increased shipping activity may disturb polar bears in the marine environment, adding additional 
energetic stresses. If ice breaking activities occur they may alter habitats used by polar bears, 
possibly creating emphemeral lead systems and concentrating ringed seals within the refreezing 
leads. This in turn may allow for easier access to ringed seals and may have some beneficial 
values. Conversely, this may cause polar bears to use areas that may have a higher incidence of 
human encounters as well as increased likelihood of exposure to oil, waste products or food 
wastes that are intentionally or accidentally placed into the marine environment. If shipping 
involved the tanker transport of crude oil or oil products there would be some increased 
likelihood of small to large volume spills and corresponding oiling of polar bears as well as 
potential effects on seal prey species (Richardson et al. c). 

The PBSG (Aars et al. ) recognized the potential for increased shipping and marine 
transportation in the Arctic with declining summer/fall ice conditions. The group recommended 
that the Parties to the International Agreement on the Conservation of Polar Bears take 
appropriate measures to monitor, regulate and mitigate ship traffic impacts on polar bear 
subpopulations and habitats (Aars et al. ). 

. Tourism 

Increasing levels of tourism and photography in polar bear viewing areas and natural habitats is 
of concern. In some such situations, carelessness or ignorance has resulted in polar bear being 
killed to protect people (PBSG ). As tourism continues to increase in the Arctic, the number 
of conflicts is expected to rise. 


 



Tourists and photographers may inadvertently displace bears from preferred habitats or alter 
natural behaviors. Polar bears are inquisitive animals and often investigate novel odors or sights. 
This trait can lead to polar bears investigating food odors at cabins and remote stations where 
they may be killed. Dumps near human settlements have a history of being frequented by polar 
bears. 

Clark () documented  perceived aggressive interactions between people and polar bears, 
and one interaction that resulted in human injury, in Canadian National Parks. Two interactions 
resulted in bears fatalities. Most (%) interactions took place in Wapusk National Park, outside 
of Churchill, Manitoba, where most of the Western Hudson Bay population comes on shore 
between July and November (Clark ). Interactions took place on land during summer or fall 
(Clark ). The number of interactions and the number of bears captured in and around 
Churchill appeared to be greater during years when bears came ashore earlier, however, small 
sample sizes likely limit statistical significance (Clark ). 

Clark () found no relationship between the rates of interaction and and the mean number of 
park visitors and mean number of visitor nights, suggesting that sea-ice availability and the 
amount of time the bears spend on land appears to be the primary factor influencing the rate of 
interactions. Clark’s analyses were consistent with Derocher et al.’s () hypothesis that 
longer ice-free periods will contribute to an increase in the number of polar bear-human 
interactions. 

Clark () found that bears were reported killed in only % of the perceived aggressive 
interactions, which was much less than the % reported by Fleck and Herrero (). Fleck and 
Herrero () compiled data from bear-human interactions throughout Canada. Possible 
explanations include the fact that Clark’s () study was confined to interactions in national 
parks, where visitors are not encouraged to carry firearms and are educated on bear safety, and 
that many interactions took place near established research camps that have formalized bear 
response procedures, including non-lethal deterrent measures (Clark ). 



 


Bear sightings near camps were also much more likely to lead to perceived aggressive 
interactions than bear sightings away from camps (Clark ). This could be due to a number of 
factors, including the fact that attractants such as food motivate bears into encounters with 
people, and the fact that people may perceive bears as more aggressive near a camp rather than 
when they are in the field (Clark ). 
