
Canada 

Canada manages (or shares management responsibility for)   of the world’s  polar bear 
populations. Wildlife management is the responsibility of the provincial and territorial 
governments. The federal government (Canadian Wildlife Service) has an ongoing research 
program and is involved in management of wildlife populations shared with other jurisdictions, 
especially ones with other nations. Canada has formed the Federal Provincial Technical and 
Administrative Committees for Polar Bear Research and Management (PBTC and PBAC, 
respectively) to ensure coordinated management. The committees include provincial, territorial, 
and federal representatives who meet annually to review research and management activities. 

Human-caused mortality such as hunting, defense of life, and incidental kills are all included in 
TAH. Hunting is allowed by Inuit people of communities in Nunavut, NWT, Manitoba, 
Labrador, Newfoundland, and Quebec. In Ontario the Cree as well as the Inuit can harvest polar 
bears. In Nunavut and NWT, each community obtains an annual harvest quota which Is based on 
the best available scientific information and monitored through distribution of harvest tags to 
local hunter groups, who work with scientists to help set quotas. Some communities may hold 
tags for several separate polar bear populations. Native hunters may use their harvest tags to 
guide sport hunts from approved populations and sport hunts must occur using traditional 
methods, e.g. dog teams. Local Hunter and Trapper Organizations (HTO) determine how many 
tags shall be allocated to sport hunts, and monitor, regulate, and enforce hunting regulations. A 
flexible quota system is used in all but the DS populations hunted by Nunavut. Quebec and 
Ontario do not set quotas but do monitor and report harvest. 

In April , the Nunavut Territory, formerly part of the NWT, offlcially joined the Federation 
of Canada. Nunavut now has primary management responsibility for  of the  Canadian 
polar bear populations and has committed to conducting -year population inventory cycles for 
each population. Their harvest approach consists of two phases; ) conservative harvest rate, 
which begins after a scientific population inventory is completed, and continues for the next  


 



 


years. Harvest is limited to “the number of bears that can be taken per year with not more than 
% risk of a population decline that would require more than  years of harvest moratorium to 
recover to the current numbers”. This is thought to allow for slight population growth; and ) 
guided harvest rate, which means “the number of bears that can be taken without reducing the 
population below the target number, which takes into account that scientific data is becoming 
increasingly dated and allows for Inuit ecological knowledge (IQ) to increase or decrease the 
harvest rate. RISKMAN modeling is used to identify sustainable harvest levels. Harvest is based 
on the assumption that providing protection to reproductive females by setting a sex-selected 
harvest of :  males: females increase the potentially allowable harvest by % (Testa , 
Taylor et al. a). If the quota for female polar bears is inadvertently exceeded, it results in an 
automatic reduction in next year’s quota, so the average take of females over a two year period 
cannot exceed the sustainable rate (Testa , Taylor et al. a). 

The Canadian system has resulted in tight controls on the size of harvest and high quality harvest 
reporting. It allows reduction of quotas in response to population declines resulting from over- 
hunting (PBSG  ). In , the existing polar bear harvest practices became more 
controversial when Nunavut identified quota increases for  populations,  of which are shared 
with other jurisdictions (Lunn et al. , Aars et al. ). Quota increases were largely based 
on IQ and the perception that some populations are increasing from historic levels; it was also 
done without input from Jurisdictions with shared management responsibility. This action 
resulted in an overall increase from the / quota of  bears to  bears in / 
(Lunn et al. , Aars et al. ). Concern has been expressed by PBSG and PBTC members 
whether raising harvest quotas based on IQ constitutes a sound conservation practice based on 
the best scientific data, as called for in the  Polar Bear Agreement (Wiig , Aars et al, 
). In Western Hudson Bay, the scientific information was used and the quotas were not 
reduced which would seem to directly contradict guidelines set forth by the  Polar Bear 
Agreement. 

The Service, in its overall evaluation of the Canadian management program relative to approving 
specific populations for importation of polar bear trophies by U.S. hunters, found three key 

 



 


characteristics of the calculation of sustainable harvest from the population estimates. These are: 
(a) assumption of no density effects; (b) emphasis on conservation of female bears through 
hunting at a ratio of  males to  female; and (c) use of pooled best estimates for vital rates (e.g. 
rates of birth and death) for all Canadian polar bear populations, with the exception of Viscount 
Melville Sound (USFWS ). In his review and evaluation of the procedures used to estimate 
sustainable harvests, Testa () tested the polar bear parameters provided by Taylor et al. 
() with a general population model. He concluded that a  % harvest of the female segment 
of the polar bear population is sustainable and probably conservative, and that the assumptions 
made for calculation of the sustainable harvest are reasonable. Additionally, he noted that these 
low rates of harvest, even if somewhat greater than  %, are unlikely to result in irreversible 
reductions of bear numbers on the time scale of Canada’s research and management actions. 
Harvests of  to  % of the original population would take from  to  years to reduce the 
female population by  %. In this context overharvest is possible, but reversible in the same or 
shorter time span by regulating or eliminating quotas, particularly if density dependent effects 
come into play (Testa , USFWS ). It should be noted that reliance of density 
dependent effects for management of polar bears may not be warranted based on previous 
research with grizzly bears (Derocher and Taylor , Wielgus and Bunnell ). Assuming 
the Maximum Sustainable Yield (MSY) is close to the carrying capacity, Taylor () 
recommended that managers assume that there will be no increases in reproduction or decreases 
in the rates of natural mortality as a result of a reduction in population numbers, at least until the 
density dependent mechanisms for population regulation in bears have been documented. 

Regarding the harvest of polar bears, the PBSG recently expressed concerns for the application 
of IQ by the Government of Nunavut in determining harvest rates in the absence of supportive 
scientific data. The PBSG advocated that a precautionary approach be instituted when setting 
future harvest levels in a warming Arctic. The group noted that during recent decades the area of 
the sea ice in the Arctic has declined significantly, and that ice break-up in many areas is 
occurring earlier and freeze-up later; these patterns are predicted to continue to effect survival 
and abundance of polar bears in Western Hudson Bay. The group recognized that both local 
hunters and scientists have observed an increased occurrence of polar bears near settlements and 

 



 


outposts and on near-shore sea ice in recent years, but that this may not reflect an increased 
population size, and that some quotas had been increased based on local and traditional 
knowledge or, in the case of Greenland, based on increased nearshore availability. The group 
was concerned that the combined effect of habitat loss and increased harvest could threaten 
populations and recommended that harvest levels be increased only when supported by scientific 
information. The group noted the recent analysis (Aars et al. ) indicating population 
declines and recommended that management action be taken (reduced quotas) without delay. 

Sport hunting is allowable by communities in Canada (Nunavut and NWT) and Greenland and as 
part of the TAH. Because sport hunters tend to seek out large adult “trophy” bears, sport hunting 
tends to decrease the proportion of the harvest. The majority of sport hunters in Canada are 
American citizens, and in  a provision was made in the MMPA to allow these hunters to 
import their trophies into the U.S. if the bears had been taken in a legal manner from approved 
populations (see “United States” section). The propotion of the TAH comprised of sport hunting 
has increased dramatically from around % to  % since the  s (Freeman and Wenzel ). 
Import of sport-hunted polar bears into the U.S. is currently allowed from the Southern Beaufort 
Sea, Northern Beaufort Sea, Viscount Melville Sound, Lancaster Sound, Norwegian Bay and 
Western Hudson Bay populations. Gulf of Boothia and Western Hudson Bay are currently being 
reviewed for status change (PBTC ). 

Greenland 

Greenland was governed by Denmark until attaining Home Rule in May . Greenland’s 
Home Rule Government now manages harvest through a system introduced in  that allows 
only full-time hunters living a subsistence lifestyle to hunt polar bears. Licenses are issued 
annually for a small fee, contingent upon reporting of harvest during the prior  months. Until 
, no quotas were in place but harvest statistics were collected through Piniarneq, a local 
reporting program. In January , a new harvest monitoring and quota system was 
implemented. Annual quotas are determined in consideration of international agreements, 
biological advice, user knowledge, and consultation with the Hunting Council. Part of the quota 

 



