
 


Listing the polar bear 

statement bylUCN-The World Conservation Union regarding the 
proposed listing of the polar bear as a threatened species under the US 
Endangered Species Act 

Geneva, Switzerland,  February  (lUCN) 

Background on the Red Listing of the Polar Bear 

The lUCN Red List is the world's most comprehensive inventory of the global 
conservation status of plant and animal species. It uses a set of criteria to evaluate 
the extinction risk of thousands of species and subspecies. These criteria are 
relevant to all species and all regions of the world. With its strong scientific base, the 
lUCN Red List is recognized as the most authoritative guide to the status of biological 
diversity. 

In June , the lUCN SSC (World Conservation Union, Species Survival 
Commission) Polar Bear Specialist Group (PBSG) held its ’’’ meeting in Seattle, 
Washington, US, The meeting included delegates representing each of the five 
circumpolar nations signatory to the Agreement for the Conservation of Polar Bears 
(Canada, Denmark/Greenland, Norway, Russian Federation, US), in addition to 
invited representatives from the Greenland Home Rule Government, the Alaska 
Nanuuq Commission (Alaska), the Inuvialuit Game Council and Wildlife Management 
Advisory Council, Nunavut Tunngavik Incorporated (Canada), National 
Oceanographic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA; USi National 
Environmental Research Institute (Denmark) and other scientists. The PBSG meets 
every - years to review and exchange information on progress in the research and 
management of polar bears throughout the Arctic and to review the worldwide status 
of polar bears. (For further details about the meeting see 
httpT/pbsg. nDolar.no/Meetinas/Stories/th meetinq.htm ). 

Bearing in mind all the research to date on polar bear population status and trends 
and the related uncertainties about the impacts of the various threats, the delegates 
at the PBSG meeting reviewed the status of polar bears using the  lUCN Red 
List Categories and Criteria. 

The meeting concluded that the lUCN Red List classification of the polar bear should 
be upgraded from Lower Risk (i.e., Least Concern) to Vulnerable based on the 
suspected likelihood of an overall decline in the size of the total population of more 
than % within the next  years. The principal cause for this decline was given as 
climatic warming and its consequent negative affects on the sea ice habitat of polar 
bears. But it was also recognized that in some areas, contaminants might have an 
additional negative influence. 

Based on the outcome of the *'’ PBSG meeting, a new assessment of the polar 
bear was compiled by members of the PBSG in accordance with lUCN Red List 
procedures (see http://www.iucnredlist.ora/info/assessment process ). Following 
these procedures, the new assessment was subsequently peer reviewed by 
members of the Polar Bear Red List Authority (a group of scientists appointed by the 
Species Survival Commission) before it was submitted for inclusion on the lUCN Red 



 


List of Threatened Species. Following submission, the assessment was further 
checked by the lUCN Red List Unit staff and staff involved in the Global Mammal 
Assessment project currently being conducted under the auspices of lUCN and a 
number of other partner organizations. All the checks are deemed necessary to 
ensure that the assessment is scientifically robust and that it is done in a way that is 
consistent with other species assessments on the lUCN Red List. The new 
assessment was accepted and it appeared on the  lUCN Red List of Threatened 
Species released on May ,  (see 

http://wvw.iucnredlist.orq/search/details. php?species=&tab=all ). 

lUCN Policy on National Legislation and Uses of the Red List 

lUCN notes that the US Fish and Wildlife Service have proposed listing the polar 
bear as a threatened species under the US Endangered Species Act {Federal 
Register ()-. -,  CFR Part , January , ). lUCN further notes 
that this proposal is based on a status assessment which evaluated all the scientific 
and commercial information and found that the polar bear is likely within the 
foreseeable future (next  years) “to become an endangered species throughout all 
or a significant part of its range based on threats to the species, including loss of 
habitat caused by sea ice recession and lack of effective regulatory mechanisms to 
address the recession of sea ice" {Federal Register {): ). 

Although there is no direct link between the Vulnerable listing of the polar bear on the 
lUCN Red List and the proposed threatened listing under the US Endangered 
Species Act, lUCN recognizes that much the same information is used to support 
both listings. Hence, although it is not lUCN’s role to comment on national listings, 
we feel it is necessary to draw attention to an lUCN Resolution on The uses of the 
lUCN Red List of Threatened Species’ (RESWCC.) that was adopted at the "' 
World Conservation Congress held in Bangkok in  (for a copy of the full 
resolution see under http://app.iucn.ora/conaress/members/submitted motions.htm 
or http://app.iucn.orq/conaress/members/WCC Res Rees ENGLISH. pdfi . 

Under this resolution, when the lUCN Red List of Threatened Species is used to 
support national legislation, lUCN: 

“(a) CALLS UPON governments to make use of the data in the lUCN Red List of 
Threatened Species when considering the species to be afforded special 
conservation measures under national legislation; 

(b) EMPHASIZES that the inclusion of species in national legislative schedules 
requires information not only on the level of threat (as recorded in the lUCN Red List 
of Threatened Species), but also on the types of threatening processes and on the 
conservation measures needed, and so the correct listing of threatened species in 
national legislation frequently requires additional information beyond that available in 
the lUCN Red List; and 

(c) EMPHASIZES that it is important that conservation action is not automatically 
linked to the inclusion of a species in any particular category of the lUCN Red List, 
but must rather be applied flexibly following a careful analysis of the processes 
driving the threats and the measures needed to counteract these. In particular, any 
possible negative effect of prohibitions on harvesting or trade should be carefully 
assessed before their introduction”. 

Sustainable Use Considerations 

In regard to the polar bear, lUCN notes that the harvest of polar bears is of cultural 
and economic significance to indigenous people and that sports hunting can be a 
major source of income for remote settlements. 



 


lUCN also notes that polar bear harvest management has recently started to include 
a shift towards more conservative management with the recognition that the 
information needed to manage a population is imperfect (see 
httD://pbsa . n polar. no/Threats/harvest . htm l 

Understanding the risks associated with a range of harvest management options is 
an important development for polar bear conservation. As threats such as pollution, 
climate change, tourism, and oil development are better understood, there may be 
more changes necessary in how polar bear harvest is managed. Clearly, if 
reproduction or survival rates are affected by climate change or pollution, managers 
and hunters will have to alter their harvests accordingly. 

lUCN notes that under the proposed threatened listing those activities that would or 
would not likely constitute a violation of section  of the Act and associated 
regulations will need to be identified and listed. Some permissible uses or actions 
have been identified {Federal Register (): -) but the proposal indicates 
that further evaluation of the exceptions to prohibition of take and import for Alaska 
natives is required as is an evaluation of the importation of polar bear trophies taken 
from approved populations in Canada into the US. 

lUCN urges all parties deliberating on the proposed polar bear listing to consider all 
relevant issues, including the conservation and management measures already in 
place, to ensure that if the proposal is adopted that it be scientifically authoritative, 
based on the best available species data, and that it includes appropriate regulatory 
