

 


). Studies on movements using telemetry data show that some polar bears associated with 
Svalbard are very restricted in their movements but bears from the Barents Sea range widely 
between Svalbard and Franz Josef Land (Wiig , Mauritzen et al. ). Population 
boundaries based on satellite telemetry data indicate that the Barents Sea is a natural population 
unit, albeit with some overlap to the east with the Kara Sea population (Mauritzen et al. ). 
Although overlap between the Barents Sea and East Greenland may be limited (Born et al. 

), low levels of genetic structure among all these populations indicates substantial gene flow 
(Paetkau et al. ). The BS population is currently unharvested with the exception of bears 
killed in defense of life and property (Gjertz and Persen , Gjertz et ai. , Gjertz and 
Scheie  ). The population was depleted by over-harvest but a total ban on hunting in  in 
Norway and in  in Russia allowed it to increase (Larsen , Prestrud and Stirling ). 
High levels of PCBs have been detected in samples of polar bears from this area which raises 
concern about the effects of pollutants on polar bear survival and reproduction (Skaare et al. 

, Bernhoftetal. , Norstrom etal.  , Andersen etal. , Derocher et al. ). 
Recent studies suggest a decline and levelling of some pollutants (Henriksen et al .   ) while 
new pollutants have been discovered (Wolkers et al. ). Oil exploration in polar bear habitat 
may increase in the near future (Isaksen et al.  ). The natural history of this population is 
described by Lono (), and Derocher (). 

. Kara Sea (KS) 

This population Includes the Kara Sea and overlaps in the west with the BS population in the 
area of Franz Josef Land and Novaya Zemlya archipelagos. Data for the Kara and Barents Seas, 
in the vicinity of Franz Josef Land and Novaya Zemlya, are mainly based on aerial surveys and 
den counts (Parovshikov , Belikov and Matveev , Uspenski , Belikov et al. , 
Belikov and Gorbunov , Belikov ). Telemetry studies of movements have been done 
throughout the area but data to define the eastern boundary are incomplete (Belikov et al. , 
Mauritzen et al. ). The population size estimate is unknown. Reported harvest activities 
have been limited to defense kills and an unknown number of illegal kills; these are not thought 
to be having an impact on the size of the population. However, contaminant levels in rivers 

 



 


flowing into this area and recent information on nuclear and industrial waste disposal raise 
concerns about the possibility of environmental damage. Recent studies show that polar bears 
from the Kara Sea have some of the highest organochlorine pollution levels in the Arctic 
(Andersen et al. , Lie et al. ). 

. Laptev Sea (LV) 

The LV population area includes the western half of the East Siberian Sea and most of the 
Laptev Sea, including the Novosibirsk and possibly Severnaya Zemlya islands (Belikov et al. 
). The estimate of population size for the Laptev Sea (-) is based on aerial counts of 
dens on the Severnaya Zemlya in  (Belikov and Randala ) and on anecdotal data 
collected from  through the s on the number of females coming to dens on Novosibirsk 
Islands and on the mainland coast (Kistchinski , Uspenski ). This estimate should 
therefore be regarded as preliminary. Reported harvest activities in this population are limited to 
defense kills and an apparently small but unknown number of illegal kills. The current levels of 
harvest are not thought to be having a detrimental impact on the population (Belikov et al. , 
Aars et al. ). 

. Chukchi Sea (CS) 

Cooperative studies between the U.S. and Russia have revealed that polar bears in this area, also 
known as the Alaska-Chukotka population, are widely distributed on the pack ice of the northern 
Bering, Chukchi, and eastern portions of the East Siberian seas (Garner et al. , Garner et al. 

 a, Garner et al.  ). Based upon these telemetry studies, the western boundary of the 
population was set near Chaunskaya Bay in northeastern Russia. The eastern boundary was set at 
Icy Cape, Alaska, which also is the previous western boundary of the southern Beaufort Sea (SB) 
population (Amstrup et al. , Amstrupand DeMaster , Garner et al. , Amstrup 
, Amstrup et al. , Amstrup et al. ). This eastern boundary constitutes a large 
overlap zone with bears in the SB population. 


 



 


Estimates of the size of the population have been derived from observations of dens, and aerial 
surveys (Chelintsev , Stishov a, Stishov , Stishov et al. ). However, these 
estimates have wide ranges (ca. -) and are considered to be of little value for 
management. Reliable estimates of population size based upon mark and recapture are not 
available for this region, although recent studies provide data for analyses using new spatial 
modelling techniques, as reported in the SB population section. Probabilistic distribution 
information for zones of overlap between the CS and BS populations is now available. This 
information can be used to more accurately describe sustainable harvest levels once defensible 
estimates of abundance are developed (Amstrup et al. , Amstrup et al. ). The 
approximate boundaries of this population for illustration purposes are as described above and as 
reported previously (Lunn et al. a). 

The status of the CS population, which was believed to have increased after the level of harvest 
was reduced in , is now thought to be uncertain or declining (Aars et al. ). Measuring 
the population size remains a research challenge (Evans et al. ) and recent reports of 
substantial levels of illegal harvest in Russia are cause for concern. Legal harvesting activities 
are currently restricted to Inuit in western Alaska. In Alaska, average annual harvest levels 
declined by approximately % between the s and the s (Schliebe et al. ) and have 
remained at low levels in recent years. There are several factors potentially affecting the harvest 
level in western Alaska. The factor of greatest direct relevance is the substantial illegal harvest in 
Chukotka. In addition, other factors such as climatic change and its effects on pack ice 
distribution, as well as changing demographics and hunting effort in native communities 
(Schliebe et al. ) could influence the declining take. Recent measures undertaken by 
regional authorities in Chukotka may have reduced the illegal hunt (Kochnev, Kavry pers. 
comm.). The unknown rate of illegal take makes the stable designation uncertain and tentative 
and as a precaution the Chukchi population is designated as declining. 

Implementation of the United States-Russia Agreement on the Conservation and Management of 
Polar Bear is designed to ensure that a scientifically-based, sustainable management program is 
instituted. Management will include active involvement of Native hunters’ organizations from 

 



 


Alaska and Chukotka. On December ,  the United States Congress passed the “United 
States-Russia Polar Bear Conservation and Management Act of .” This Act provides the 
authorities in the U.S. to fully implement the Agreement noted earlier. 

As with the Beaufort Sea population, the primary concerns for this region are the impacts of 
climate change, human activities including industrial development within the near-shore 
environment, increases in the atmospheric and oceanic transport of contaminants into the region, 
and possible over-harvest of a stressed or declining population. 

. Southern Beaufort Sea (SB) 

The SB polar bear population is shared between Canada and Alaska. During the early s, 
radio-collared polar bears were followed from the Canadian Beaufort Sea into the eastern 
Chukchi Sea of Alaska (Amstrup et al. , Amstrup and DeMaster ). Radio-telemetry 
data, combined with earlier tag returns from harvested bears, suggested that the SB region 
comprised a single population with a western boundary near Icy Cape, Alaska, and an eastern 
boundary near Pearce Point, NWT, Canada (Amstrup et al. , Amstrup and DeMaster , 
Stirling et al.  ). Recognition that the polar bears within this region were shared by Canada 
and Alaska prompted development of the “Polar Bear Management Agreement for the Southern 
Beaufort Sea” (Agreement) between the Inuvialuit Game Council (IGC) of Canada, and the 
North Slope Borough (NSB) of Alaska. The Agreement was ratified by both parties in . The 
text of the Agreement included provisions to protect bears in dens and females with cubs, and 
stated that the annual sustainable harvest from the SB polar bear population would be shared 
between the two jurisdictions. Harvest levels also were to be reviewed annually in light of the 
best scientific information available (Treseder and Carpenter , Nageak et al. ). An 
evaluation of the effectiveness of the Agreement during the first  years (Brower et al. ) 
concluded that the Agreement had been successful in ensuring that the total harvest, and the 
proportion of the harvest comprised of adult females, remained within sustainable limits. The 
