THE SCIENCE BEHIND GLOBAL WARMING 


WEDNESDAY, MAY ,  

U.S. Senate, 

Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation, 

Washington, DC. 

The Committee met, pursuant to notice, at : a.m., in room 
SR-, Russell Senate Office Building, Hon. John McCain, Chair- 
man of the Committee, presiding. 

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. JOHN McCAIN, 

U.S. SENATOR FROM ARIZONA 

The Chairman. Good morning. We meet today to examine the 
issues surrounding global warming. This subject continues to be an 
issue of great importance to the environment and the economic fu- 
ture of the country. 

To better prepare ourselves to objectively evaluate future legisla- 
tive policy, the Committee will explore three issues: One, the un- 
derlying science behind global warming; two, exactly where we are 
in our research efforts; and, three, what does it all mean. 

For many years, scientists have been warning us about the 
greenhouse effect caused by man-made emissions of carbon dioxide 
and other gases, and the far reaching environmental consequences 
which could result if the problem is not properly addressed. 

A large amount of evidence has been presented to suggest that 
this phenomena is real and is due to the activity of man. However, 
there also has been evidence presented to contradict this conclu- 
sion. 

Earlier this year, the National Research Council concluded that 
the warming trend during the past  years is real, and is substan- 
tially greater than the average temperature of warming during the 
th Century. The report also identified a substantial disparity be- 
tween satellite data trends and surface temperature trends as well. 

The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change also has issued 
a draft of its third assessment report which will, in all likelihood, 
suggests a warming trend when its final version is released early 
next year. These two reports, in addition to hundreds of other stud- 
ies, outline the need for a more firm understanding of and scientific 
consensus on global warming. 

I would like to offer one brief example of global warming’s poten- 
tial harm. According to the United Nations Environment Program, 
the global average sea level has risen by  to  centimeters over 
the past  years. It is likely that much of the rise is related to 
an increase in the lower atmosphere’s global average temperature 
since . 


(l) 



 


Scientific models further project a rise in sea levels of a foot and 
a half by the year . This projected rise is two to five times fast- 
er than the rise experienced over the past century. The impact of 
such movement on our coastal communities and businesses, such 
as fisheries, agriculture, and tourism, is unknown, but the con- 
sequences could be serious considering that half of the U.S. popu- 
lation lives in the coastal communities. 

We look forward to hearing more about the outlined reports and 
potential scenarios from our witnesses today, along with the new 
findings from the government’s research efforts. 

Most importantly, any actions the United States takes in re- 
sponse to claims of global warming must be based on the best 
science available and not on rhetoric or political expedience. We 
must continue to invest in our research capabilities to fully under- 
stand the scientific interactions between humans, the land, the 
ocean, and the atmosphere. 

Testimony presented here today will serve as a valuable insight 
for this Committee. We hope to establish a baseline for the Com- 
mittee on the current state of knowledge on the subject of global 
warming. And I welcome all of our witnesses who are here today. 

Before I ask Dr. Neal Lane, who is the Assistant to the President 
for Science and Technology of the Office of Science and Technology 
Policy, to begin his statement, I would like to make one additional 
comment. 

One of the great things about the requirements of the electoral 
process is extensive interaction with the citizenry. I just finished 
an unsuccessful, but very enlightening, adventure in that area. 

In town hall meeting after town hall meeting after town hall 
meeting, of which I had hundreds, young Americans stood up and 
said, “Senator McCain, what is your position on global warming?” 
There is a group of Americans who now come to political rallies 
with signs that say, “What is your plan?” “What is your plan,” is 
the question that is asked. 

I do not have a plan. I am sorry to say that I do not have a plan 
because I do not have, nor do the American people have, sufficient 
information and knowledge. But I do believe that Americans and 
we who are policymakers in all branches of government, should be 
concerned about mounting evidence that indicates that something 
is happening. 

I do not pretend to have the expertise and knowledge on this 
very important and very controversial issue, but I do intend, begin- 
ning with this hearing and follow-on hearings, to become informed, 
to reach some conclusions, and make some recommendations, or 
make some non-recommendations depending on the information 
that I receive. 

I believe that it is of the utmost importance that we examine this 
issue thoroughly, and I am dedicated to that proposition. And I am 
very grateful that we have such a very well informed group of 
Americans who will appear before us today. 

[The prepared statement of Senator Hollings follows:] 



 


Prepared Statement of Hon. Ernest F. Hollings, 

U.S. Senator from South Carolina 

Mr. Chairman, thank you for holding this hearing today on global climate change, 
which I hope will be only one of many. It’s been about  years since our last full 
Committee hearing on climate change, so I welcome this opportunity to hear what 
the science can now tell us about this important topic. This Committee has worked 
hard to ensure that the federal government has the best research and information 
possible about global warming, as well as other types of climate changes. I’m glad 
to see our investments are bearing fruit and that we are identifying ways to focus 
our research to help us make decisions now and in the decades ahead. 

During the s, a number of us here on the Committee became increasingly 
concerned about the potential threat of global warming and loss of the ozone layer. 
In , I sponsored the National Global Change Research Act, which attracted sup- 
port from many Members still serving on this Committee including Chairman 
