peer-review process, which is deemed an important means of ensuring continued 
program quality. 

The agencies that actively participate in the USGCRP are USDA, DOC/NOAA, 
DOE, HHS/NIH, DOI/USGS, EPA, NASA, NSF, and the Smithsonian Institution. 
OMB and OSTP are the Executive Office of the President liaisons to the SGCR. The 



 


Department of State does not fund research but is part of the SGCR because of the 
extensive international cooperation necessary in all aspects of global change re- 
search. The Department of Defense does not fund research focused on global change, 
but participates in the SGCR because it performs related research, such as how 
changing ocean conditions may affect their ability to ensure the nation’s security. 
Some of these agencies support research on a broad range of issues, while others 
have a more specialized focus. Programmatic contributions are closely matched to 
agency missions and areas of expertise. The crosscutting research that takes place 
in the USGCRP program element areas takes advantage of the unique capabilities 
of different agencies and applies them to science problems that are beyond the scope 
of any single agency’s mission or the ability of any one agency’s programs to ad- 
dress. 

The scientific community contributes to the planning, definition, and implementa- 
tion of USGCRP research activities. An important aspect of this is scientific over- 
sight and review of the USGCRP that is provided by the National Academy of 
Sciences. This function includes review of various program activities and examina- 
tion of scientific issues in response to requests from the USGCRP and participating 
agencies. Over the past several years, the USGCRP has commissioned a series of 
reports, including “Pathways” and smaller reports on climate observations and cli- 
mate modeling. These reports have provided important input to the ongoing plan- 
ning and program implementation decisions of the USGCRP agencies, including the 
initiation of the carbon cycle and water cycle research efforts described above, and 
the current organization of the USGCRP as a series of other interrelated program 
elements. 

• Understanding the Earth’s Climate System, with a focus on improving our 
understanding of the climate system as a whole, rather than its individual com- 
ponents, and thus improving our ability to predict climate change and varia- 
bility. The FY budget proposes $ million for this program element (a 
decrease of $ million), which is largely focused on the physical climate sys- 
tem. Improving our understanding of climate change, including its potential im- 
pacts on ecosystems and human society, requires support of research and inte- 
gration of results across the entire USGCRP. Climate is a naturally varying and 
dynamic system with important implications for the social and economic well 
being of our societies. Understanding and predicting climate changes across 
multiple time scales (ranging from seasonal to interannual, to decadal and 
longer) offers valuable information for decision making in those sectors sensitive 
to rainfall and temperature fluctuations, including agriculture, water manage- 
ment, energy, transportation, and human health. 

• Biology and Biogeochemistry of Ecosystems, with a focus on improving un- 
derstanding of the relationship between a changing biosphere and a changing 
climate and the impacts of global change on managed and natural ecosystems, 
including forests, coastal areas, and agriculture. The budget proposes $ mil- 
lion in FY (an increase of $ million) for the study of changes in managed 
and unmanaged ecosystems. The biosphere consists of diverse ecosystems that 
vary widely in complexity and productivity, in the extent to which they are 
managed, and in their economic value to society. Better scientific understanding 
of the processes that regulate ecosystems and the capability to predict eco- 
system changes and evaluate the potential consequences of management strate- 
gies will improve our ability to manage for sustainability. 

• Composition and Chemistry of the Atmosphere, with a focus on improving 
our understanding of the impacts of natural and human processes on the chem- 
ical composition of the atmosphere at global and regional scales, and deter- 
mining the effect of such changes on air quality and human health. The budget 
proposes $ million for programs studying the composition and chemistry of 
the atmosphere (a decrease of $ million from FY). Changes in the global 
atmosphere can have important implications for life on Earth, including such 
factors as the exposure to biologically damaging ultraviolet (UV) radiation, the 
abundance of greenhouse gases and aerosols (which in turn affect climate), and 
regional air pollution. 

• Paleoenvironment and Paleoclimate, with a focus on providing a quan- 
titative understanding of the patterns of natural environmental variability, on 
timescales from centuries to millennia, upon which are superimposed the effects 
of human activities on the planet’s biosphere, geosphere, and atmosphere. The 
budget proposes $ million in FY (a decrease of $ million) for the study 
of the Earth’s environmental past. Reconstructing the historical climate record 
offers an enhanced understanding of the mechanisms controlling the Earth’s cli- 



 


mate system and, together with insight obtained from numerical modeling exer- 
cises, provides a foundation for anticipating how the planet might respond to 
future environmental perturbations. 

• Human Dimensions of Global Change, with a focus on explaining how hu- 
mans affect the Earth system and are affected by it, and on investigating how 
humans respond to global change. The budget proposes $ million in FY 
(level with FY) for the study of the human dimensions of global change. 
Scientific uncertainties about the role of human socioeconomic and institutional 
factors in global change are as significant as uncertainties about the physical, 
chemical, and biological aspects of the Earth system. Improving our scientific 
understanding of how humans cause changes in the Earth system, and how so- 
ciety, in turn, is affected by the interactions between natural and social proc- 
esses, is an important priority for the USGCRP. 

Conclusion 

This brief description of climate change science and U.S. climate change research 
efforts should be seen as a summary rather than a comprehensive overview. Never- 
theless, it highlights several very important points. The USGCRP is a broad and 
successful program of research on global change that is resulting in increases in our 
understanding of how the Earth system is changing, and of the human role in such 
change. In particular, it has made a major contribution to our understanding of cli- 
mate change. USGCRP-supported research has played a key role in demonstrating 
that climate change is occurring, and that human activities are playing a role in 
causing such change. It has helped explain the relationships between climate 
change and other significant global-scale environmental changes, such as land cover 
change, ozone depletion, and loss of biodiversity. 

We expect a much fuller understanding of the processes of change to emerge from 
this effort in the future. The sustained bipartisan support for global change research 
over the last decade has enabled steady scientific progress and resulted in the devel- 
opment of a new generation of tools that offer the promise of more rapid progress 
in the years ahead. We will benefit from unprecedented amounts of data about the 
Earth, and these data will be of higher quality than ever before. We will develop 
more complex and accurate models that permit more realistic simulation of the 
Earth system. Most importantly, we can expect to learn much more about the poten- 
tial consequences of change for ecosystems and for human society. 



 


U.S. Global Change Research Program 
By Agency/Appropriation Account 
FY  Budget 

(Discretionary budget authority; in millions of dollars) 



FY  
Actual 

FY  
Estimate 

FY  
Proposed 

