

OMB, and the Department of Commerce, GFDL’s current supercomputer budget is 
in comparatively good shape. A number of our respected U.S. colleagues have not 
been as fortunate. 

For example, in NOAA it has been much easier to obtain funding for large hard- 
ware ventures (e.g., satellites, ground-based measurement systems, and supercom- 
puters) than for funding the scientific talent required to achieve optimal value from 
these critical investments. Even a % “tax” on these large “hardware” commitments 
would have produced a very highly leveraged enhancement of these “big ticket” 
items. Also, the recent National Research Council’s “Pathways” report has made a 
similar point about the under funding of NASA’s research base necessary to opti- 
mize the value of its large satellite programs. 

In the case of my own lab, GFDL, the stresses created have been daunting. Over 
the past  years, GFDL’s base funds for science have diminished by more than half 
in purchasing power due to unfunded inflationary losses, to increased administra- 
tive costs, and to Congressionally authorized pay raises, so conspicuously unaccom- 
panied by the funds necessary to pay for them. 

In my strong opinion, this seemingly oblivious diminution of the federal research 
talent base has produced a serious reduction from the expected return on NOAA’s 
and NASA’s substantial investments in large environmental data and computing 
systems. Moreover, I see no evidence of any observable reversal of this destructive 
trend. In fact, the current budget initiative processes in place for FY and  
appear to perpetuate this seemingly oblivious shortfall in the return from our big 
ticket “hardware” investments, including supercomputers. 

Many of us in the scientific community find it inexplicably baffling that something 
so obvious and so amenable to repair can remain so conspicuously unaddressed for 
so long. 

Question . Can you discuss the validation process used to authenticate your mod- 
els? 

Answer. Let me begin by asserting that there is no such thing as a “validated cli- 
mate model.” We do find that the models perform very well for certain processes 
under certain circumstances. These same models exhibit important deficiencies 
under other circumstances. Interestingly, the same dilemma is present in the futile 
quest for “validated” data sets. There is a surprisingly small number of the sci- 
entists who analyze observational data and output data from model experiments 
who are focused on sharpening our understanding by careful evaluation of the 
strengths, weaknesses, and information content of these “real-world” and model- 
based data sets. 

Given the above constraints, models are evaluated (not validated) through careful 
assessment of their agreement (or lack thereof) with carefully analyzed data sets. 
For example, are the model’s simulated desert regions in the right location with the 
right climate and the right level of natural variability on time scales of years to dec- 
ades? Are the characteristics of the modeled Arctic region, including sea ice, in 
agreement with available data? Does the model simulate credible El Nino and La 
Nina events? Are the characteristics of the moist subtropics, such as the southeast 
U.S., properly simulated? Is the seasonal cycle of climate correctly simulated in all 
of these regions? Generally speaking, the answers to these kinds of questions is yes. 
However, a closer look often reveals significant discrepancies between observations 
and model simulations. 

Does a correct simulation of the present guarantee that we can simulate future 
climate well, assuming that we know how carbon dioxide, sulfate particles, and 
other greenhouse gases will change in the future? Not necessarily. Such agreements 
do add confidence to our use of the models as a tool, but do not supply the desired 
guarantee. 

A very important international effort is currently underway to use the observed, 
roughly .°F, warming of the global-mean surface-air temperature over the th 
century as a critical test of the models’ abilities to project future climate changes. 
This international collaborative effort, which includes GFDL and the National Cen- 
ter for Atmospheric Research, is showing that the models capture the essence of the 
observed th century warming rather well, although the models differ in their de- 
tails. These studies do indicate, however, that imperfections in the observations, in 
the “exotic” forcings operative in the past century (such as solar changes, and indi- 
rect effects of sulfate and carbon particles), and in the models themselves, still pro- 
hibit us from tightly constraining the levels of uncertainty in the model-based pro- 
jections. That is why my official testimony gives a - °F range of warming for 
“business as usual” in the middle of this century. In spite of this genuine uncer- 
tainty, there is still no viable hypothesis that makes a credible case that the global 
warming problem will be substantially less than our best current estimates. 



 


Question . Why is the largest uncertainty regarding global-mean surface warming 
due to clouds? Can you explain this further. 

Answer. Many aspects of calculating the key effects of global warming are rather 
simple; many of its basic features are rather well understood. For the past three 
decades, for example, the clear-sky trapping of outgoing heat radiation from the 
earth by CO  and other greenhouse gases are well documented, as are many aspects 
of the role of water vapor increases in amplifying this “greenhouse” trapping effect. 

As we all know, cloudy skies have a dramatic effect in suppressing the overnight 
cooling that is so evident when skies are clear. Clouds thus absorb outgoing heat 
radiation and radiate energy back to the earth’s surface, producing a warming ef- 
fect. They also reflect incoming radiation from the sun, producing a cooling effect. 
Increasing clouds near the ground produce a net cooling effect on the climate, while 
increasing clouds at  miles altitude tend to warm the climate. 

Each of these separate cloud effects are difficult to calculate with accuracy. The 
combined effects in the context of climate change tend to be small differences be- 
tween large opposing effects, of which all carry significant uncertainty. Moreover, 
the effects vary differently in different geographic regions, and all of these effects 
depend upon the details of very small-scale phenomena on the scale of the water 
droplets and/or ice crystals in the clouds. Furthermore, satellite-based measure- 
ments do not neatly diagnose the net role of clouds very well, even in today’s cli- 
mate. 

Thus, clouds have legitimately earned their place as the leading source of the un- 
certainty in our projections of climate change. 

Question . What is your current accuracy rate of climate models for projecting trop- 
ical storms, earthquakes, and floods? How has your understanding of global warm- 
ing changed your models? 

Answer. I am rather confident, better than  out of , that hurricanes and similar 
tropical storms, once formed, will tend to have stronger winds and considerably 
greater rainfall as the climate and the oceans continue to warm. The warmer and 
moister atmosphere and the warmer ocean below, simply put, makes the potential 
energy of a hurricane significantly stronger. Today, those hurricanes that stay over 
warm water for sufficient time do tend to approach their maximum potential power. 
We expect that to be also true in the future, only at higher intensities. Some have 
argued that we also should expect more hurricanes in the future warmer earth. 
That may be so, but I see no convincing scientific evidence that says that. For now, 
we simply do not know. 

All models of which I am aware do tend to produce more floods- in those regions 
where floods already tend to be prevalent today. At the simplest level, this effect 
is mainly due to the expected higher water vapor amounts in the atmosphere due 
to increased evaporation efficiency over the warmer oceans. In effect, wet weather 
systems become even wetter because the atmosphere will carry more water. Con- 
versely, drought prone regions, such as the southwest U.S., are likely to be even 
drier due to increased evaporation of soil moisture in the warmer climate. 

Earthquakes have no known or suspected connection to a warming climate. Even 
speculated effects would be expected to be very weak. 

Our models have evolved significantly in response to improvements in our under- 
standing of very complex phenomena. For example, the mathematical modeling of 
clouds has become significantly more sophisticated in the treatment of radiative, 
convective, and cloud microphysical processes. Unfortunately, these improvements 
have yet to produce dramatic breakthroughs in this dauntingly difficult problem. 
However, the problem is now being attacked with increasingly focused tools from 
specialized observations, better theories, and models more firmly rooted in fun- 
damentals of atmospheric physics and dynamics. 

Question . You stated in your testimony that you are “virtually certain” that in- 
creasing greenhouse gases are due to human activities. What erased the doubt in 
your mind? 
