Ecology and Climate Change Workshop (June , ). U.S. EPA Global 
Change Research Program. 

Kirk, D. A., M. D. Evenden, and P. Mineau. (). Past and current attempts to evaluate 
the role of birds as predators of insect pests in temperate agriculture. Current 
Ornithology , -. 



 


Kyle, R.E. and Brabets, T.P. (). “Water Temperature of Streams in the Cook Inlet 
Basin, Alaska, and Implications of Climate Change,” USGS Water-Resources 
Investigations Report -. 

Malcolm, J.R. and Pitelka, L.R. () Ecosystems & Global Climate Change: A Review of 
the Potential Impacts on U.S. Terrestrial Ecosystems and Biodiversity. Pew Ctr. on 
Global Climate Change. 

McCabe, G.J. and Wolock, D.M. (). “General Circulatin Model Simulations of 
Future Snowpack in the Western United States,” Journal of the American Water 
Resources Association, Vol. , No. : . 

McCullough, D. A. “A review and synthesis of effects of alterations to the water 

temperature regime on freshwater life stages of sahnonids, with special reference to 
Chinook salmon,” Region  Water Resources Assessment Report No. 
-R-- (Seattle, WA: U.S. EPA Region , ). 

McKenzie, D, et al. (). “Climate Change, Wildfire and Conservation,” Conservation 
Biology, Vol. , No. :-. 

Ministry of Water, Land, and Air Protection, “Climate Change and Freshwater 

Ecosystems: Salmon in the River,” (Victoria, B.C.: Government of British 

Columbia), (accessed November , ). 
httD://wlapwww.gov.bc.ca/air/climate/indicat/salmonriv idl .html 

Munich Re () http://\vww.munichre.com/ 

National Research Council. () Effectiveness and Impact of Corporate Average Fuel 
Economy (CAFE) Standards. National Academy of Sciences. Online at 
http://books.naD.edu/execsumm pdf/  .pdf 

National Wildlife Federation & International Association of Fish and Wildlife Agencies 
(NWF & lAFWA). (). Fish and wildlife recreation: Boosting our economy. 
Washington, DC. 



 


O’Neal, K. Effects of Global Warming on Trout and Salmon in U.S. Streams 

(Washington, D.C.: Defenders of Wildlife and Natural Resources Defense 
Council, May ). 

Poole, G., et al., Technical Synthesis: Scientific Issues Relating to Temperature Criteria 
for Salmon, Trout, and Char Native to the Pacific Northwest (Seattle, WA: U.S. 
EPA Region , ). 

Price, J. & Glick, P. (). The birdwatcher’s guide to global warming. The National 
Wildlife Federation and American Bird Conservancy. 

Price, J. & Root, T. ( ). Climate change and neotropical migrants. Transactions of the 

* North American Wildlife and Natural Resources Conference. Washington, DC: 
Wildlife Management Institute. 

Rahel, F.J. Keleher, C.J. and Anderson, J.L. () “Potential habitat loss and population 
fragmentation for cold water fish in the North Platte River drainage of the Rocky 
Moimtains: Response to climate warming,” Limnology and Oceanography .: 
-. 

Root, T. L., J. T. Price, K. R. Hall, S. H. Schneider, C. Rosenzweig, & J. A. Pounds. . 
Fingerprints of global wanning on animals and plants. Nature, , -. 

Salzman, J. () Creating Markets for Ecosystem Services: Notes from the Field, 

N.Y.U. L. Rev. , - 

Scott, D et al. () Climate Change and Tourism and Recreation in North America: 
Exploring Regional Risks and Opportunities, in Tourism, Recreation and Climate 
Change. C. M. Hall & J. Higham eds. . 

Sorensen, L.G. et al. () Potential Effects of Global Warming on Water Fowl 

Populations Breeding in the Northern Great Plains. Climatic Change , - 
Thomas, C.D., Cameron, A., Green, R.E., Bakkenes, M., Beaumont, L.J., Collingham, 
Y.C.,etal.().Aarure, , -. 



 


U.S. Department of the Interior (U.S. DOI), Fish and Wildlife Service and the U.S. 

Department of Commerce, Bureau of Census. ().  National survey of 
fishing, hunting, and wildlife-associated recreation. Washington, DC. 

U.S. EPA, Ecological Impacts from Climate Change: An Economic Analysis of 

Freshwater Recreational Fishing EPA -R-- (Washington, DC: U.S. 

EPA, April ). 

U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service (U.S. FWS). (). National survey of fishing, hunting, 
and wildlife-associated recreation. Washington, DC. 

U.S. Climate Change Science Program. () Our Changing Planet: The U.S. Climate 
Change Science Program for Fiscal Years  and . Washington, DC. 

U.S. Global Change Research Program (USGCRP) () Climate change impacts on the 
United States: The potential consequences of climate variability and change. 
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom.   pp. 

van Ripper, C., Ill, Sogge, M.K., and Willey, D.W. () Potential Impacts of Global 
Climate Change on Bird Communities of the Southwest. Pages - in: 

Kirtland, D.A., etal., eds. Impact of Climate Change and Land Use in the 
Southwestern United States. U.S. DOI/USGS/GPO/WWW series. 

Velicogna, I. & Wahr, J. (). Measurements of time-variable gravity show mass loss in 
Antarctica. Science Express Reports, March , . 

Washington State Department of Ecology, “Effects of Elevated Water Temperatures on 
Salmonids,” Focus Number -- (Olympia, WA: State of Washington, 
 ). 

Webster, P.J., et al. (). Changes in Tropical Cyclone Number, Duration and Intensity in 
a Warming Environment. Science, Vol. : -. 

Westerling, A.L., “Warming and Earlier Spring Increases Western U.S. Forest Wildfire 
Activity,” www.sciencexpress.org.  July , Page  . 



 


Alaska Wilderness League * Clean Water Action * Defenders of Wildlife 
Earthjustice * Friends of the Earth * Greenpeace 
Natural Resources Defense Council * League of Conservation Voters 
National Audubon Society * National Environmental Trust 
National Wildlife Federation * Physicians for Social Responsibility 
Sierra Club * The WOderness Society * Union of Concerned Scientists * U.S. PIRG 
