leagues here have mentioned pine bore beetles. In preparation for 
this testimony, I spoke to a friend of mine who works in the For- 
estry Department in Virginia, and he said his biggest concern at 
the moment, his biggest concern, is that beetles that typically have 
a -year life cycle, it takes them  years to go through their life 
cycle, and while they are alive, they munch on trees, if it warms 
up just a little bit, they will go to a -year life cycle. If they go to 
a -year life cycle, instantly the numbers of them double. 

And this is one of these very step functions, if you can imagine 
suddenly just doubling all the populations of destructive beetles. So 
when you look at this, there are people who are waiting for these 
to happen. And he bases his observations on what has happened 
in the west. He is gravely concerned that this might happen in the 
pine forests in Virginia as well. 

Senator Warner. Well, we have to be very careful when we 
blame all the ills of our natural environment, not to attribute it all 
to global warming. As an old trial lawyer, you have to have a chain 
of proof, almost beyond a reasonable doubt, I think, before we are 
going to see any real action here. Because the economic interests 
of a drastic change in our energy supplies and so forth, which affect 
this, are going to whipsaw, believe me. Talk about this institution 
where you and I have been now a couple of decades. If you want 
to get one issue that you can’t deal with unless you have an an- 
swer, it is the loss of jobs. And that could be impacted by various 
steps we have to take. 



 


But that is not to say I am deterred. But I just want to make 
sure that this chain of evidence, as an old trial lawyer, it has to 
be almost beyond a reasonable doubt if you are going to tie it and 
warp it around global warming. 

Back to the striped bass, I recall a couple of years ago, you may 
have the accurate dates, we actually put an embargo, stopped all 
the fishing and everything. And I have forgotten how many years 
we shut it down, but then they just came back in increased num- 
bers, almost. Can you correlate that? And that is within the last 
decade. We have the accurate facts when we shut it down and 
when we opened it up again. 

Mr. Mann. Actually, it is a little bit older than that, sir. It is 
about the last  years. 

Senator Warner. Fifteen. 

Mr. Mann. But the closure was really a response to a fishing ef- 
fort. 

Senator Warner. Probably was. 

Mr. Mann. And of course, there are few things that you can con- 
trol in natural populations except the exploitation rate. And it cer- 
tainly was very unpopular when the suggestion was that you close 
it and let the stock rebuild. But nonetheless, the closures took 
place, and now we have a fairly healthy population in terms of its 
size. It certainly is one of the good examples of working with fisher- 
men to actually rebuild the stock and then to try to manage it, so 
that everybody has an opportunity to use it, whether it is commer- 
cially or recreationally. 

Senator Warner. Right. But that gives you an example of how 
a species can regenerate itself if you take a certain pressure off. 
Now, if they were going through some extraordinary  or  years 
of climate change, that pressure may diminish that species. But if 
Mother Nature comes swinging back again to more normal tem- 
perature changes, I would think there hopefully could be a regen- 
eration of the species again. But if we react too quickly to these ab- 
normal cycles that we are experiencing now, and we have a very 
significant detriment to our economy, the fish may come back but 
the jobs may not. 

Mr. Mann. I agree. 

Senator Warner. Take me on as hard as you want. Let’s not be 
pleasant about this thing. Let’s just get our brass knuckles out and 
go at it. 

Mr. Mann. Caution is the word of the day. I think all of my col- 
leagues here have also said that. 

Senator Warner. All right, thank you. I will come back maybe 
with another question. 

Senator Lieberman. Thanks very much. 

Dr. Kelly, I know that your work doesn’t focus on the polar bear, 
the much-mentioned polar bear, much-loved. But obviously the 
polar bear exists in the environment in which you are working. So 
I want to ask you to comment, testify to any alterations that you 
have seen in the polar bear environment and in the species itself, 
if any. And also I suppose just comment maybe on your reaction 
to the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service beginning a process which it 
concludes will list the polar bear as a threatened species and list 
climate change as one of the reasons for that. 



 


Mr. Kelly. I would be happy to. I have spent some time working 
on polar bears with Steve Amstrup with the U.S. Geological Sur- 
vey. And as I mentioned, the species that I spent a lot of my career 
studying, ringed seals, are the prime food of, in fact,  percent of 
what polar bears eat in Alaska are ringed seals. So we encounter 
them frequently in our field work. 

Senator Lieberman. And you are, just to repeat in your testi- 
mony, you said you are already seeing the environment of the 
ringed seals compromising their numbers. 

Mr. Kelly. What we are seeing is these premature snow melts 
that are exposing the young seal pups prematurely to both preda- 
tion and extreme weather events. This can only have a negative 
impact on the seals and hence the bears. 

Senator Lieberman. Right. 

Mr. Kelly. I think, all I can say in terms of the proposed listing 
of polar bears is that you know, there are lots of things that as sci- 
entists we get really picky about, levels of confidence about state- 
ments we make and about the data and we are trained to be very, 
very conservative in our analysis of data. 

But as policy makers, I think you are in a different position. You 
need to look out for the welfare of the whole Nation and the wild- 
life. I think it is important to listen to the different points of view 
and recognize that you have to decide when you have enough infor- 
mation to act and when waiting is not a prudent thing to do. 

I think it is not, there are lots of things that are hard to predict 
in terms of ecological responses to changes in environment. But 
changes to ringed seals, polar bears, walruses, these ice-associated 
marine mammals, are pretty straightforward to predict. It is clear- 
ly going to have an extremely negative impact on them and it could 
in fact lead. 

So I guess I would have to say I think it is with good foresight 
that the Fish and Wildlife Service predicts that this kind of a 
change in habitat will in fact threaten polar bears. 

Senator Lieberman. Let me take you one more step in this. You 
indicated in your testimony that in your career you had seen the 
summer ice diminish by  percent. So when we see the pictures 
