the uptake and storage of carbon in the ocean. Research advances on these ques- 
tions will provide information needed as a basis for sound policymaking, as well as 
valuable information about potential management strategies to land and forest 
managers in both the public and private sectors. 

Research on the Global Water Cycle is receiving increased attention in the 
USGCRP, with $ million proposed in the FY budget (a $ million increase 
over FY). This has been an important research area since the inception of the 
USGCRP, but the increasing evidence that changes in the water cycle are already 
occurring, and that changes in the water cycle and climate are closely coupled, are 
leading to a new emphasis on water cycle science. The USGCRP has established a 
Water Cycle Study Panel that is focused on improving our understanding of how 
water moves through the land, atmosphere, and ocean, and how global change may 
increase or decrease regional water availability. This group, which includes govern- 
ment and academic scientists, is developing comprehensive research and applica- 
tions strategies that will take advantage of existing and future observing systems 
to address the major issues concerning the global water cycle and global and na- 
tional water resources. 

The primary goal is to achieve a greater understanding of the seasonal, annual, 
and interannual mean state and variability of water and energy cycles at conti- 
nental-to-global scales, and thus a greater understanding of the hydrological inter- 
actions in the Earth’s climate system. The study of the global water cycle is a uni- 
fying theme that bridges the gap between the spatial scales involved in global at- 
mospheric (and atmosphere-ocean interaction) processes, and land surface 
hydrological processes, which determine the availability of water resources. 

Finally, the U.S. National Assessment of the Potential Consequences of Cli- 
mate Variability and Change is now nearing completion. The National Assess- 
ment effort, which began in , is examining the degree to which particular re- 
gions and sectors of the U.S. are vulnerable to climate variations and change. The 
National Assessment is examining the potential ecological and socioeconomic im- 
pacts of climate variations and change, and ways we might prepare for both the 
next few decades and the next century, including identification of possible adapta- 
tion measures. It is also identifying key information gaps and research needs (i.e., 
information that is still required to answer questions of interest to resource man- 
agers and decision-makers). 

The assessment effort has included a series of regional workshops with participa- 
tion from a broad range of public and private stakeholders in the identification of 
issues of interest and a series of regional and sectoral analyses, most of which are 
not yet complete. The major product of the assessment process is a National Assess- 
ment Synthesis Report that should be completed this year. The National Assess- 
ment Synthesis Report is undergoing a rigorous peer-review that includes several 
rounds of technical review, full agency review, and a -day public comment period 
before it is submitted to the President and the Congress. The U.S. Global Change 
Research Act calls for this type of assessment of the potential consequences of global 
changes on a periodic basis. 

The first National Assessment will soon be completed, but we expect many of the 
lessons learned during this process to play a significant role in the definition of fu- 
ture USGCRP research activities. There were important issues that it was not pos- 
sible to fully address in this initial effort, such as the potential indirect effects on 
the U.S. of changes in other parts of the world. Many additional questions of inter- 
est have been identified. Farmers and ranchers are curious about what might 
change for their competitors in other nations. People all around the country are in- 
terested in how climate change might alter the incidence of extreme climate condi- 
tions that affect the quality of life and livelihoods, such as drought, heat waves, and 
severe storms. 

This first assessment is part of a larger evolution of the USGCRP. During much 
of the first decade of its existence, the program concentrated on observing and docu- 
menting change in the Earth’s physical systems and understanding why these 
changes are occurring. It is now appropriately shifting from this predominant focus 
on physical systems to a much broader effort to understand how global change will 
affect the Earth’s biological systems and the human societies that are dependent 
upon them, and make useful scientific data and information more broadly available 
for public and private planning and decision making. 

To accomplish this, we must greatly improve our capabilities for conducting re- 
gional-scale assessment of global change and its potential consequences around the 
country. Our current level of understanding tells us that climate change and its ef- 
fects will vary by region, but our ability to project specific regional effects remains 
limited. We also need to learn more about the interactions of natural and human- 
induced climate change and variability and other human-induced stresses on the en- 



 


vironment, such as pollution, land-use change, resource extraction, and invasive spe- 
cies, many of which are regional in scale. Additionally, we need to achieve an inte- 
grated understanding not only of the nature and extent of physical and biological 
effects of climate change, but also of their ramifications for our social and economic 
systems. 

The Organization of the U.S. Global Change Research Program 

Our current understanding of climate change, as well as our understanding of 
many other important global change issues, is the result of the significant progress 
that has occurred over the last several decades through scientific research. U.S. cli- 
mate change research is largely supported through the USGCRP. The Administra- 
tion is committed to continued strong support for the research needed to improve 
our understanding of the mechanisms of the Earth’s climate system, the likely fu- 
ture course of climate change, and the potential impacts of such change on the envi- 
ronment and human society. 

The USGCRP, a program planned during the Reagan Administration and elevated 
to a Presidential Initiative under President Bush in , was codified by the Global 
Change Research Act of . The program has been strongly backed by every Ad- 
ministration and Congress since its inception. The FY Budget Request dem- 
onstrates President Clinton’s ongoing commitment to the program, with an overall 
request for the USGCRP of approximately $. billion dollars, about  percent (or 
$ million) higher than last year’s enacted level (tables showing the budget by 
agency and by program element area are attached). 

Within the total, support for scientific research is up about $ million (%), in- 
cluding a $ million increase for carbon cycle studies at USDA as part of the car- 
bon cycle research initiative begun last year. Surface-based observations at NOAA 
are receiving a substantial increase ($ million, or about %) that will help pro- 
vide new information on changing patterns of temperature and rainfall in the US. 
The total increase for surface-based observations and science together is about $ 
million, or %. The space-based observation component of the budget is reduced 
by about $ million, to a total of $ million. This decrease is mainly a con- 
sequence of decreases in NASA development costs as some of the first series of 
Earth Observing System (EOS) satellites are completed and launched. 

The fact that the increase in science funding more than offsets the decrease in 
funding for space-based observations is important. Increasing the proportion of pro- 
gram funding for science has been one of the most consistent recommendations from 
the National Research Council and various agency advisory committees over the last 
few years. The National Research Council (NRC) report, Global Environmental 
Change: Research Pathways for the Next Decade, noted that  percent of the total 
USGCRP were devoted to space-based observations and data systems in the  
budget proposal. In this year’s budget proposal, the equivalent number is about  
percent, demonstrating the progress that has been made over the last  years in 
increasing the proportion of USGCRP funding for scientific research and analysis. 

Since its inception, the USGCRP has been directed toward strengthening research 
on key scientific issues, and has fostered much improved insight into the processes 
and interactions of the Earth system. The results of research supported by the 
USGCRP play an important role in international scientific assessments, including 
assessments of climate change and stratospheric ozone depletion. The USGCRP re- 
search results provide the scientific information base that underpins consideration 
of possible response strategies. The USGCRP does not recommend specific govern- 
ment policies responsive to global change, nor does it include support for research 
and development of energy technologies or development of mitigation strategies. 

Participants and Organization 

The Subcommittee on Global Change Research (SGCR) of the Committee on Envi- 
ronment and Natural Resources (CENR), a component of the National Science and 
Technology Council (NSTC), provides overall direction and executive oversight of the 
USGCRP. In addition, the National Research Council within the National Academy 
of Sciences provides external oversight and review of USGCRP programs. Agencies 
manage and coordinate Federally supported scientific research on global change 
within this framework. In addition to USGCRP review of the overall set of agency 
research programs, each agency is responsible for the review of individual projects 
within its programs. These reviews are almost exclusively based on an external 
