
Counter-intuitively, ringed seals, the major prey of polar bears and an important 
resource to Arctic Eskimos, face the prospect of freezing deaths as a consequence 
of global warming. Ringed seals give birth in snow caves excavated above breathing 
holes they maintain in the sea ice. The snow caves protect the pups from extreme 
cold and to a large extent from predators. As the climate warms, however, snow 
melt comes increasingly early in the Arctic, and the seals’ snow caves collapse before 
the pups are weaned. The small pups are exposed without the snow cover and die 
of hypothermia in subsequent cold periods. The prematurely exposed pups also are 
more vulnerable to predation by arctic foxes, polar bears, gulls, and ravens. Further- 
more, gulls and ravens are arriving increasingly early in the Arctic as springs be- 
come warmer, further increasing their potential to prey on the seal pups. 

The net effect of climate change inevitably will be major changes to the ecosystem. 
Some species will become extinct, others will adapt to new habitats. Indeed, the his- 
tory of the earth has involved many ecosystem changes and extinctions. Whether 
the changes underway today will be survived by walruses, seals, Eskimo culture, 
our economies and ways of life, will depend critically on the pace of change. Adapta- 
tion — biological or social — requires time for adjustment. The current rates of change, 
however, are very steep. 



 



TESTIMONY OF JAMIE RAPPAPORT CLARK 

Executive Vice president 
Defenders Of Wildlife 

BEFORE THE COMMITTEE ON ENVIRONMENT AND PUBLIC WORKS 
UNITED STATES SENATE 

subcommittee on private sector and consumer solutions to 

GLOBAL WARMING AND WILDLIFE PROTECTION 


HEARING ON GLOBAL WARMING AND WILDLIFE PROTECTION 


FEBRUARY ,  


 


Jamie Rappaport Clark 
Executive Vice President, Defenders of Wildlife 

Testimony before the Senate 
Committee on Environment and Public Works 
Subcommittee on Private Sector and Consumer Solutions to Global 
Warming and Wildlife Protection 
Hearing on Global Warming and Wildlife Protection 
February ,  


Mister Chairman and members of the subcommittee, I am Jamie Rappaport Clark, 
Executive Vice President of Defenders of Wildlife. Foxmded in , Defenders of 
Wildlife has over , supporters across the nation and is dedicated to the protection 
and restoration of wild animals and plants in their natural communities. 

I want to thank you for the opportunity to submit this testimony for the record of 
this hearing, which focuses on one of the most important conservation issues we face 
today, the impact of global warming on wildlife. It is no exaggeration to say that all of the 
work that is being done to conserve wildlife and its habitat, in North America and around 
the globe, is put at risk by the potential consequences to wildlife of global warming. This 
is why Defenders of Wildlife is working to educate our supporters, the public, and 
policymakers on the threat to wildlife posed by global warming. We stand ready to work 
with this subcommittee and the rest of the Congress to develop solutions that will reduce 
greenhouse gas emissions and enable wildlife to survive the next century imtil the benefits 
of emissions reductions can be fully realized. In my testimony, I will highlight some of 
the impacts on wildlife from global warming and offer some ideas for addressing them. 



 


Impacts of Global Warming on Wildlife 

The subcommittee’s hearing could not have come at a more important time. Last 
week the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) concluded that evidence of 
global wanning is unequivocal, and that dramatic changes to the planet’s climate are, with 
a  percent certainty, the result of human-generated emissions of greenhouse gases. Quite 
simply, there is no remaining scientific debate: we are causing global warming and it is 
past time that we do something about it. 

We are already in the midst of what Harvard Professor Edward O. Wilson and 
others have referred to as the sixth great mass extinction crisis in the history of the planet. 
However, unlike previous extinction events, this one is due entirely to human activity, 
principally habitat destruction, pollution, and overexploitation of wildlife. Moreover, in 
each of the previous mass extinctions, it took more than  million years for new species to 
evolve to replenish the biodiversity that was lost. 

Global warming only makes a bad situation worse. Under some climate change 
scenarios, the National Academy of Sciences predicts extinctions of % of all species on the 
planet. Extinctions alter not only biological diversity but also the essential evolutionary 
processes by which diversity is generated and maintained. Furthermore, we continue to 
destroy much of the habitat needed for species to survive and recover. 

More than half (%) of nearly , species examined in a study published in the 
journal Nature^ showed measurable changes in distribution and/or timing of their life cycles 
concurrent with global warming. Buds leaf out and flowers bloom earlier, winter 

jParmesm, C., and G. Yohe. . A globally coherent fingerprint of climate change impacts across 

nntitral ca/«t#*me 'KlnfMro /- 



 


hibernation of wildlife is shorter in duration, and migrating and breeding occurs earlier in 
the spring. Such changes are consistently and systematically in the direction expected from 
regional changes in climate: upslope, inland, and towards the earth’s poles. Thus, we 
consider climate change to be among the greatest conservation threats to our natural world. 

Types of Global Warming Impacts 

Among the observed impacts of global warming are the following: 

Sea and land ice meltdowns. According to the IPCC, average Arctic 
temperatures increased at almost twice the global average rate in the past  years. 
Satellite data since  show that annual average Arctic sea ice extent has shrunk by 
.% per decade. Temperatures at the top of the permafrost layer have generally 
increased since the s in the Arctic (by up to °C). The maximum area covered by 
seasonally frozen ground has decreased by about % in the Northern Hemisphere since 
, with a decrease in spring of up to %. 

Changes in the Arctic environment are eroding the integrity of unique terrestrial 
and marine ecosystems. Sea pack ice is literally melting, thinning, and moving further 
offshore from land, all of which tip the scales against wildlife that rely on this key habitat. 
Spectacled eiders, a sea duck already listed as threatened under the Endangered Species 
Act, use large open areas (termed polynyas) for foraging during the winter, and rest and 
sleep on adjacent ice edges strategically located over sea floor grounds rich in prey. 
Without their sea-ice roosting areas. Spectacled eiders won’t be able to easily reach their 
food sources. Rapidly changing ice conditions have forced ringed seals to move and 



 


give birth to their pups in different locations - even under ice - making finding and 
catching seals a bigger challenge for the polar bears that depend on them for survival. 
