McCain, as well as Senators Stevens, Inouye, and Gorton. In , after numerous 
hearings and roundtable discussions, Congress enacted the legislation, thereby cre- 
ating the U.S. Global Climate Research Program. 

When we passed the Global Change Research Act, we knew it was the first step 
in investigating a very complex problem. We placed a lot of responsibility in NOAA, 
the scientific agency best suited to monitor and predict ocean and atmospheric proc- 
esses. We need to renew this ocean research commitment to ensure we better under- 
stand the oceans, the engines of climate. The so-called “wild card” of the climate 
system, the oceans, are capable of dramatic climate surprises we should strive to 
comprehend. In addition, the oceans are critical to our continued well-being. I am 
particularly interested that we pursue the questions covered by the recent NRC re- 
port, From Monsoons to Microbes: Understanding the Ocean’s Role in Human 
Health. This excellent report tells everyone here — even those who don’t live on the 
coast — that understanding our oceans is of the utmost national importance. The 
Oceans Act this Committee approved only a few weeks ago would go a long way to 
ensuring that we give priority to these important ocean research questions. 

I am glad to report that the research accomplished under the National Global 
Change Research Act has led to increased understanding of global climate changes, 
as well as regional climate phenomena like El Nino/Southern Oscillation (ENSO). 
We now have a better understanding of how the Earth’s oceans, atmosphere, and 
land surface function together as a dynamic system, but we cannot stop there. Only 
recently, NOAA measured an important increase in temperature in all the world’s 
oceans over a  year period. We need to understand the causes and how that will 
affect us. All this research ensures that federal and state decisionmakers get better 
information and tools to cope with such climate related problems as food supply, en- 
ergy allocation, and water resources. 

While we have learned an astonishing amount about climate and other earth/ 
ocean interactions in only a decade, we have other critical questions that require 
further research to answer. Many of these questions are relevant not only to improv- 
ing our scientific understanding, but also to contributing to our future social and 
economic well-being. For example, climate anomalies during the past two years — 
most directly related to the - El Nino event — have accounted for over $ 
billion in impacts worldwide. When impacts from the recent floods in China are in- 
cluded, these direct losses could rise to $ billion. This most recent El Nino claimed 
, lives, displaced . million people, and affected  million acres of land 
through severe flood, drought, and fire. When we better understand the global cli- 
mate system, and its relationship to regional climate events like El Nino, we may 
be able to find ways — such as improved forecasting and early warning — to avoid 
some of the severe impacts. 

Under current global warming scenarios, scientists predict a  to  inch rise in 
sea level by the year  that will put our coastal areas at an increased risk of 
flooding. This could have severe consequences for coastal states, such as mine, par- 
ticularly if climate change has any bearing on the frequency or severity of hurri- 
canes. While we have been in a pattern of infrequent hurricane landfalls along the 
East Coast, it is possible that recent severe storms signal a return to conditions 
similar to those of the s, s, and s when huge storms were frequently 
making landfall. If so, and particularly if global warming increases our vulnerability 
to flooding, we must develop the science to better understand and respond to any 
environmental changes in weather patterns. 

I welcome our witnesses to discuss the current state of science on global climate 
change. I am anxious to hear about the progress we’ve made towards better under- 
standing the complex temperature and precipitation pattern changes, and where our 
research efforts are going in the upcoming decade. I hope today’s hearing will rein- 



 


vigorate this Committee’s leadership in promoting sound research on these impor- 
tant scientific questions. 

[The prepared statement of Senator Snowe follows:] 

Prepared Statement of Hon. Olympia J. Snowe, U.S. Senator from Maine 

Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for holding this timely hearing so that we can further 
understand the underlying science behind global climate variability from a distin- 
guished group of internationally renowned scientists. 

Mr. Chairman, last spring, Maine had a first-of-its-kind conference specifically to 
debate and discuss the impact of potential environmental climate change with state, 
national and international experts. For two days, over  people explored many 
questions. Are we leaving a human fingerprint on the Earth’s climate? Why has the 
average temperature in Lewiston — where the conference was held — increased . 
degrees F. over the last century? Are we in a race against an uncertainty that none 
of us on this planet can afford to lose? And, if so, what do we need to do to establish 
a sound scientific basis for making state, regional, national, and international re- 
source management and economic and policy decisions when considering global envi- 
ronmental change issues? The answers to these questions are complex, and our ap- 
proach to them must continue to be through research and thorough analysis of the 
research results. 

It is important to continue to develop more accurate models led by common sci- 
entific research and thought so we might better predict what the impacts will be 
on plants and animals — including ourselves — under any changing climatic condi- 
tions. Concurrently, we must also evaluate the mitigation and adaptation strategies 
under consideration by policy makers in response to increasing amounts of atmos- 
pheric carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases and possible environmental 
changes. 

The U.S. Forest Service has predicted that climate and pollution stresses from 
wild pests, humans, and other environmental changes are likely to cause unprece- 
dented cumulative effects on our northern forest ecosystems and, by extension, on 
our economy and our culture. Our forests can largely adapt to environmental 
changes. But, over time, these forests could very well change in their composition, 
range, health, and productivity. Oak and conifers, for instance, could prevail over 
the maple dominated hardwood forests — diminishing the brilliant fall foliage for 
which New England is so famous. 

The fact is, the vast majority of international scientists say that something ap- 
pears to be happening because of the excess of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere, 
and there is general agreement that human activities are affecting the global cli- 
mate and thus affecting both land and sea. 

As Chair of the Oceans and Fisheries Subcommittee, I have introduced the Coral 
Reef Conservation Act, along with you, Mr. Chairman, in an effort to protect, sus- 
tain, and restore the health of coral reef ecosystems. In , coral reefs around the 
world appeared to have suffered the most extensive and severe bleaching damage 
and subsequent mortality in modern times. Reefs in at least  countries were af- 
fected, and in some areas, more than  percent of the corals died off. These impacts 
have been attributed to, among other factors, the warmest ocean temperatures in 
 years. We must increase our efforts to protect these coral reefs, which are 
among the world’s most biologically diverse and productive ecosystems. 

Again, Mr. Chairman, I thank you for holding this hearing on the science of global 
warming, and thank you for assembling such a distinguished panel today to share 
their vast expertise with us. 

The Chairman. Dr. Lane, thank you and welcome, and thank 
you for all the outstanding work you have done in the past and are 
presently doing. 

STATEMENT OF DR. NEAL LANE, ASSISTANT TO THE PRESI- 
DENT FOR SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, OFFICE OF SCIENCE 
AND TECHNOLOGY POLICY 

Dr. Lane. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. 

And I want to thank you, Senator Hollings, members of the Com- 
mittee, for holding this hearing, and for giving me and also my col- 
leagues, who are the experts in this matter, a chance to talk to you 



 


today about the state of knowledge of climate change, and about 
our Federal agency research program. 

The U.S. Global Change Research Program continues a strong bi- 
partisan tradition of support for this scientific endeavor. And it 
began with President Reagan, continued through President Bush’s 
Administration, and on to the Clinton/Gore Administration. 
