by Congress in , the WCRP operates as a sub-account of the highly successful 
Pittman-Robertson Wildlife Restoration Act. The program provides funding to every 
state and territory to support on-the-ground programs and projects aimed at keeping 
wildlife from becoming endangered. Because it is based in the well-established 
structure of the existing state-federal partnership in wildlife conservation, the WCRP 
provides the most effective way to put resources on the ground and begin immediately 
addressing critical wildlife and habitat conservation needs. 

As a requirement of the Wildlife Conservation and Restoration Program and the related 

State 

Wildlife 


ASSOCIATION OF PISH Sc WILDLIFE AGENCIES 

The voice offish and wildlife ^nctes 

 North Capitol Street, NW • Suite S • Wuhington, D.C W) 

Phone. -- • Fax -- • E-mail; info@fiihwiWl.fc.oig • www 


r.Ethwiidhfe.o^ 



 


Grants program, every state and territory recently completed a wildlife action plan 
(known technically as a “comprehensive widlife conservation strategy”). The wildlife 
action plans assess the status of each state’s wildlife and habitats and outline the 
actions that are needed to keep fish and wildlife from becoming endangered. These 
plans provide a clear roadmap for putting funding on the ground to address 
conservation needs as fish and wildlife react to the challenge of climate change. 

Adaptation assistance that helps address the needs of fish and wildlife is an essential 
national natural resource policy objective as well as an indispensable component of any 
overall package. Thank you for recognizing these needs in your bill. We look forward 
to working with you to ensure that this funding is robust enough to meet the needs of 
fish and wildlife in our changing climate. 

Respectfully, 



Edward Parker 

President, Association of Fish and Wildlife Agencies 

& Director, Bureau of Natural Resources, Connecticut Dept of Environmental Protection 



 


Letter from  Sportsmen and Wildlife Conservation Groups asking that Funding for 
Fish and Wildlife Conservation be Included in Any Global Warming Legislation 

September “’,  

Dear Senator / Representative, 

We are writing to urge you to include in any climate change legislation dedicated funding for fish 
and wildlife conservation and restoration through the Wildlife Conservation and Restoration 
account of the Pittman-Robertson Wildlife Restoration Act. 

Adequate and consistent funding for the Wildlife Conservation and Restoration account of the 
Act is essential to fulfilling the responsibility federal and state governments share for conserving 
our nation’s fish and wildlife. Current federal efforts to proactively conserve fish and wildlife 
through annual appropriations for State Wildlife Grants are having dramatic results, but they still 
fall far short of what is needed. At the same time, changing climate conditions are placing even 
greater burdens on fish and wildlife and fish and wildlife management agencies, As a result, we 
ask you to use the well-established structure of the Pittman-Robertson Act, one of America’s 
landmark conservation laws, to address this issue. Climate change legislative proposals that raise 
new' federal revenues can meet the needs of fish and wildlife without raising the federal deficit. 

America’s fish and wildlife are highly-valued public trust resources and must be conserved. The 
most recent national survey shows that in , some  million adults participated in hunting, 
fishing, and wildlife watching. In pursuit of these activities, participants spent more than $   
billion in our communities, which in turn generated more than . million jobs across the nation. 

Changing climate conditions will place enormous strain on the nation’s fish and wildlife and other 
natural resources. At the same time, our response to this challenge offers us an opportunity to make 
a long-overdue investment in fish and wildlife conservation. As Congress considers options to 
respond to climate change, we ask that you champion the need to take immediate action to assist 
the states in securing the nation’s fish and wildlife heritage for our children and for our economic 
and environmental future, 

Sincerely, 


NATIONAL ORGANIZATIONS 

Ghassan Rassam 
Executive Director 
American Fisheries Society 

Steve Olson 

Director of Government Affairs 

The American Zoo and Aquarium Association 



 


John Baughman 
Executive Vice President 

International Association of Fish and Wildlife Agencies 

Tom Franklin 

Conservation Director 

Izaak Walton League of America 

Steve McCormick 

President and Chief Executive Officer 
The Nature Conservancy 

Larry Schweiger 
President & CEO 
National Wildlife Federation 

Matt Connolly 
President 

Theodore Roosevelt Conservation Partnership 
John F. Calvelli 

Senior Vice President of Public Affairs 
Wildlife Conservation Society 

Steven A. Williams 
President 

The Wildlife Management Institute 

Michael Hutchins 
Executive Director 
The Wildlife Society 

