
Summary 

I will close with three questions and a plea. 

Is the climate changing? Yes, it always has and it always will, but it is very dif- 
ficult to detect on decadal time scales or on regional spatial scales. 

Are climate models useful? Yes, and improving. At this point, their utility is most- 
ly related to global averages, though shortcomings are still apparent. 

Is that portion of climate change due to human factors good, bad or inconsequen- 
tial? No one knows (although the plant world thrives on increases in carbon dioxide 
because CO  is plant food.) 

What we do know is that we depend on data to answer these questions. The glob- 
al data network is decaying at the very time we need it most. If the richest country 
in the world could do something, it would be to lead out in monitoring the present 
climate, in reconstructing the past climate, in assuring easy and timely access to 
the data . . . and in supporting scientists to study the data on which depend such 
important answers. 

The Chairman. Dr. Mahlman, is that the proper pronunciation? 

Dr. Mahlman. Yes, it is. 

The Chairman. Welcome, Doctor. Would you pull the microphone 
over? Thank you. 

STATEMENT OF DR. JERRY MAHLMAN, DIRECTOR, GEO- 
PHYSICAL FLUID DYNAMICS LABORATORY, NATIONAL OCE- 
ANIC AND ATMOSPHERIC ADMINISTRATION 

Dr. Mahlman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. We have long known 
that buildups of atmospheric carbon dioxide and other gases have 
the potential to warm earth’s climate, through the so-called green- 
house effect. 

Today, I will discuss the modeling of projections of climate 
changes due to these increases in greenhouse gases for the time 
around the middle of this st Century. Because I speak with cre- 
dentials as a physical scientist, I do not offer personal opinions on 
what society should do about these projected climate changes. 

Societal actions to greenhouse warming involve value and policy 
judgments that are beyond the realm of climate science. At the 
onset, please recognize that a major international effort to assess 
climate warming was completed in . This is the IPCC assess- 
ment that Dr. Lane referred to earlier. 

This was the most widely accepted assessment ever on climate 
change. The  climate assessment will be completed soon. I ex- 
pect only small changes in its major conclusions, mainly concerning 
some very important increases in scientific confidence over the last 
 years. 

I strongly recommend your use of these IPCC assessments as a 
foundation for your own evaluations. I also recommend their use as 
a point of departure for evaluating the credibility of opinions that 



 


disagree with the IPCC assessments. IPCC is not an infallible sys- 
tem, in that sciences is always self corrective, but opinions that dis- 
agree with them have the burden to make sense. 

My information I present today is derived from the strengths and 
weaknesses of climate models, the strengths and weaknesses of cli- 
mate theory, and the strengths and weaknesses of widespread ob- 
servations of the climate system. 

Climate models have improved in their ability to simulate the cli- 
mate and its natural variations. Unfortunately, important uncer- 
tainties due to deficiencies in our scientific understanding and in 
our computing power still remain. Nevertheless, significant 
progress is expected over the next decade. 

However, let me say at the onset, none of the uncertainties that 
I discuss today can make current concerns about greenhouse warm- 
ing go away. This problem is very real, and is guaranteed to be 
with us for a very long time. 

I will give my evaluation of current model projections of climate 
change for the middle of the next century by my setting of simple 
betting odds. By “virtually certain,” a phrase used earlier by Sen- 
ator Kerry, I mean, that there is no plausible alternative that we 
know of. In effect, the bet would be off the books. 

“Very probable” means that I estimate a nine out of ten chance 
that this will happen within the range projected. “Probable” implies 
that I am setting the odds at about a two out of three chance, while 
uncertain means a plausible effect, but which lacks appropriate evi- 
dence. I will give examples of all of these. So essentially, I set the 
betting odds; you choose your bet. 

My analysis is presented in decreasing levels of scientific con- 
fidence. Human-caused increasing greenhouse gases in the atmos- 
phere is virtually certain. There is no remaining real doubt that in- 
creasing greenhouse gases are due to human activities. 

Radiative effects of increased greenhouse gases is virtually cer- 
tain. Greenhouse gases absorb and reradiate infrared radiation, the 
heat radiation that leaves the planet all the time, that makes it 
cool off at night. Independent of other factors, this acts to produce 
an increased heating on the planet. 

A doubling of atmospheric carbon dioxide expected, virtually cer- 
tain. Atmospheric carbon dioxide amounts are now expected to at 
least double over pre-industrial levels in this century. Currently, 
emission growth is on track to quadruple carbon dioxide levels. 

Long time to draw down excess carbon dioxide, virtually certain. 
We know that it takes decades to centuries to produce a large 
buildup of greenhouse gases. Much less appreciated is that a re- 
turn to normal from high carbon dioxide levels in the atmosphere 
would require many additional centuries, perhaps more than , 
years. 

Global surface warming over the past century, virtually certain. 
The measured th century warming in the surface temperature 
records of over one degree Fahrenheit is undoubtedly real. Its 
cause is very probably due mostly to added greenhouse gases. No 
other hypothesis today is nearly as creditable. 

Future global-mean surface warming, very probable. Assuming 
business as usual for the middle of the next century, global-mean 
surface warming is estimated to be in the range of two to six de- 



 


grees Fahrenheit, with continued increases for the rest of the cen- 
tury. The largest uncertainty is due to the effects of clouds. 

Increased summertime heat index, very probable. In warm moist 
subtropical climates, such as Washington, D.C., the summertime 
heat index effect is expected to magnify the warming impact felt 
by humans by an additional  percent. 

Rise in global sea level, very probable. A further rise of four to 
twelve inches in global mean sea level by the year  is esti- 
mated due simply to the thermal expansion of warmer sea water. 
As the water warms, it occupies more volume. This does not in- 
clude the effects of possible melting of Greenland ice. Continued 
sea level rise is expected for many centuries, probably to much 
