comments are presented in Dowsley and Taylor (). A qualitative analysis allows greater 
latitude in interpretation and consideration of the context of the responses and other associated 
responses than a quantitative analysis. The results from the quantitative analysis found that Inuit 


 



 


knowledge is variable depending upon the community and experiences of the respondent 
(Dowsley ). 

Most respondents (%) believed that the population had increased because more bears were 
seen near the communities and near cabins and camps, and hunters encountered bear signs in 
areas not previously used by bears. Some people noted that these observations could reflect a 
change in bear behavior rather than an increase in population. Many (%) respondents believed 
that bears were less fearful of humans now than  years ago. Most (%) respondents reported 
bears to be skinnier now and  people in one community reported an increase in fighting among 
bears (Dowsley ). 

Respondents also discussed climate change and they indicated that there was more variability in 
sea ice environment in recent years than in the past. Some indicated a general trend for ice floe 
edge to be closer to the shore than in the past, the sea ice to be thinner, fewer icebergs present, 
and glaciers receding. Fewer grounded icebergs, from which shorefast ice forms and extends, 
were thought to be partially responsible for the shift of the ice edge nearer to shore. Respondents 
were uncertain if climate change was affecting polar bears or what form the effects may be 
taking (Dowsley ). 

Stirling and Parkinson (, p. ) evaluated sea ice conditions and distribution of polar bears 
in five populations in eastern Canada: Western Hudson Bay, Eastern Hudson Bay, Baffin Bay, 
Foxe Basin, and Davis Strait. Their analysis of satellite imagery beginning in the  s 
indicates that the sea ice is breaking up at progressively earlier dates, so that bears must fast for 
longer periods of time during the open water season. Stirling and Parkinson (, pp. -) 
point out that long-term data on population size and body condition of bears from the Western 
Hudson Bay, and population and harvest data from the Baffin Bay population indicate that these 
populations are declining or likely to be declining. The authors indicate that as bears in these 
populations become more nutritionally stressed, the numbers of animals will decline and the 
declines will probably be significant. Based on the recent findings of Holland et al. () these 


 



 


events are predicted to occur within the foreseeable future as defined in this rule (Stirling, pers. 
comm. ). 


c. Access to and Alteration of Denning Areas 

Many female polar bears repeatedly return to specific denning areas on land (Harrington , 
Schweinsburg et al. , Garner et al. b, Ramsay and Stirling ). In order for a bear to 
reach a preferred terrestrial den site, either the ice must drift close enough or must freeze early 
enough in the fall for pregnant females to be able to walk to shore, or they swim to the coast in 
time to dig a den in late October or early November (Derocher et al. ). The relationship 
between increasing distance from the pack ice to historical den areas or habitat and successful 
reproduction is difficult to forecast. In addition to increased travel distances another habitat 
component for which no forecasts or models exist is the amount and quality of snow that 
provides suitable denning strata. Areas of concentrated land denning include the islands of Kong 
Karls Land, Nordaustlandet, Edgeoya, and Barentstoya in the Svalbard Archipelago north of 
Norway (Larsen ), Franz Josef Land, Novaya Zemlya, Wrangel Island in Russia, the west 
coast of Hudson Bay, and the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge on the Beaufort Sea coast in the 
U.S. (Amstrup ). Larger interannual variation in the distance between the ice and denning 
areas is already occurring (Derocher et al. ). As global warming progresses, the distance 
between the edge of the pack ice and land will increase (ACIA ). Derocher et al. () 
theorized that as distance increases between the southern edge of the pack ice, where some polar 
bear populations spend the summer, and coastal areas, where pregnant females den, it will 
become increasingly difficult for pregnant females to reach their presently preferred locations. 
Most high density denning habitat is located at more southerly latititudes. Therefore for those 
populations denning at high latitude in the Canadian archipelago islands the effects may be less 
or the effects may become evident until much later than for the more southerly populations, 
which will likely be affected first. 


 



 


Some climate models predict the complete disappearance of summer sea ice by  (ACIA 
). One regional model predicts the complete disappearance of sea ice from Hudson Bay by 
 (Gough and Wolfe ). The average of five models used by ACIA () projects large 
distances between summer sea ice and polar bear terrestrial denning sites. Additionally, the 
ACIA projections are based on the IPCC B emissions scenario and uses climate sensitivity 
measures that may be conservative or understated and losses of sea ice may be much greater than 
predicted. A number of scientists have predicted more extreme projections of the timing and 
extent of polar pack ice retraction (Zhang and Walsh ) although a few climatologists dispute 
these findings regarding climate change (Kandekar , Kandekar et al. ). 

Derocher et al.  predicted that under any of these climate change scenarios, pregnant female 
polar bears will likely be unable to reach many of the most important denning areas in the 
Svalbard Archipelago, Franz Josef Land, Novaya Zemlya, Wrangel Island, Hudson Bay, and the 
Arctic National Wildlife Refuge and north coast of the Beaufort (Derocher et al. ). Scientists 
do not know how quickly female polar bears that previously denned on land might learn to 
exploit alternate denning habitat such as the drifting pack ice if they were unable to access land, 
or if they would respond this way at all (Derocher et al. ), or if drifting pack ice would 
continue to be a suitable substrate for denning. 

Another anticipated impact of a climate change on polar bear denning will be the thinning of sea 
ice and likely increased drift rates of ice floes (Derocher et al. ). In northern Alaska, 
between    and , approximately % of polar bear maternity dens were found on drifting 
multiyear ice several hundred kilometers north of the coast (Amstrup and Gardner  , 
Derocher et al. ). While those bears appeared to successfully raise cubs, between den entry 
and emergence, these dens drifted between  and  km from their location when the female 
first entered them (Amstrup and Gardner ). Increased drifting of sea ice with maternity dens 
could cause females with small cubs to travel longer distances and expend additional energy to 
return to the core of their normal home range (Derocher et al. ). Cubs emerging from dens 
in optimal habitats could also experience reduced survival (Derocher et al. ). Although use 
of pelagic denning habitat is minor overall, it provides important habitat for some populations 


 



 


and suggests that this habitat may be available for use by females that find their land den areas 
unsuitable. The stability of pack ice and its use for denning in the future, however, are uncertain. 

In some locations, female polar bears might adopt the current denning strategy used by bears in 
the Western Hudson Bay population, where pregnant females leave the ice at break-up and 
summer in the same locations where they ultimately den (Derocher et al. ). This strategy 
requires females to accumulate sufficient fat stores to fast for up to approximately  months 
before they can return to sea ice to resume feeding on seals (Derocher et al. ). If the sea ice 
these bears use is over the deep polar basin where seal densities are low pregnant females may 
not be able to meet the energetic requirements for such a long period of fasting and nursing cubs 
(Derocher et al. ). 

In addition to changes in access to or movement of denning areas, in traditional denning areas, 
there may be changes in the habitat available for denning (Derocher et al. ). For example, in 
Hudson Bay, pregnant females make extensive use of terrestrial dens dug into permafrost peat 
banks under black spruce in riparian areas (Derocher et al. ). Some dens may be used 
repeatedly (by different bears) over a period of over  years (Scott and Stirling ). As 
temperatures warm, fire frequency will increase, and in fire areas it will destabilize the riparian 
banks where polar bear dens occur, making the banks unsuitable for denning (Richardson , 
Derocher et al. ). 

Climate change could also impact populations where females den in snow (Derocher et al. ). 
Insufficient snow would prevent den construction or result in use of poor sites where the roof 
could collapse (Derocher et al. ). Too much snow could necessitate the reconfiguration of 
