evaluation also noted that increased monitoring efforts and continued restraint in harvesting 
females were necessary to ensure continued compliance with the provisions of the Agreement. 

 



 


Early estimates suggested the size of the SB population was approximately  polar bears, 
although uneven sampling was known to compromise the accuracy of that estimate (Amstrup et 
al. , Amstrup and DeMaster , Amstrup ). New population estimation techniques 
are emerging and continue to be refined (Amstrup et al. , Amstrup et al. , McDonald 
and Amstrup ). The field work for an intensive capture-recapture effort in the SB region, 
coordinated between the U.S. and Canada, was completed in spring  and a final population 
analysis and report will be available by summer . The preliminary analysis of the joint data 
was completed in June . That analysis indicated the population of the region between Icy 
Cape and Pearce Point is now approximately  polar bears (% confidence intervals 
approximately  - ). Further analyses are likely to tighten the confidence intervals, but 
not likely to change the point estimate appreciably. Although the confidence intervals of the 
current population estimate overlap the previous population estimate of ,, other statistical 
and ecological evidence (e.g. high recapture rates encountered in the field) suggest that the 
current population is actually smaller than has been estimated for this area in the past. 
Observations of changes in polar bear body condition and unusual hunting behaviors in polar 
bears (e.g. cannibalism, digging through solid ice to find seals) suggest foraging success may 
have declined (Amstrup et al. b). These observations parallel those made in western Hudson 
Bay (see below), where changes in sea ice, caused by warmer temperatures, have caused a 
population reduction (Stirling and Parkinson ). Although the new SB population estimate is 
preliminary, we believe it should be used for current status assessments. 

Stirling () reviewed the ecology of polar bears and seals in the Canadian sector of the 
Beaufort Sea from  through . Research incorporating the collection and analysis of 
radio-telemetry data in the SB region has continued on a nearly annual basis through present 
time. Recent analyses of radio-telemetry data using new spatial modelling techniques suggest 
realignment of the boundaries of the SB area (Amstrup et al. , Amstrup et al. ). We 
now know that nearly all bears in the central coastal region of the Beaufort Sea are from the SB 
population, and that proportional representation of SB bears decreases to both the west and east. 
For example, only % of the bears occurring in Barrow, Alaska and Tuktoyaktuk, NWT are SB 

 



 


bears, with the remainder being from the CS and northern Beaufort Sea (NB) populations, 
respectively. The recent radio-telemetry data indicate that bears from the SB population seldom 
reach Pearce Point, which is currently on the eastern management boundary for the SB 
population. 

Historically, a principal assumption of the Agreement was that polar bears harvested within the 
SB region came from a single population. However, our improved understanding of the spatio- 
temporal use patterns of bears in the SB region provides the foundation for improved harvest 
management, based on the geographic probability of bears occurring in specific areas at specific 
times of the year (Amstrup et al. ). Assignment of new boundaries based upon this 
information will probably necessitate a readjustment of the total size of the SB population, to 
correspond with a smaller geographic area. This adjustment is likely to reduce the estimated size 
of the SB population because some poiar bears formerly assigned to the SB will be re-assigned to 
the NB and CS populations. For purposes of this report, however, we continue to use the 
previously-published boundaries for the SB population. This population is assessed using the 
sustainable yield criteria previously reported. 

The primary management and conservation concerns for the SB population are: ) climate 
warming, which continues to increase both the expanse and duration of open water in summer 
and fall; ) human activities, including hydrocarbon exploration and development occurring 
within the near-shore environment; ) changing atmospheric and oceanic transport of 
contaminants into the region; and ) possible inadvertent over-harvest of the SB population, if it 
becomes increasingly nutritionally-stressed or declines due to some combination of the afore- 
mentioned threats, 

. Northern Beaufort Sea (NB) 

Studies of movements and population estimates of polar bears in the eastern Beaufort Sea have 
been conducted using telemetry and mark-recapture at intervals since the early s (Stirling et 
al. , , DeMasteretal. , Lunnetal. ). As a result, it was recognized that there 

 



 


were separate populations in the North and South Beaufort Sea areas and not a single population 
as was suspected initially (Stirling et al. , Amstrup , Taylor and Lee , Bethke et al, 
). The density of polar bears using the multi-year ice north of the main study area was lower 
than it was further south. The estimate of , polar bears (Stirling et al, ) for the NB 
population was believed to be unbiased at the time but the northwestern coast of Banks Island 
was not completely surveyed because of perceived conflicts with guided sport hunters in the area 
at that time, A coordinated, intensive mark and recapture study covering the whole of the 
Beaufort Sea and Amundsen Gulf was completed in  and a final analysis and report will 
follow. Until this new estimate is available, the previous estimate and quota will continue to be 
used for management purposes. The harvest is being closely monitored and appears to be 
sustainable (Stirling, pers. comm.) 

Recent analyses, using data from satellite tracking of female polar bears and new spatial 
modelling techniques, indicate the boundary between NB and the SB populations needs to be 
adjusted, probably expanding the area occupied by bears from NB and retracting that of SB 
(Amstrup et al. , Amstrup et al. ). 

The primary concerns for this population are from climate warming that continues to expand 
both the expanse and duration of open water in summer and fall, changing characteristics of 
atmospheric and oceanic transport of contaminants into the region, and possible inadvertent 
over-harvest of a population stressed or declining as a result of the previous threats. 

. Viscount Melville Sound (VM) 

A -year study of movements and size of the VM population, using telemetry and mark- 
recapture, was completed in  (Messier et al. , , Taylor et al. ). Population 
boundaries are based on observed movements of female polar bears with satellite radio-collars 
and movements of bears tagged in and out of the study area (Bethke et al. , Taylor et al. 

  b). The current population estimate of    was based on population data collected prior to 
 (Taylor et al. ). When quotas were originally allocated in the s, the size and 


 



 

productivity of the population was thought to be greater because they occurred in such a large 
geographic area. However, this area is characterized by heavy multi-year ice and low densities of 
ringed seals (Kingsley et al. ), and the productivity and density of polar bears was lower 
than initially expected. Consequently, quotas were reduced and a -year moratorium on hunting 
began in /. Hunting resumed in / with an annual quota of  bears. 

In , the former Northwest Territories was divided into two new territories: NWT and 
Nunavut, and resulted in the VM population being shared between the two jurisdictions. In 
/ the annual quota was increased to  bears (NWT - , Nunavut - ). The population is 
regarded as severely reduced in relation to historic population size (Aars et al. ). 

. Norwegian Bay (NW) 

The NW polar bear population is bounded by heavy multi-year ice to the west, islands to the 
north, east, and west, and polynyas to the south (Stirling , , Taylor et al. b, unpubl. 
data). From data collected during mark-recapture studies, and from satellite radio-tracking of 
adult female polar bears, it appears that most of the polar bears in this population are 
concentrated along the coastal tide cracks and ridges along the north, east, and southern 
boundaries (Taylor et al. b). The preponderance of heavy multi-year ice through most of the 
central and western areas has resulted in low densities of ringed seals (Kingsley et al.  ) and, 
consequently, low densities of polar bears. Based on preliminary data, the current estimate for 
this population based on data collected during - is  bears (Taylor et al., unpubl. 
data). Survival rate estimates for the NW population were derived from pooled Lancaster Sound 
(LS) and NW data because the populations are adjacent, and because the number of bears 
captured in Lancaster Sound was too small for reliable survival estimates. Recruitment estimates 
were derived from the standing age distribution (Taylor et al. ). The harvest quota for the 
