term, large-scale, human-induced changes are likely to interact with natural climate 
variability on time-scales of days to decades (e.g., the El Nino-Southern Oscillation 
(ENSO) phenomena). Temperature changes are expected to differ by region with 
high latitudes projected to warm more than the global average. However, the reli- 
ability of regional scale predictions is still low. Associated with these estimated 
changes in temperature, sea level is projected to increase by - cm by , 
caused primarily by thermal expansion of the oceans and the melting of glaciers. 
However, it should be noted that even when the atmospheric concentrations of 
greenhouse gases are stabilized, temperatures will continue to increase for several 
decades because of the thermal inertia of the climate system (temperature by an- 
other -%), and sea level for an even longer period of time (centuries to mil- 
lennia). 

Model calculations show that evaporation will be enhanced as the climate warms, 
and that there will be an increase in global mean precipitation and an increase in 
the frequency of intense rainfall. However, not all land-regions will experience an 
increase in precipitation, and even those land regions with increased precipitation 
may experience decreases in soil moisture, because of enhanced evaporation. Sea- 



 


sonal shifts in precipitation are also projected. In general, precipitation is projected 
to increase at high latitudes in winter, and soil moisture is projected to decrease 
in some mid-latitude continental regions during summer. The arid and semi-arid 
areas in Southern and Northern Africa, Southern Europe and the Middle East are 
expected to become drier. 

While the incidence of extreme temperature events, floods, droughts, soil moisture 
deficits, fires and pest outbreaks is expected to increase in some regions, it is un- 
clear whether there will be changes in the frequency and intensity of extreme 
weather events such as tropical storms, cyclones, and tornadoes. 

The Vulnerability of Human Health, Ecological Systems, and Socio-eco- 
nomic Sectors to Climate Change 

The IPCC has assessed the potential consequences of changes in climate for 
human health, ecological systems and socio-economic sectors for ten continental- or 
subcontinental-scale regions: Africa, Australasia, Europe, Latin America, Middle 
East and Arid Asia, North America, Polar regions, Small Island States, Temperate 
Asia, and Tropical Asia. Because of uncertainties associated with regional projec- 
tions of climate change, the IPCC assessed the vulnerability of these natural and 
social systems to changes in climate, rather than attempting to provide quantitative 
predictions of the impacts of climate change at the regional level. Vulnerability is 
defined as the extent to which a natural or social system is susceptible to sustaining 
damage from climate change, and is a function of the sensitivity of a system to 
changes in climate and the ability to adapt the system to changes in climate. Hence, 
a highly vulnerable system is one that is highly sensitive to modest changes in cli- 
mate and one for which the ability to adapt is severely constrained. 

Most impact studies have assessed how systems would respond to a climate 
change resulting from an arbitrary doubling of atmospheric carbon dioxide con- 
centrations. Very few have considered the dynamic responses to steadily increasing 
greenhouse gas concentrations; fewer yet have been able to examine the con- 
sequences of increases beyond a doubling of greenhouse gas concentrations or to as- 
sess the implications of multiple stress factors. 

The IPCC concluded that human health, terrestrial and aquatic ecological sys- 
tems, and socioeconomic systems (e.g., agriculture, forestry, fisheries, water re- 
sources, and human settlements), which are all vital to human development and 
well-being, are all vulnerable to changes in climate, including the magnitude and 
rate of climate change, as well as to changes in climate variability. Whereas many 
regions are likely to experience the adverse effects of climate change — some of which 
are potentially irreversible — some effects of climate change are likely to be bene- 
ficial. Hence, different segments of society can expect to confront a variety of 
changes and the need to adapt to them. 

There are a number of general conclusions that can be easily drawn: (i) human- 
induced climate change is an important new stress, particularly on ecological and 
socio-economic systems that are already affected by pollution, increasing resource 
demands, and non-sustainable management practices; (ii) the most vulnerable sys- 
tems are those with the greatest sensitivity to climate change and the least adapt- 
ability; (iii) most systems are sensitive to both the magnitude and rate of climate 
change; (iv) many of the impacts are difficult to quantify because existing studies 
are limited in scope; and (v) successful adaptation depends upon technological ad- 
vances, institutional arrangements, availability of financing and information ex- 
change, and that vulnerability increases as adaptation capacity decreases. There- 
fore, developing countries are more vulnerable to climate change than developed 
countries. 

The range of adaptation options for managed systems such as agriculture and 
water supply is generally increasing because of technological advances. However, 
some regions of the world, i.e., developing countries, have limited access to these 
technologies and appropriate information. The efficacy and cost-effectiveness of ad- 
aptation strategies will depend upon cultural, educational, managerial, institutional, 
legal and regulatory practices that are both domestic and international in scope. In- 
corporation of climate change concerns into resource-use and development decisions 
and plans for regularly scheduled investments in infrastructure will facilitate adap- 
tation. 

Let me now briefly discuss the implications of climate change for a representative 
number of systems: natural ecosystems (forests and coral reefs), food security, water 
resources, sea level rise, and human health. 

Natural Ecosystems — Forests 

The composition and geographic distribution of many ecosystems will shift as indi- 
vidual species respond to changes in climate, and there will likely be reductions in 



 


biological diversity (particularly species diversity) and in the goods and services eco- 
systems provide society, e.g., sources of food, fiber, medicines, recreation and tour- 
ism, and ecological services such as controlling nutrient cycling, Waste quality, 
water run-off, and soil erosion. Models project that as a consequence of possible 
changes in temperature and water availability under doubled carbon dioxide equi- 
librium conditions, a substantial fraction (a global average of one-third, varying by 
region from one-seventh in tropical forests to two-thirds in Boreal forests) of the ex- 
isting forested area of the world will undergo major changes in broad vegetation 
types. Climate change is expected to occur at a rapid rate relative to the speed at 
which forest species grow, reproduce and re-establish themselves. For mid-latitude 
regions a global average warming of -. °C over the next  years would be 
equivalent to a poleward shift of isotherms of approximately - km or an alti- 
tude shift of - meters. This compares to past tree species migration rates 
that are believed to be on the order of - km per century. Therefore, species 
composition of impacted forests is likely to change, entire forest types may dis- 
appear, while new assemblages of species and hence new forest ecosystems may be 
established. Large amounts of carbon could be released into the atmosphere during 
times of high forest mortality prior to regrowth of a mature forest. 

Natural Ecosystems — Coral Reefs 

Coral reefs, the most biologically diverse marine ecosystems, are important for 
fisheries, tourism, coastal protection, and erosion control. Coral reef systems, which 
are already being threatened by pollution, unsustainable tourism and fishing prac- 
tices, are very vulnerable to changes in climate. While these systems may be able 
to adapt to the projected increases in sea level, sustained increases in water tem- 
peratures of -°C above long-term average seasonal maxima over a -month period 
can cause significant coral mortality; short-term increases on the order of only - 
°C can cause “bleaching,” leading to reef destruction. Indications are that the full 
restoration of coral communities could require several centuries. 

Food Security 

Currently,  million people are malnourished; as the world’s population in- 
creases and incomes in some countries rise, food consumption is expected to double 
over the next three to four decades. Studies show that on the whole, global agricul- 
tural production could be maintained relative to baseline production in the face of 
climate change under doubled carbon dioxide equilibrium conditions. However, crop 
yields and changes in productivity due to climate change will vary considerably 
across regions and among localities, thus changing the patterns of production. In 
general, productivity is projected to increase in middle to high latitudes, depending 
on crop type, growing season, changes in temperature regime, and seasonality of 
precipitation, whereas in the tropics and subtropics, where some crops are near 
their maximum temperature tolerance and where dryland, non-irrigated agriculture 
