our understanding will undoubtedly change. But the picture at present is that we 
are indeed living in climatically unusual times, and that the future is likely to be 
even more unusual. 

Appendix . 

Tree ring data include both ring width and ring density variations. Records are 
available from all continental areas (except Antarctica) though most series are from 
outside the tropical regions. High latitude and high altitude trees generally provide 
estimates of past temperature; trees in dry regions generally provide estimates of 
past precipitation, though even in wetter areas, records of rainfall changes can 
sometimes be obtained. 

Ice cores provide many records of past climate but changes in oxygen isotopes in 
the ice, accumulation rate and (summer) melt conditions are of primary interest in 
examining recent centuries. In polar regions oxygen isotopes are generally consid- 
ered to be an indicator of annual temperature. Other useful climate indicators in- 
clude the fraction of a core containing ‘melt features’ (produced by the re-freezing 
of percolating surface melt water) which provides a useful index of summer tem- 
perature conditions, and accumulation rate changes, which indicate past snowfall 
amounts. 

Corals provide uniquely detailed records of sea-surface temperatures, from 
changes in the (temperature-dependent) oxygen isotopes in the carbonate skeletons 
of the corals. In some cases, salinity variation is the most important factor influ- 
encing isotope content, in which case the changes reflect precipitation and runoff 
from adjacent continental regions. 

Varved sediments, from both lake and marine environments, are annual layers 
that record past environmental conditions in the lake or oceanic region. There are 
few ocean areas where varved sediments are known to occur (generally upwelling 
coastal regions where there is little oxygen in the deep waters) but varved lake sedi- 
ments are found on all continents. Providing the records are clearly annual and a 
strong climatic signal can be demonstrated, these records can provide useful data 
from many regions of the world. 

Historical records can, potentially, provide seasonal estimates of past climate over 
wide geographic regions, though at present only European and East Asian sources 
have been adequately studied. 

Details of how these and other paleoclimate proxies are used to reconstruct past cli- 
mates can be found in the book “Paleoclimatology” by R.S. Bradley (, Academic 
Press). 

The Chairman. Dr. Christy, welcome. 



 


STATEMENT OF DR. JOHN R. CHRISTY, DIRECTOR, 
EARTH SYSTEM SCIENCE CENTER, UNIVERSITY OF ALABAMA 

Dr. Christy. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I am pleased to be here 
testifying before this Committee. 

By the way, I am from the University of Alabama in Huntsville. 
We do not have football team. Ice hockey, in fact, is our favorite 
sport. 

[Laughter.] 

Dr. Christy. Considering the varying levels of skepticism rep- 
resented on this panel, it would be apparent that I am very likely 
the witness that is most skeptical, but not agnostic, regarding our 
ability to predict future climate. And I hope to demonstrate why 
this is so. 

The universal feature of climate model projections of global tem- 
perature changes due to greenhouse gas increases is a rise in the 
temperature of the atmosphere from the surface to about , 
feet. 

This temperature rise itself is projected to be significant at the 
surface, with increasing magnitude as one rises in the atmosphere, 
which we call the troposphere. 

Over the past -years various calculations of surface tempera- 
ture, indeed, show a rise between . and . of a degree. This rep- 
resents about half of the total rise since the end of the th Cen- 
tury. 

In the troposphere, however, various estimates, which include 
satellite data that Dr. Roy Spencer of NASA and I produced, show 
only a very slight warming between . and . of a degree, a rate 
less than one-third that observed at the surface. 

So rather than seeing a rise in temperature that increases with 
altitude as climate models project, we see that in the real world 
since , the rise decreases substantially with altitude. 

The most recent modeling efforts which attempt to explain this 
disparity suggest that when some of the actual climate processes 
are factored in, and I emphasize “some,” such as the Mount 
Pinatubo eruption, the models looked like they came close to re- 
ality. 

On closer inspection of these studies, however, one finds that the 
apparent agreement was achieved only by comparing apples with 
oranges. The model experiments included some major processes, 
but not all major processes. 

When those additional processes were included, like real El 
Ninos, the climate models did not produce the observed global aver- 
age vertical temperature changes. In other words,  percent of the 
atmosphere is going in a direction not predicted by models. 

And that, in my view, is a significant missing piece of the climate 
puzzle that introduces considerable uncertainty of the models’ util- 
ity regarding predicting temperatures. 

Now, it is certainly possible that the inability of the climate mod- 
els to predict what happened over the past  years may only indi- 
cate that the climate experiences large natural fluctuations in the 
vertical temperature structure. 

However, this means that any attention drawn to the surface 
temperature rise for the past two decades must, I repeat must, also 



 


acknowledge the fact that  percent of the atmospheric mass that 
was projected to warm did not. 

This vertical temperature situation is a curious and unexplained 
issue regarding global average temperatures. But we do not live 
, feet in the atmosphere, and we do not live in a global aver- 
age. We live in a specific place, city, state, and so on. 

Local and regional projections of climate are very difficult and 
challenging. An example from North Alabama that I wanted to use 
here, only illustrates the difficulty in providing regional estimates 
of what might happen. 

A few climate models have attempted to reproduce the tempera- 
ture changes over the last  years, since the th century. These 
are complex models with solar changes, carbon dioxide increases, 
sulfate pollution, oceans, and so on. 

They indicate that since the ’s we in North Alabama should 
have experienced a warming of about two degrees. 

Observations show we have actually experienced a cooling of over 
two degrees. The models may have done fairly well at the global 
average surface temperature, and may have done acceptably well 
in several geographic locations, but my opinion in the southeast, is 
