
For those of you who have ever fished for striped bass, this is a 
magnificent fish. Striped bass is very susceptible here. Oysters the 
same. Two years ago, we saw a large dieback in the submerged 
aquatic vegetation in the shallows of the bay, temperature related. 
This is the crucial habitat for small crabs and fishes. 

As you go out onto the eastern shore, we see real threats to the 
food species for migratory birds that move up and down the Atlan- 
tic flyway. These are birds that just move through, but we are an 
important feeding stop. And when you move out onto the conti- 
nental shelf, there are numerous species that are now moving 
northwards in their distributions and into deeper water. This is 
well documented. My graduate students have done it, amongst 
many others. 



 


Across Virginia from the Appalachians to the intercontinental 
shelf, we are observing these changes. They can arguably be linked 
to global warming and we expect these trends to continue. As biolo- 
gists, those of us who are watching it, we are concerned. All of us, 
all of us as custodians of this rich natural resource should be con- 
cerned and support action to try and halt these trends. 

Thank you for the opportunity to comment. 

Senator Lieberman. Thank you very much. Dr. Mann. Excellent 
testimony. 

We now welcome David Stalling. Mr. Stalling is the Western 
Field Coordinator of Tout Unlimited. He lives and works in Mis- 
soula, MT. As part of Trout Unlimited’s public lands initiative, Mr. 
Stalling helps to inform and rally hunters and anglers to protect 
public wildlands for the American west. 

Mr. Stalling, my original text here in introducing you now says 
“Mr. Stalling is a former Marine.” I know there is no such thing 
as a former Marine. 

[Laughter.] 

Senator Lieberman. So you are a Marine and an avid fisherman 
and bow hunter. Mr. Stalling has been hunting elk in Montana’s 
back country for more than  years. He has written hundreds of 
articles on elk, elk hunting, conservation, wildlife management and 
natural history. Perhaps you have an avid reader of some of your 
articles to my right here. 

He recently contributed a chapter to the Wildlife Management 
Institute volume “North American Elk: Ecology and Management.” 
It is a pleasure to have you here, and we look forward to your testi- 
mony now. 

STATEMENT OF DAVID H. STALLING, WESTERN FIELD 
COORDINATOR, TROUT UNLIMITED 

Mr. Stalling. Thank you. Senator. 

Senator Warner. Would you indulge me a minute? 

Mr. Stalling. Yes. 

Senator Warner. I hosted a breakfast for the Commandant of 
the Marine Corps right above this room this morning for about  
people. Were you present? 

Mr. Stalling. I was not. Senator. 

Senator Warner. Then your absence should be noted. Thank 
you, Mr. Chairman. 

[Laughter.] 

Mr. Stalling. Thank you for this opportunity, but more impor- 
tantly, thank you for taking on this vital issue and trying to find 
immediate solutions. 

As mentioned, I am not a scientist, I am not a wildlife biologist. 
However, I am an avid hunter and angler and backpacker, and I 
spend a lot of time out in the wilds, particularly in Montana, and 
know the wilds there well, and spend a lot of time among the hunt- 
ers and anglers of Montana and other places in the west. 

I cherish these wild places. I am very passionate about protecting 
them. That is what brought me to Montana when I left the Marine 
Corps in , and it is what keeps me in Montana. It is also what 
keeps me fighting for their protection. And as mentioned, I do orga- 
nize hunters and anglers throughout the west to help protect wet- 



 


lands. I am also the past president of the Montana Wildlife Federa- 
tion, which is Montana’s oldest and largest conservation organiza- 
tion. And I volunteer for the National Wildlife Federation, in addi- 
tion to working for Trout Unlimited. Prior to that I worked for the 
Rocky Mountain Elk Foundation in Missoula. 

The scientific evidence regarding global warming, and in my 
writing, I try to make the connection for people to understand the 
connection between good science and good wildlife management. So 
I do read a lot of the science, even though I am not a scientist. It 
seems the evidence regarding global warming is conclusive and 
overwhelming. Those of us closest to the land are seeing some of 
this first-hand, some of the things that scientists have been warn- 
ing us about for years. 

Two summers ago I took a leave of absence from work, and I 
hiked from my front porch in Missoula, Montana all the way to 
Waterton, Alberta. It took me eight weeks. It was about  miles, 
through some pretty wild country. I only crossed three roads. I 
went through the Bob Marshall, the Scapegoat, the Great Bear 
Wilderness, the Mission Mountain Wilderness, Glacier National 
Park and on up into Canada. I saw grizzly bears, heard wolves, 
saw mountain lion tracks, saw a lot of elk and mule deer. This 
country has some of the wildest country left in the lower , some 
of the best hunting and fishing and back country opportunities left 
in the world, I think. 

And even back here, in some of this most remote wild, precious 
country, I saw some of the things first-hand that scientists have 
been warning us about. A lot of the streams and rivers back there 
are very low and drying out. Trout were congregated in pools 
where they were very lethargic and having trouble with the heat 
of the summer and more susceptible to predation. 

I walked through large swaths of forest that were affected by 
pine beetle and saw where there large, intense fires that were be- 
yond what historically occurred and did a lot of damage. I also saw 
a lot of dead and dying white bark pines up in the alpine country, 
which I am told is a critical food source for grizzly bears. 

So I saw a lot of stuff, and of course, when I went through Gla- 
cier National Park at the end of my journey, I could see obvious 
declines in the size of the glaciers there. I have a picture of me and 
my father being up at some of those glaciers  years ago, and was 
able to compare some of those photos with photos I took during this 
trip. A lot of park rangers and scientists are now predicting those 
glaciers will be completely gone within  years. 

And I am not the only hunter and angler talking about this and 
seeing these changes. I talk to hunters and anglers throughout 
Montana who are saying the same thing. And as Senator Lieber- 
man referred to earlier, the National Wildlife Commission just com- 
