
Major declines in sea-ice habitat will also likely result in a decline in polar bear abundance over 
time due to reduced availability of prey (Derocher et al. ). The effects of declining ice 
habitat on seals will vary depending on the location, timing and extent of reductions. It is 
possible that reduced ice cover and increased open water periods with warmer water will 
enhance primary productivity and promote growth of fishes and invertebrates preyed upon by 
ringed and bearded seals. Increased food sources for seals may increase seal physical condition 
and contribute to higher productivity. While these effects may have some initial benefits for 
polar bears, Derocher et at. () believe that they will be transitory in their timing and with 
increased area and duration of open water, polar bears will have reduced access to prey during 
critical periods of the year. Ultimately productivity of ringed seals is likely to diminish and their 
distribution change over time. The Arctic food web is driven by the complex interactions 
between ice, light penetration, nutrient supply, and productivity (Tynan and DeMaster , 
Rosing-Asvid , Grebmeier et al. ). Due to the Arctic Ocean’s relatively low species 
diversity, it may be particularly vulnerable to trophic-level alterations caused by global warming 

(Derocher et al. ). Grebmeier et al. ( p. ) found that a major ecosystem shift is 

 



 


occurring in the Northern Bering Sea which is indicated by decrease in benthic prey populations, 
which could affect Pacific walrus and bearded seal populations, an increase in pelagic fish, a 
reduction in sea ice, and an increase in the air and sea water temperatures. Arctic cod 
(Boreogadus saida), one of the primary prey species of ringed seals, is strongly associated with 
sea ice throughout its range and makes use of the underside of the ice to escape from predators 
(Gaston et al. ). It is therefore likely that a decrease in seasonal ice cover could have adverse 
effects on Arctic cod (Tynan and DeMaster , Gaston et al. ). It is uncertain if other 
forage fish species will pioneer into open water habitats and provide seals with alternate forage 
species (Derocher et al, ). 

Ringed seals are the primary prey of the polar bear in most areas, though bearded seals, walrus, 
harbor seals {Phoca vilulina), harp seals, hooded seals, and beluga whales are sometimes taken 
and may be locally important to some populations (Stirling and Archibald , Smith , 
Smith , Iverson et al. ). A study of seal prey consumed by polar bears in three major 
regions of the Canadian arctic: Davis Strait; Western Hudson Bay; and the Beaufort Sea, 
revealed that diets differed among the regions, and within the region for Davis Strait. In the 
Beaufort Sea ringed seals comprised % of diet. In Western Hudson Bay ringed seals 
accounted for % of the diet in the early  s indicating important foraging in ice covered 
habitat. Ringed seal consumption declined later in the s concurrent with earlier ice breakup, 
and the proportion of bearded and harbor seals increased, both species are less reliant on ice than 
ringed seals. Throughout Davis Strait, harp seals comprised % of bears’ diet, consistent with 
the increase in harp seal populations in this region. Off southern Labrador near the whelping 
patch, harp seals comprised % of diets and in northern Davis Strait, near a major whelping 
patch, hooded seals made up the majority of the diet (Iverson et al. , Stirling and Parkinson 
). Polar bears have been observed using terrestrial food items such as blueberries, snow 
geese, and reindeer, but researchers do not believe that these alternate foods represent significant 
sources of energy (Derocher et al. ). Further, the inefficiency of polar bear locomotion noted 
above likely explains why polar bears are not known to hunt musk oxen (Ovibos moschatus) or 
snow geese {Anser caerulescens), potential prey species that co-occur with the polar bear in 


 



 


many areas (Lunn and Stirling ). The energy needed to catch such species would almost 
certainly exceed the amount of energy a kill would provide (Stirling ). 

Polar bear populations are known to fluctuate based on prey availability (Stirling and Lunn 
). During the winters of - and -, ringed and bearded seal numbers in the 
Beaufort Sea dropped by about % and productivity by about %, apparently in response to 
severe ice conditions (Stirling , Stirling ). Numbers and productivity of polar bears also 
declined markedly in response (Stirling , Stirling ). A similar reduction in seal 
productivity, with a subsequent decline in polar bear productivity, occurred in the mid-.s as 
well (Stirling and ritsland , Stirling ). 

Stirling and ritsland () calculated that a hypothetical polar bear population containing 
 , bears would need approximately ,-, ringed seals per year for all bears to meet 
their nutritive requirements. Kingsley () estimated that the polar bears in Baffin Bay and 
associated waters (N= ca. ) would need to eat , to , ringed seals per year to 
sustain themselves. In the absence of solid data, it has generally been assumed that seal 
populations occur at high numbers and are relatively stable and that there are enough ringed seals 
to fulfill the needs of both polar bears and Inuit hunters (Ferguson et al. ). However, one 
study found an unexpectedly low pregnancy rate and proportion of young-of-the-year among 
ringed seals in an open water sample from Arviat in - (Holst et al. , Ferguson et al. 
), and a follow up study with data from - also found a lower than expected 
pregnancy rate and proportion of young-of-the-year. These results indicate that ringed seal 
recruitment may be in decline, and that ultimately ringed seal populations, and therefore food 
availability for polar bears, may decline as well (Stirling ). 

Ice-associated seals, including the ringed seal, may be particularly vulnerable to habitat toss from 
changes in the extent or concentration of Arctic ice because they depend on pack-ice habitat for 
pupping, foraging, molting, and resting (Tynan and DeMaster , ACIA , Derocher et al. 
). The southern edge of ringed seal ranges may also shift north, because ringed seals stay 
with the ice as it annually advances and retreats (Tynan and DeMaster  ). Whether ringed 


 



 


seals will continue to move north with retreating ice over the deeper less productive Arctic Basin 
waters and whether forage fishes that they prey on will also move north is uncertain. Increased 
amounts of open water may reduce the hunting efficiency of polar bears because seals may 
become less restrained by their need to maintain breathing holes and haul-out sites and thus 
become less predictable for foraging bears (Derocher et al. ). Bears have only rarely been 
reported to capture a ringed seal in open water (Fumell and Oolooyuk ), so it is unlikely that 
hunting in ice-free water would compensate for loss of ice access to ringed seals (Derocher et al. 
). It is unlikely that increased take of other species such as bearded seals, walrus, or harbor 
seals, even where they are available, could or would compensate for reduced availability of 
ringed seals (Derocher et al. ). 

It has been suggested that several species of seals which currently occur al the southern edge of 
the range of polar bears could expand northward. In the north Pacific this could include the 
harbor seal, spotted seal (Phoca largha) and the ribbon seal (Phoca fasciata). In the north 
Atlantic, harp (Phoca greenlandica) and hooded seals (Cryslophora cristatd) could expand 
northward and come into contact with polar bears particularly if the whelping grounds move to 
more northern latitudes (Derocher et al. ). However harp and hooded seals are also 
dependent on the sea ice and thus may also be reduced. Bom (a) reported on the potential 
effects as follows: 

Early ice break-up in years with “light” ice conditions may also influence other ice- 
breeding pinniped than ringed seals. Extremely small sized  year-class ofharp seals 
in eastern Canada and high juvenile mortality from starvation and cold stress was likely 
due to light ice conditions during  (Sergeant ) indicating that early ice breakup 
at the harp seal whelping patches may lead to increased mortality (Johnston et al. ). 
One may speculate if early ice break-up may also negatively influence other ice breeding 
pinnipeds like the ribbon and spotted seals in the Bering Strait region. 

Yearly variation in sea ice cover may have significant effects on harp and hooded seals. 

In light ice years the quantity of ice that is appropriate for whelping can be greatly 

 



 


reduced, and female seals may crowd into whelping areas and produce pups in high 
densities (Johnston et ai. ). It has been suggested that such crowding may increase 
the risks of disease transmissions and subsequently the risk of epizootics (Fay ) but 
the effects of crowding at the harp and hooded seal whelping patches are largely 
unknown (Johnston et al. ). Repeated years (, , , and ) with little 
or no ice in the Gulf of St. Lawrence resulted in years with almost zero production of 
harp seal pups, compared to hundreds of thousands in good ice years (ACIA ). 
Hooded seals may shift to heavier ice for whelping. Shifts in the more northerly whelping 
areas reportedly occur during periods or warmer climate and diminished ice (Burns 
