search and Advisory Services at the Virginia Institute of Marine 
Services, School of Marine Science, which is the College of William 
and Mary’s professional graduate school in marine science. Dr. 
Mann is a marine ecologist who focuses on oysters, clams and 
invasive species in the Chesapeake Bay. He has been a researcher 
examining natural ecosystems and their management for both eco- 
logical services and sustained harvests of commercially valuable 
products for over  years. We are delighted to have you here and 
look forward to your testimony now. Dr. Mann. 

Senator Warner. Would you indulge me, Mr. Chairman? 

Senator Lieberman. Excuse me, I yield to my friend from Vir- 
ginia. 

Senator Warner. I want to welcome my constituent. The one 
thing that this witness has at his immediate disposal is one of the 
most precious and largest ecosystems in all of our United States, 
our Chesapeake Bay. The Congress has, year after fear, tried to 
support the rehabilitation of that system. And subject to his con- 
currence, I will give you my own opinion, having introduced with 
Senator Mathias, a long-time colleague here in the Senate, the ini- 
tial legislation to try and reverse the trends in the Bay, we simply 
have not made any real, significant success. The Bay has continued 
to decline. 

So you have a built-in laboratory within a stone’s throw of where 
you are living your life in that magnificent community of Williams- 
burg, VA. So I thank this witness for taking the time to go up here 
through wind, sleet and snow this morning to joint us. 

Senator Lieberman. Thanks, Senator Warner. 

Dr. Mann. 



 


STATEMENT OF ROGER MANN, DIRECTOR FOR RESEARCH 
AND ADVISORY SERVICES, SCHOOL OF MARINE SCIENCE, 
VIRGINIA INSTITUTE OF MARINE SCIENCE, COLLEGE OF 
WILLIAM AND MARY 

Mr. Mann. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you, Senator 
for those kind words. The Chesapeake Bay is indeed a national 
treasure and we should do whatever we can to ensure that it stays 
pure. 

I have been a researcher examining these natural systems, as 
was mentioned, for over  years. While my primary focus has been 
estuarine and coastal systems, it is really quite difficult to imagine 
how you can look at those without also examining and coming to 
understand the complexity of the watersheds that provide the riv- 
ers that flow into those systems. 

So indeed, in order to do my job, I have to know something about 
all the way to the feet of the Appalachians. Today I am going to 
talk to you with a regional focus on the Commonwealth of Virginia. 
As the Senator mentioned, the current worldwide projections for in- 
crease in temperature over the next century go between  and  
degrees Fahrenheit. All of these are based on models, and one of 
the things that is difficult about these large, global models is that 
when you try to look at small regional levels, they sometimes don’t 
work quite as well in terms of predictions. 

So when we look at the issue with Virginia, our predictions go 
anywhere from a  to  to  degree rise, or even one model that 
I’ve seen that goes as far as  degrees, very substantial changes. 
What is also bad about these models is they are not quite as good 
as predicting rainfall as they are looking at temperature, and real- 
ly the two go together. So I have seen instances where we get drier 
conditions, wetter conditions, wetter conditions with more rain in 
the spring but less in the fall, or those combined with more tumul- 
tuous events like hurricanes. So there are lots of things on the pal- 
ette here. Nearly all of them are bad. 

If you look at the whole issue and ask one question, is fresh 
water important, it is absolutely seminal. Fresh water affects ev- 
erything that happens in wildlife. So when we look at these models, 
all of them are cause for concern. 

Virginia is indeed an excellent example as a laboratory to look 
at this, not just because of the Chesapeake Bay. But if you take 
a short walk across Virginia, you go from the Appalachians, 
through its foothills and the forests, through the rich areas of agri- 
cultural land into the freshwater marshes, into the salty estuaries 
that feed into the Chesapeake Bay with its salt marches, out into 
the continental areas where you see barrier islands and indeed, out 
onto the shallow continental shelf itself 
This is a relatively small transact when one looks at it with re- 
spect to the size of this country. But when one looks at the animal 
and plant communities that exist along it, there is remarkable di- 
versity. There is diversity in the east-west and the north-south di- 
rection. And the changes, as you look at these communities going 
one to the next, the biogeographic regions, the borders between 
them are all very subject to climate change. They will indeed move, 
as was described by Dr. Lovejoy. And in fact, we are watching 
those movements. 



 


Again, perhaps to be a little repetitive, if there is one message 
that I can leave you today, just one, it is that destabilizing the 
habitat relationships between all of these animal and plant species 
that live in these single communities, then if you destabilize them, 
there is a potential domino effects. You take out one species or you 
alter it, then it affects the next species and then the next and then 
the next. 

So often the sort of signals that you do see and will see from cli- 
mate change are not necessarily those that affect every species, but 
they start with this one small step. Probably the best analogy I can 
find is that of a spider’s web, where all parts contribute to stability 
and function. But if you break a limited number of the strands, the 
web is weakened. You only have to break a few more before the 
thing starts to disassemble very quickly. It is actually, I think, a 
fairly good analogy. And in talking to many of my colleagues who 
work with wildlife throughout the Commonwealth of Virginia, their 
concern is that we are starting to pick away at individual threads 
in this web. 

Again, if we take that quick walk across Virginia and we ask 
what are the predicted impacts, some of which we already have evi- 
dence for, but some of which we also expect, they go from the Appa- 
lachians to the coastal shelf. This is a quick list, and it is fright- 
ening: a higher prevalence of forest fires; increased impacts of in- 
sects on forest resources; fragmentation of the forest itself, which 
has considerable problems for the birds and wildlife; increased dis- 
placement of native plants by invasive species and forest fresh- 
water wetlands and managed agriculture. 

That comment came from people who work in forestry and in ag- 
riculture many times. It is not just my particular bias towards 
invasive species. 

Changes in the nutritional value of farm crops. There is a lot of 
wildlife that eat farmed crops, as well as we do. Changes in river 
flow and water quality impact on freshwater fishes in both the riv- 
ers and in the lakes. Increased low dissolved oxygen seasonal dead 
zones in the Chesapeake Bay. This is truly frightening. Large parts 
of the deeper waters in the Chesapeake Bay have no oxygen in the 
summer. This is projected to get worse. It forces animals out of 
these deep water areas into the shallows where it is warmer. The 
end product is that they become more susceptible to diseases and 
we do see increasing diseases in both the fish populations. 
