in the cost of gasoline. In fact, even then, the cost of gasoline in 
the United States would be much less than it is in Europe and in 
most other places around the world. 

But if we did that and it was a certainty that it was going to 
happen, then because the lifetime of a car is less than  years, 
the next time people went to buy a car, they would think twice 
about the energy-efficiency of the car that they are buying. 

And it is this kind of thing that would enable people to plan 
ahead in a reasonable fashion and adapt to the changes in tax pol- 
icy. And of course, you can use the increases in taxes to offset other 
taxes, so that it is tax-neutral. This kind of activity is the kind of 
thing which I think emphasizes the point I make in my comment 
that it is not what you do, it is how you do it. 

Dr. Watson. Yes. I think one needs to look at all facts of this. 
There is no simple home run here. One needs to look at the tech- 



 


nology on both energy supply and energy demand. So, efficient ve- 
hicles, efficient housing, and more efficient industry can help. 

On energy supply, you can have more efficient use of fossil fuels. 
It does not mean the elimination of fossil fuels — more efficient pro- 
duction of energy from fossil fuels. 

You can have fuel switching, from coal to gas. One should think 
renewable energy. 

The policy issues are very, very important policy reform. There 
is no question. And Kevin is absolutely right. We must do this in 
the economically least disruptive manner, which means we need a 
long-time perspective. 

Just like the sulphur market, when there was a decision by Con- 
gress to reduce sulphur emissions in the U.S. The most important 
thing they did, did not actually involve new technologies, but it was 
the emissions training system that was put in place. 

So, one could actually stimulate a market — in this case, on car- 
bon — so that both domestically and internationally, you can buy 
and sell carbon as a commodity. That will absolutely drive down 
the price. 

So, one needs to look at both the technology, but also the policy 
framework. And I think that one should — and of course, as you, 
yourself, have mentioned, I think there is a significant opportunity 
through better forest management, better agricultural manage- 
ment, better rangeland management. 

And so, again, thinking through the policies that might stimulate 
the farmer to move toward no-till agriculture. What do we do with 
some of the degraded lands? It could actually be very useful land 
for either afforestation or reforestation or just simply to improve 
soil carbon. We must not lose the potential in soil carbon. 

My view would be, do not move for one simple home run solution, 
but look right across the wide variety of options, both in tech- 
nologies and in policies. 

Senator Brownback. Dr. Watson, when you look internationally 
on the issues of carbon sequestration in the construction of the — 
some of the forests in areas, do you think that that is a key compo- 
nent of — as well as to look at this issue, or is it not a major issue? 

You have mentioned the complexity of this and the multifaceted 
solution that is going to be required, if we are going to try to pull 
more carbon out of the atmosphere. Regardless of how it got there, 
regardless of what may be some of its impact in the future, we 
want to get some of this CO  out of the atmosphere. And we could, 
I think, most would agree on that. 

What do you see, as that component of it on the international 
scale? 

Dr. Watson. Today we put about . billion tons of carbon per 
year into the atmosphere from using energy. And from tropical de- 
forestation, we put somewhere around . billion tons of carbon per 
year. So, from a total of .,  percent comes from tropical defor- 
estation. 

Therefore, slowing tropical deforestation is a major component to 
acting to protect the earth’s climate system. It would also have in- 
credible benefits to the biodiversity and water resources in those 
regions. But it is unbelievably political. 



 


I chaired the recent IPCC report and part of my testimony is on 
land use, land use change in forestry. And what we see from many 
developing countries — and this is a political, not a scientific issue — 
is that they are willing to think through issues of afforestation and 
reforestation, and issues such as no-till agriculture. 

But Brazil, in particular, is absolutely opposed to including 
avoided deforestation into the Kyoto Protocol through the Clean 
Development Mechanism Article . It is a political issue. It has to 
do with the Federal/state government relationships, that is to say 
the interplay between the Federal Government and the state gov- 
ernments in Brazil. It is a question of whether or not, if you avoid 
deforestation in one part of Brazil, it will accelerate it in another 
part of Brazil. 

So, you have to understand the drivers behind deforestation, in 
order to say that you can actually stop deforestation. You need to 
know all the underlying political and technical and industrial fac- 
tors that drive it. 

But there is no question in my mind that if we can slow deforest- 
ation in the tropics, and if we can accelerate afforestation and re- 
forestation, both in the tropics and high latitudes, it would be a 
major contribution to climate change and to save the world’s bio- 
logical diversity. 

Senator Brownback. On the afforestation and reforestation, 
would we not actually affix or sequester more carbon if we — if our 
policies actually focused in that direction, avoiding some of the po- 
litical issues that you have identified? 

Dr. Watson. Yes. On afforestation or reforestation — forests grow 
slowly, but surely, over the next , ,  years, depending on 
the lifetime of the forest, you would sequester carbon. And there 
is no question it is a very good thing. But if you can avoid deforest- 
ation, it stops a big slug of carbon going into the atmosphere. 

And of course, if one is trying to avoid deforestation in the trop- 
ics, one could argue there are national sovereignty issues at stake, 
as well. 

I think we need the dialogue right across the world on all of 
these issues simultaneously. We have got to recognize political sen- 
sitivity, but we also need to recognize that avoiding deforestation 
is a powerful tool to keep the carbon where it is. 

Afforestation and reforestation will draw additional carbon from 
the atmosphere, but avoiding deforestation stops it going in, in the 
first place. 

Senator Brownback. Dr. Trenberth. 

Dr. Trenberth. Senator, you were asking especially about the 
sequestration of carbon dioxide, and there is also new technology, 
