


 


. 



YEAR 

Figure  . Mean annual temperatures for the northern hemisphere since A.D. . 
Values are shown as anomalies from the average for - (from M.E. Mann, 
R.S. Bradley and M.K. Hughes, : Geophysical Research Letters, v., p.- 
). 


In spite of the uncertainties that such a global reconstruction entails, the recon- 
structed record (of mean annual temperature for the northern hemisphere) shows 
that temperatures slowly declined over the millennium, with especially cold condi- 
tions in the th, th and th centuries. This colder period is generally referred 
to as the “Little Ice Age,” when glaciers advanced in most mountainous regions of 
the world. However, the downward trend changed abruptly to a strong warming 
trend early in the th century and this rate of warming was unprecedented in the 
last  years. The warming continued through the s making that decade the 
warmest in at least  years; indeed,  was arguably the warmest year of the 
millennium, and  was only slightly cooler. 

What can this longer perspective on temperature tell us about natural cli- 
mate variability? By comparing it with the records of factors that may have af- 
fected temperature, it is apparent that variations of solar irradiance (the total en- 
ergy emitted by the sun), major explosive eruptions and perhaps changes in the po- 
sition of the earth in relation to the sun (slight orbital variations) were responsible 
for much of the variability of temperatures leading up to the th century. However, 
these “natural” effects were completely overwhelmed in the th century by the in- 
creasing effect of greenhouse gases. Human effects on climate system variability 
now appear to dominate over natural factors. If variations in “natural” forcings in 
the future are similar to those of the last millennium, it is unlikely that they will 
be of great importance since climatic changes will be mainly affected by anthropo- 
genic (human-induced) increases in greenhouse gases. 

What significance does the paleo-record of temperature have for future 
climate? An important conclusion from our long-term climate studies is that until 
the second half of the th century, temperatures generally remained within .°C 
(~°F) of the average for - (the arbitrary baseline we used in our studies). 
The latest IPCC model-based projections of future climate point to a temperature 
increase of . to .°C (- to °F) above  levels by . Clearly, these esti- 
mates have large uncertainties, but it is important to note that even the lowest 
value would be far beyond the range of temperatures in the last millennium. If 
these estimates are even close to being correct, we are heading into uncharted wa- 
ters relative to the climate of the last  years. 

Why should we be concerned about global contamination of the atmos- 
phere and future changes in climate? Earlier, I noted that the levels of two im- 
portant greenhouse gases (carbon dioxide and methane) were now higher than at 
any time in the last , years (Figure ). In fact, this conclusion is based on 
measurements from the longest ice core record available (from the Russian Vostok 
station in Antarctica) but it is likely that current levels are higher than at any time 
for several million years. To put this in perspective, recall that it was only , 
years ago that human society first developed agriculture, and , years ago 
sabre-toothed tigers roamed what is now Trafalgar Square. Yet carbon dioxide levels 



 


have risen from fairly steady background levels (~ppmv) to present day levels 
(ppmv) in a little over a century. This rate of change has no parallel in the his- 
torical past, just as temperatures recorded in the late th century were unprece- 
dented. Most of the change in CO  and other greenhouse gases resulted from the 
growth of world population and the insatiable demand for fossil fuel-based energy. 
Given that world population will almost certainly double within the lifetime of those 
currently in kindergarten, unless something is done to curb the use of fossil fuel 
consumption, it seems very likely that significant changes in climate will occur in 
the near future. 


GrsenhouseGat Record hom the Vostok Ice Core 



Figure . Changes in atmospheric carbon dioxide and methane levels in the atmos- 
phere over the last , years (from gas bubbles trapped in an ice core, from 
Vostok, Antarctica). 


Should we be concerned that the climate may change significantly in the 
future? Here I have focused exclusively on changes in temperature, but tempera- 
ture change is only one component of our overall climate system. Changes in tem- 
perature are associated with variations in rainfall and the amounts of snow, shifts 
in storm tracks and hurricanes etc. From the record of past climate, we know that 
a relatively small overall change in global temperature can have significant environ- 
mental effects. The “Little Ice Age” was characterized by dramatic changes in ice 
cover in mountain regions throughout the world. But historical records from lowland 
areas of Europe also document more extensive snow cover, longer periods when riv- 
ers and lakes were frozen over and frequent cold, wet summers, with disastrous con- 
sequences for agriculture, leading to social disruption and political upheavals. Such 
changes all occurred with an overall change in average hemispheric temperature of 
less than °F. Of course, in trying to anticipate the effects of future climate change, 
we are looking at the consequences of warmer, not colder conditions but the implica- 
tion is the same — even a small shift in average global or hemispheric temperature, 
with its associated changes in atmospheric circulation, rainfall patterns etc., can be 
highly disruptive to society. We have seen many examples of such anomalies in re- 
cent decades, yet temperatures, though warm, were nowhere near the levels that 
may be reached later in this century. These include extremes in rainfall, leading to 
catastrophic flooding in some areas, and droughts, exceptional wildfires and histori- 
cally low lake levels elsewhere, as well as an increase in windstorms and other 
weather-related disasters. Unusual weather events are becoming less uncommon, 
impacting agriculture, transportation and commercial activity. Of course, such dis- 
asters have always occurred to some extent, but the frequency of extremes has in- 
creased in recent years throughout the world, leading major insurance companies 
to express grave concerns about their exposure to these unprecedented risks (note 




 


that these risks are in addition to the costs due to increased development). Munich 
Re, one of the world’s largest re-insurance firms recently reported: 

“ fits exactly into the long-term pattern of increasing losses from natural ca- 
tastrophes . . . insured losses came to $bn. This is the second highest figure 
ever recorded . . . windstorms were responsible for % of the insured losses 
while earthquakes accounted for %, floods %, and other events like forest 
fires, frost, and heat waves around % ... In view of the fact that the signs 
of climate change and all its related effects are becoming more and more discern- 
ible ... if .. . meteorological extremes like torrential rain, windstorms, and 
heat waves continue to increase and the rise in sea level accelerates, many re- 
gions of the world will be in immediate danger ...” 

Can we be certain that future climate will involve unprecedented risks? 

Some argue that processes within the climate system will act to compensate for the 
effects of higher greenhouse gas levels (so-called negative feedback effects). Accord- 
ing to this scenario, these feedbacks will help maintain the climatic status quo ena- 
bling us to continue to contaminate the atmosphere ad infinitum. There is a small 
chance that such critics are right, in which case it would be safe to do nothing. But 
they may be completely wrong, and indeed the scientific consensus is that they are 
wrong. Political decisions inevitably involve assessing risk and weighing the con- 
sequences of action versus inaction. Just as Congress must decide if the (perhaps 
small) risk of a rogue nation launching a nuclear missile at the United States (re- 
sulting in a catastrophe) is worth avoiding by spending large sums of money on a 
space defense system, so it must weigh the potentially catastrophic environmental 
and commercial consequences of future global warming against the costs of curbing 
fossil fuel consumption to reduce these risks. Scientists cannot provide Congress 
with a certain forecast of the future and as research on global warming continues, 
