I would also say that if we think we might be comfy in our part 
of the country because it is getting a little warmer, and maybe we 
can grow crops a little more easily, there are other parts of the 
world are becoming destabilized, people are dying from the spread 
of disease that could well be caused by climate change, or signifi- 
cant coastal regions that are increasingly densely populated around 



 


the world are going under water, if we think that is a world in 
which we all could live comfortably, then I think we need to look 
much more carefully at the implications for climate change. 

Senator Kerry. Thank you, Doctor. 

Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

The Chairman. I just want to say, Senator Kerry, I thank you 
for your involvement and many years on this issue. I am a relative 
newcomer. I appreciate what you have done for many years and 
your participation on this issue, and these hearings are very impor- 
tant. 

And I would like to add again, that I think we have tried to find 
a balanced second panel that represent a variety of views on this 
issue, and I think that is the best way we can be educated on this 
issue. 

Senator Brownback. 

STATEMENT OF HON. SAM BROWNBACK, 

U.S. SENATOR FROM KANSAS 

Senator Brownback. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, and 
I want to congratulate you for once again taking leadership on an 
important and tough topic in typical McCain fashion, grabbing a 
hold and saying, “Here is something that is tough to do, and let us 
get after it.” And I applaud you very much and hope you hold a 
series of hearings on this. 

And I also thank Senator Kerry for his leadership for a long time 
on this topic as well. 

Dr. Lane, you have made comments on a number of issues here. 
I have got your testimony and caught the end of it, but I want to 
focus on specifically the issue of CCL in the air, carbon dioxide in 
the air. And apparently, there are some scientific questions that re- 
main out here. There are a number of them that are resolved and 
understood, and I think there is unanimity on agreement that 
there is too much CO in the air. Is there anybody that disagrees 
with that point? 

Dr. Lane. You could probably find somebody, but I think that the 
consensus is precisely as you stated it. 

Senator Brownback. And that you have in your statements the 
factual — the loading of CO that is in the air and what has oc- 
curred there. And I am a relative newcomer to this topic as well, 
but as I have looked at it, I thought, we can disagree on a lot of 
things, but here is one that I think everybody agrees. 

You may disagree about how it all got there, or how you pull it 
out of the air, or some things like that, but there is too much CO, 
and it would be better if we had less in the air. And everybody 
would agree to that, or I guess, most would, although as Senator 
Kerry was talking about how he looked forward to the winter and 
playing ice hockey, I was sitting here thinking I was out cutting 
holes in the ice to water cattle, and I did not like that, as thick 
as it got. 

It is not that I am saying we should have global warming. I do 
not agree with that. I am not for global warming, but we just did 
not play the ice hockey. I had to cut ice holes. 

[Laughter.] 



 


Senator Brownback. I put forward a bill along with Senator 
Kerrey from Nebraska that tries to get more carbon sequestration 
taking place in agriculture in this country, a domestic component. 
And we have got an international component we are putting for- 
ward of trying to have more carbon sequestration taking place 
internationally; the international component by tax credits, the do- 
mestic component by carbon payments to farmers along the model 
of the CRP, the Conservation Reserve Program style. 

It seems to me that if we all agree that we have too much C  
in the air — and you can kind of disagree about “Here is the impact, 
or this is how it got there.” If you just step past that one and say, 
“We have got too much C  in the air. How do we get it out,” here 
are a couple of ways of doing that. 

And the research is coming along pretty well on no till farming, 
different biomass cropping practices of their ability to sequester 
carbon in the soil. The research is pretty good on the amount of 
carbon that has been released from U.S. soil over the years of our 
agricultural practices so that — we know it has the capacity to fix 
it back, because at one time it had a higher degree of carbon in the 
soil. And we know that as well internationally from a number of 
the forests that have been uprooted, that if you started or re-in- 
stilled those forests, or did not take them down in the first place, 
you would be releasing less carbon into the atmosphere. 

I would like your thoughts about those two approaches on ad- 
dressing the issue of carbon sequestration and taking carbon out of 
the atmosphere. 

Dr. Lane. Senator, this is clearly a very important issue on 
which a great deal of progress has been made in understanding the 
science, but there is much more to do. 

There is, in the Fiscal Year  budget, a significant initiative 
this year and last, for the part of the U.S. Global Change Research 
Program focused on carbon sequestration. It is one of the ways that 
we expect that we will be able to remove carbon from the atmos- 
phere. 

The second thing I might say here is that the recent IPCC report 
on land use and land use change and forestry, addresses this issue 
and provides important international consensus on what the issues 
are here, and the remaining scientific questions, but also what we 
know. 

Our understanding of the matter so far is that there is signifi- 
cant potential for removal of carbon dioxide through changes in 
land use. Just exactly how much is still quite widely debated. The 
error bars, we say, in the science community are rather large on 
that. 

I think most would feel at this point that even with all kinds of 
reasonable land use changes, and accounting for that, it would not 
be enough to deal with the enormous increases that we project in 
carbon dioxide, but it is very important. 

And I think the only issue then is: How do you deal with that 
in terms of our international discussions? So there are some impor- 
tant research questions to continue to get at. 

There are also some serious policy issues in any kind of inter- 
national agreement on dealing with the greenhouse emission prob- 
lem. It is important to have the right agreement on how you ac- 

