dominates, yields are likely to decrease, especially in Africa and Latin America, 
where decreases in overall agricultural productivity of % are projected under dou- 
bled carbon dioxide conditions. Therefore, there may be increased risk of hunger in 
some locations in the tropics and subtropics where many of the world’s poorest peo- 
ple live. 

Water Resources 

Currently . billion people do not have access to adequate supplies of safe water, 
and  billion people do not have access to adequate sanitation. Today, some nineteen 
countries, primarily in the Middle East and Africa, are classified as water-scarce or 
water-stressed. Even in the absence of climate change, this number is expected to 
double by , in large part because of increases in demand from economic and 
population growth. Climate change will further exacerbate the frequency and mag- 
nitude of droughts in some places, in particular Northern and Southern Africa and 
the Middle East where droughts are already a recurrent feature. Developing coun- 
tries are highly vulnerable to climate change because many are located in arid and 
semi-arid areas. 

Sea Level Rise 

Sea-level rise can have negative impacts on tourism, freshwater supplies, fish- 
eries, exposed infrastructure, agricultural and dry lands, and wetlands. It is cur- 
rently estimated that about half of the world’s population lives in coastal zones, al- 
though there is a large variation among countries. Changes in climate will affect 
coastal systems through sea-level rise and an increase in storm-surge hazards, and 
possible changes in the frequency and/or intensity of extreme events. Impacts may 
vary across regions, and societal costs will greatly depend upon the vulnerability of 
the coastal system and the economic situation of the country. Sea-level rise will in- 



 


crease the vulnerability of coastal populations to flooding. An average of about  
million people per year currently experience flooding due to storm surges; a  cm 
sea-level rise would increase this number to about  million; a  meter sea-level 
rise would increase this number to  million. The estimates will be substantially 
higher if one incorporates population growth projections. A number of studies have 
shown that small islands and deltaic areas are particularly vulnerable to a one- 
meter sea-level rise. In the absence of mitigation actions (e.g., building sea walls), 
land losses are projected to range from .% for Egypt, % for Netherlands, .% 
for Bangladesh, to about % of the Marshall Islands, displacing tens of millions 
of people, and in the case of low-lying Small Island States, the possible loss of whole 
cultures. Many nations face lost capital value in excess of % of GDP. While an- 
nual adaptation/protection costs for most of these nations are relatively modest 
(about .% GDP), average annual costs to many small island states are much high- 
er, several percent of GDP, assuming adaptation is possible. 

Human Health 

Human health is sensitive to changes in climate because of changes in food secu- 
rity, water supply and quality, and the distribution of ecological systems. These im- 
pacts would be mostly adverse, and in many cases would cause some loss of life. 
Direct health effects would include increases in heat-related mortality and illness 
resulting from an anticipated increase in heatwaves. Indirect effects would include 
extensions of the range and season for vector organisms, thus increasing the trans- 
mission of vector-borne infectious diseases (e.g., malaria, dengue, yellow fever and 
encephalitis). Projected changes in climate under doubled carbon dioxide equi- 
librium conditions could lead to potential increases in malaria incidence of the order 
of - million additional cases annually, primarily in tropical, subtropical, and 
less well-protected temperate-zone populations. Some increases in non-vector-borne 
infectious diseases such as salmonellosis, cholera and other food- and water-related 
infections could also occur, particularly in tropical and subtropical regions, because 
of climatic impacts on water distribution and temperature, and on micro-organism 
proliferation. 

Social Costs of Climate Change 

The range of estimates of economic damages caused by changes in climate are 
quite uncertain. Taking into account both market and non-market costs, IPCC re- 
ported a reduction in world GDP of . -.% for a doubled carbon dioxide environ- 
ment. This value was obtained by summing widely varying estimates of damages 
by sector, including socio-economic sectors (e.g., agriculture, forestry, fisheries), eco- 
logical systems, and human health. Nordhaus, conducted an “expert” survey which 
resulted in a range from  to % for loss of world GDP, with a mean value of .% 
and a median value of .%. 

Losses in developing countries are estimated to be much higher than the world 
average, ranging from % to %. Alternate assumptions about the value of a statis- 
tical life could increase the estimate of economic damages in developing countries. 

IPCC reported values for the marginal damage of one extra ton of carbon emitted 
ranging from $ to $. A value of $ to $ per ton of carbon is obtained using 
a % social rate of time preference (discount rate). Lower discount rates increase 
this estimate, e.g. a % discount rate would increase this estimate by an order of 
magnitude. 

Approaches to Reduce Emissions and Enhance Sinks 

Significant reductions in net greenhouse gas emissions are technically, and often 
economically, feasible and can be achieved by utilizing an extensive array of tech- 
nologies and policy measures that accelerate technology diffusion in the energy sup- 
ply (more efficient conversion of fossil fuels; switching from high to low carbon fossil 
fuels; decarbonization of flue gases and fuels, coupled with carbon dioxide storage; 
increasing the use of nuclear energy; and increased use of modem renewable sources 
of energy (e.g., plantation biomass, micro-hydro, and solar), energy demand (indus- 
try, transportation, and residential/commercial buildings) and agricultural / foresty 
sectors (altered management of agricultural soils and rangelands, restoration of de- 
graded agricultural lands and rangelands, slowing deforestation, natural forest gen- 
eration, establishment of tree plantations, promoting agroforestry, and improving 
the quality of the diet of ruminants). By the year , the world’s commercial en- 
ergy system will be replaced at least twice offering opportunities to change the en- 
ergy system without premature retirement of capital stock. However, full technical 
potential is rarely achieved because of a lack of information and cultural, institu- 
tional, legal and economic barriers. 

Policy instruments can be used to facilitate the penetration of lower carbon inten- 
sive technologies and modified consumption patterns. These policies include: energy 



 


pricing strategies (e.g., carbon taxes and reduced energy subsidies); reducing or re- 
moving other subsidies that increase greenhouse gas emissions (e.g., agricultural 
and transport subsidies); incentives such as provisions for accelerated depreciation 
and reduced costs for the consumer; tradable emissions permits (and joint imple- 
mentation); voluntary programs and negotiated agreements with industry; utility 
demand-side management programs; regulatory programs including minimum en- 
ergy efficiency standards; market pull and demonstration programs that stimulate 
the development and application of advanced technologies; and product labeling. 
The optimum mix of policies will vary from country to country; policies need to be 
tailored for local situations and developed through consultation with stakeholders. 

Estimates of the costs of mitigating climate change should take into account sec- 
ondary benefits of switching from a fossil fuel based economy to a lower-carbon in- 
tensity energy system. Secondary benefits include lower levels of local and regional 
pollution, including particulates, ozone and acid rain. 

A key issue recognized by all Parties to the UNFCCC and the Kyoto Protocol is 
that of technology transfer. The recent IPCC special report on technology transfer 
examined the flows of knowledge, experience and equipment among governments, 
private sector entities, financial institutions, NGOs, and research and education in- 
stitutions, and the different roles that each of these stakeholders can play in facili- 
tating the transfer of technologies to address climate change in the context of sus- 
tainable development. The report concluded that the current efforts and established 
processes will not be sufficient to meet this challenge. It is clear that enhanced ca- 
pacity is required in developing countries and that additional government actions 
can create the enabling environment for private sector technology transfers within 
and across national boundaries. 

Summary 

Policymakers are faced with responding to the risks posed by anthropogenic emis- 
sions of greenhouse gases in the face of significant scientific uncertainties. They 
should consider these uncertainties in the context that climate-induced environ- 
mental changes cannot be reversed quickly, if at all, due to the long time scales 
