(see map in written testimony). Thus, the lower- ( percent of the globe) was not 
representative of global temperatures, and the global temperatures were not show- 
ing global warmth. 

Question . Your written statement acknowledged that in the past  years, sea 
level has risen  inches (plus or minus  inches) and is not accelerating. You further 
stated that for the Gulf Coast, a rise of  inches over  years is minuscule. Can 
you elaborate on how minuscule this impact would be? 

Answer. For this question, we actually have a good source of information — the real 
world. The sea level has risen  inches in the past  years, and the ecosystems 
along the Gulf Coast have not changed appreciably because of it. When sea level 
rises less than an inch per decade, ecosystems can naturally adapt. It is important 
to note that relative sea level is always changing as natural geologic forces uplift 
some coasts and subsidence lowers other coasts. At the sea level rates we are dis- 
cussing for the global average, the change in the volume of water in the ocean is 
often a smaller effect than the other natural forces for a given location. 

The stresses these coastal ecosystems do endure come not from sea level rise, but 
from human development and human-generated pollutants in river runoff. And, 
these developments are more and more in harms way of the next hurricane which 
could have a storm surge (i.e. sudden sea level rise) of  to  feet. This is the 
real danger for coastal dwellers and economic infrastructure. Natural ecosystems 
have ways to bounce back from hurricanes, but buildings and roads don’t. What I 
tell developers and other potential beach front property owners is “If a  inch rise 
in sea level is a problem for you, you are too close to the water.” 


Response to Written Questions Submitted by Hon. John McCain to 

Dr. Neal Lane 

Question . Are there any areas within climate change research which you would 
characterize as deficient? Is the federal government making the right choices re- 
garding which programs it should fund? 

Answer. Our current understanding of climate change is the result of significant 
successes in research over the last several decades, and, as is often the case in 
science, that success has led to many new questions. I would not characterize any 
aspect of our current climate research effort as deficient, but it is certainly true that 
we need to modify and enhance various aspects of our research effort in response 
to new developments in science and new needs for information. As noted in my testi- 
mony, the climate change debate has evolved from “Are we warming the Earth?” 
to How much are we warming the Earth? and “What impacts will that warming 
have?” The U.S. Global Change Research Program (USGCRP) is benefiting from the 
advice in a number of recent National Research Council reports, including, “Global 
Environmental Change: Research Pathways for the Next Decade” as it addresses 
these questions. A number of priorities have emerged from USGCRP consideration 
of recommendations from the NRC and from other scientific advisory bodies. The 
program is enhancing its efforts and revising its strategies in a number of key 
areas, including carbon cycle research, water cycle research, research on the impacts 
of climate change, long-term climate observations, and high-end climate modeling. 

The USGCRP established a Carbon Cycle Science initiative in the FY budget, 
focused on improving our understanding of carbon dynamics in the environment, 



 


and we have continued strong support for this in the FY budget request. The 
FY request also proposes increases for water cycle research, long-term surface 
based climate observations, and research to understand the ecological impacts of cli- 
mate change and other global changes. All of these topics will be important areas 
in the new overall long-term research strategy that is now being developed. We an- 
ticipate that a plan will be ready for review later this year. My view is that the 
federal government is making the right choices and that the programs we support 
are necessarily evolving and changing as we learn more about the problems and 
phenomena we are attempting to understand. 

Question . Do you believe that the upcoming IPCC report will alter the current de- 
bate among scientists or Congress? Will the report confirm what we already believe 
to be true? 

Answer. The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) produces a com- 
prehensive assessment of global climate change approximately every five years. I do 
not think the work of the IPCC really alters or changes the views of the scientific 
community on climate change. It is more accurate to say that it describes these 
views, because the scientific community produces IPCC reports. This is one of the 
reasons they are so valuable. The process of creating IPCC assessment reports cer- 
tainly influences scientific debate and discussion over many aspects of climate 
change, but I think it is important to note that the current scientific debate on cli- 
mate change is not over whether climate change is occurring. It is rather over de- 
tailed projection of how much change will occur, exactly how much of this change 
is due to various forcing factors, and precisely what impacts change will have. 

The upcoming Third Assessment Report, which is currently under government 
and technical review, will be completed in early . I expect this report to confirm 
and reinforce the broad scientific consensus that atmospheric COi has been signifi- 
cantly increased by human activities, that the surface of the earth is warming, and 
that the earth’s surface temperature will continue to rise during the next century. 
It will document the increase in understanding that has occurred since the SAR was 
completed in , and I believe it will also confirm the assertion in my testimony 
that the research and policy communities can now appropriately shift from a pri- 
mary focus on the physical systems of climate change to a broader effort to under- 
stand how global change will affect the Earth’s biological systems and the human 
societies that are dependent on them. 

Question . Do you believe that the U.S. Global Change Research Program is achiev- 
ing its full potential? What are the weaknesses of this multi-agency program? Are 
they currently being addressed? 

Answer. The USGCRP has been and is a successful program that can serve as a 
model for broad multi-agency cooperation in addressing a crosscutting research 
theme. Coordinating a complex research agenda across a dozen diverse agencies of 
the federal government is difficult, and it is critical that the Program evolves in re- 
sponse to changing research priorities. With input from the NRC and the partici- 
pating federal agencies, a new long-term strategic research plan is being developed 
for the Program. 

Question . What are our national objectives for the modeling program? 

Answer. Most global climate modeling research and application in the United States 
is sponsored by NSF, DOE, NASA, and NOAA. These agencies each have their own 
individual planning processes, but they have also worked together to establish well- 
defined priorities consistent with goals and objectives of the USGCRP. 

As noted in numerous versions of “Our Changing Planet,” the USGCRP modeling 
strategy calls for the use of the most powerful supercomputers to accommodate evo- 
lutionary development and revision of the climate models. An interagency group has 
established the Common Infrastructure Initiative and has made progress in develop- 
ment of a flexible national modeling infrastructure that will facilitate the exchange 
of scientific advances and technology between climate modeling and research and 
operational weather modeling groups. A USGCRP Integrated Modeling and Pre- 
diction Working Group formally coordinates the agencies’ climate modeling research. 
This Working Group, which reports to the SGCR, has reviewed and endorsed the 
various plans for climate modeling activities and, in particular, the proposal for the 
Climate Simulation Laboratory at the National Center for Atmospheric Research 
(NCAR). In addition, the Advisory Board for the NSF-sponsored Climate System 
Model at NCAR has been reconstituted to include scientists and managers from 
DOE, NASA, and NOAA to reflect their growing participation in the nation’s only 
community climate model. 



 


Two specific efforts are underway to develop a national strategy for climate mod- 
eling, one by the National Research Council, and one by the agencies. These are 
complementary efforts with overlapping membership. Both are responsive to the re- 
cent Modeling report produced by the National Research Council that identified 
problems in high-end U.S. climate modeling capabilities. An important aspect of the 
USGCRP agency effort is to determine how the climate modeling community should 
focus its efforts and investments to best leverage the new capabilities that will be 
developed through the Administration’s Information Technology Research (ITR) ini- 
tiative to create more advanced supercomputers and software. 

Finally, an implicit requirement for an effective modeling program is a robust ob- 
