

 


Polar bear distribution changes will likely contribute to an increase in bear-human interactions in 
the coming years. In addition to polar bear distribution changes, climate change will likely 
promote human populations to shift northward (AMAP ), increasing direct interactions 
between bears and humans (AMAP , Derocher et al. ). Other consequences beyond 
direct interactions with humans include increased development pressure, disturbance to bears 
from increased shipping activity, potential prey availability reductions from expanded 
commercial fisheries, and increased risk of oil spills (AMAP ). In many instances the 
results of human interactions are fatal to polar bears or may result in injury or disturbance, in 
some instance these interactions can result in human injuries or deaths. 

Polar bears come into conflict with humans partly because they will scavenge for food at sites of 
human habitation and also because they may occasionally prey or attempt to prey upon humans 
(Stirling ). “Problem bears” are most often sub-adults, because they are inexperienced 
hunters and have the most difficulty hunting, and because their feeding habits include more 
scavenging than adult bears (Stirling ). Subadults are also more vulnerable than adults to 
environmental effects (Taylor et al. ). Observations of density dependent and density 
independent effects on populations of other marine mammals indicate that environmental effects 
are typically first manifested as reductions in annual breeding success and reduced subadult 
survival rates (Eberhardt and Siniff ). Because of the greater maternal investment a weaned 
subadult represents, reduced survival rates of subadults have a greater impact on population 
growth rate than reduced litter production rates (Taylor et al. ). In the NWT, a preliminary 
study found that  of  “problem bears” killed between  and  were under five years 
of age (Lunn et al. b). In the Canadian Beaufort Sea,  of the  “problem bears” killed 
from - whose ages were determined were  years of age or less, with an average age of 
. years (Stirling ). After sub-adults, females with cubs are the most likely type of bear to 
interact with humans, because females with cubs are likely to be thinner and hungrier than single 
adult bears and starving bears will risk death in an attempt to obtain food (Stirling ). In 
Churchill, an area of predictably high polar bear use, in years when bears came ashore in poorer 
condition, more females with cubs fed at the dump in the fall when their stored fat reserves ran 


 



 


low (Stirling ). Adult females are more important than subadults from a population 
dynamics standpoint since they detemine population growth (Taylor et al. ), 

Research indicates that human-bear interactions, and the number of defense kills, increase when 
food is less available in the wild. Following a period of reduced seal abundance in the eastern 
Beaufort Sea during spring , researchers predicted that subadults would be in poorer 
condition, interact more with humans, and suffer a higher death rate in the winter of  - 
(Stirling ). The predictions proved true with seven defense kills that winter. In subsequent 
years when seal populations had recovered defense kills declined to an average of two per winter 
(Stirling ), 

Adult male polar bears, unlike adult black or grizzly bears, are less likely to frequent areas of 
human habitation, presumably because adult male polar bears are usually in better physical 
condition than other sex or age classes (Stirling ). In the Beaufort Sea adult males were 
present for protracted periods of time near settlements feeding on bowhead whale remains during 
the fall period of - (Miller et al. ). The reason for the unusual presence of adult 
males near a North Slope village is unknown but suggests that these animals were attracked by 
the presence of the carcasses and may have been nutritionally stressed. 

In Nunavut, Canada the details from  polar bear defense of life and property (DLP) kills that 
occurred from - were analyzed (Dyck ). The study found that most bears were <  
years of age (%), the majority of bears killed were males (%), and most interactions 
occurred at Native hunting camps (%). Sources of food were believed to be a contributing 
factor in many instances but other possible reasons were an increase in land use activities, or the 
number of camps, increased human populations in areas of high polar bear activity, increased 
polar bear population size, and climatic warming related to earlier departure from ice habitat to 
terrestrial habitats. The implementation of a DLP monitoring program in  resulted in a 
decrease in the number of kills. More recently (Aars et al. , Dowsley , Dyck ) 
increased levels of DLP have been reported. The Baffin Region accounted for % of the DLP 
kills. Reasons for the sex bias toward males may be related to the following: young and 


 



 


subadult males account for > % of the population based on capture data; male subadult 
dispersal has been noted for other species with polygynous mating systems (Greenwood , 
Dobson , Derocher and Stirling , McClellan and Hovey , Dyck ); males tend 
to be more aggressive (Tate and Pelton , Ramsay and Stirling , Ramsay and Stirling 
 ); and subadults may be more curious and less cautious, and possibly more nutritionally 
stressed than older bears (Stirling and Latour , MacArthur Jope , in Dyck ). 
Increased future interactions were predicted based on expanding human populations, resource 
extraction and exploration activities. Enhanced monitoring of bear-human interactions would be 
useful in better understanding and mitigating for these incidents. 

Defense kills of “problem bears” are a concern when they are not included in an area’s hunting 
quota, because the number of interactions and bears killed can cause sustainable quotas to be 
exceeded and impact the population if quotas are not in place or not adjusted in subsequent 
years. Some experts predict that the number of interactions and defense kills will increase as 
climate change continues (Derocher et al. ). Amstrup () observed that direct 
interactions between people and bears in Alaska have increased markedly in recent years, and 
that this trend is expected to continue. Schliebe et al. () confirmed this observation with 
data from hunter-harvested polar bears in Alaska (Figure ). The number of bears taken for 
safety reasons, based on  year running averages, increased steadily from about  per year in 
, to about  in , and has averaged about  in recent years. There are several plausible 
explanations for this increase. First it could be an artifact of increased reporting by the hunters, 
or of an increased polar bear population and corresponding increased probability of interactions 
with humans. Alternatively or in combination, polar bears from the Southern Beaufort Sea and 
CS populations typically move from the pack ice to the near shore environment in the fall to take 
advantage of the higher productivity of ice seals over the continental shelf. In the  s and 
early s the near shore environment would have been frozen by early or mid October, 
allowing polar bears to effectively access seals in the area. Since the late s the timing of ice 
formation in the fall has occurred later in November or early December, resulting in an increased 
amount of time that the area was not accessible to polar bears. Consequently, bears spent a 
greater amount of time on land and not feeding. The later formation of near-shore ice increases 

 



 


the probability of bear-human interactions occurring in coastal villages (Schliebe et al. ). 

The increased use of coastal habitats by polar bears during the fall in recent years is further 
supported by data from aerial surveys along the coast and barrier islands from Barrow to the 
Canadian border and from information from local residents in coastal villages in northern and 
western Alaska, The number of bears using coastal habitats has been relatively stable in the 
most recent years possibly explaining why DTP kills have stabilized. 

In Nunavut, increased bear-human encounters reported by residents of numerous communities 
(Dowsley ) resulted in quota increases for Western Hudson Bay, BB, and Davis Strait 
populations. Whether the increased incidence of polar bear use of terrestrial habitat in the open 
water season is evidence of increased population size or a change in distribution is a subject to 
conjecture. 

. Shipping and Transportation 

Observations over the past  years show a decline in arctic sea-ice extent in all seasons, with the 
most prominent retreat in the summer. Some studies estimate arctic-wide reductions in annual 
average sea-ice extent of about -% and a reduction in the average thickness of about -% 
over the past few decades. Submarine sonar measurement taken in the central Arctic Ocean 
revealed a % reduction in ice thickness. These trends indicate an Arctic Ocean with longer 
seasons of reduced sea-ice cover which will improve ship accessibility around the margins of the 
Arctic Basin - although increased accessibility will not be uniformly distributed (ACIA ). 

The Oceanographer of the Navy, the Office of Naval Research, the Arctic Research Commission, 
and the Naval Ice Center co-sponsored a symposium on Naval Operations in an ice-free Arctic 
on  and  April . Their findings were that submarine data reveal a % decrease in arctic 
sea ice volume. Satellite passive microwave data since the s demonstrate a decrease in sea 
ice extent of % per decade. Model data suggest a sea ice thickness decrease of % and an ice 
volume decrease between % and % by . Scientific models consistently suggest that 
