three warmest years in the last  years. And that fits in completely 
with the detected trend about later freezes in the fall, and earlier 
temperatures of the frost. 

I remember as a kid in Massachusetts, we always looked forward 
to October/November because the ponds froze over and we were 
going to have thick ice, and go play hockey. Today, you are lucky 
if the ponds freeze in Northern New Hampshire. 

And unlike the days when we used to have snow on the ground 
from October to April when we were campaigning as recently as  
years ago, I used to freeze and wear a coat in the morning. I do 
not wear a coat until after November now. 

Anybody who does not see the impact of these changes is putting 
their head in the sand. Now, can we say that every bit of this is 
due to global warming? The answer is no. I cannot sit here and tell 



 


you that. No scientist is going to tell you that every bit of it is. 
Some of it may be normal changes that are taking place in terms 
of the climate process, but we do know with absolute certainty, in- 
controvertible scientific fact, we are contributing to it. 

And we ought to adopt the prudent person theory with respect 
to those things that you do not quite know what the final con- 
sequences are going to be but you know they might be disastrous. 

It is like smoking, Mr. Chairman. You and others have adopted 
a very tough policy on the odds about contracting cancer from 
smoking. Does everybody get cancer who smokes? The answer is 
no. But do we know what the probabilities are? The answer is yes. 
The probabilities of this are greater than some of what we know 
about the linkages of cancer in certain kinds of disease. We take 
far more steps to deal with that than we do with this. 

Final comment I would make is, and this is of enormous concern 
I think to everybody, is the great ice cover that stretches across the 
top of the globe is about  percent thinner than it was just  to 
 decades ago. We know this through our data from nuclear sub- 
marines that have been plying the Arctic Ocean. 

Scientists from the University of Washington found in a new 
study that the average thickness of the Arctic ice was about ten 
feet from  to . From  to , it is about six feet, and 
in the ’s, the thinning has been continuing at a rate of about 
four inches a year. 

The area covered by sea ice has diminished and the duration of 
the cover has shortened. Mountain glaciers in Alaska have shrunk 
as has the Greenland ice cap. And the consequences of this, accord- 
ing to many experts now, is huge concern about what happens with 
sea levels because if the big ice sheets melt even partly, sea levels 
will rise around the world. 

And there are serious questions — I do not have the answers 
again — about the potential disruption of certain ocean currents, but 
those ocean currents modulate the earth’s climate. We do not know 
the answer of what happens to the Gulf Stream, but I am con- 
cerned about the potential of what might happen to it. 

So this hearing and the further science is critical, but we should 
not confuse ourselves by not having answers to every single ques- 
tion that common sense drives us to try to mitigate at this point 
in time. And I think that is really the critical issue that this Com- 
mittee, the Congress, and the entire country faces. 

Unless the United States is more serious about this effort, we are 
going to have a difficult time getting less developed countries and 
others to join in a more cooperative effort. So there is a huge 
amount at stake and I think this hearing is very important in that 
regard. 

In each of the past  years, the House of Representatives has in- 
cluded riders in appropriations bills on the Kyoto Protocol. And this 
year, a new bill has language that is included in the Agricultural 
Appropriations Bill that will limit the Administration’s activities on 
an international level to even continue the dialogue and process of 
building a consensus about Kyoto. 

Do you share a concern that this provision could impede our un- 
derstanding of climate change and the ways we might mitigate it, 
Doctor? 



 


Dr. Lane. Yes, Senator, I am very concerned about this rider. 
The rider seems, on the face of it, extreme. It tries to block the 
United States from even trying to reach an agreement with other 
countries on action to combat global warming, which is very dif- 
ficult to explain to our international partners around the world. 

It undermines the ability of the executive branch to conduct 
international negotiations, which seems to me to raise serious con- 
stitutional questions. It may stifle U.S. efforts to achieve bi-par- 
tisan goals with a cost effective treaty and meaningful participation 
of developing countries which, Senator, you have emphasized. 

It is extremely important that we are able to sit down with de- 
veloping countries and address their participation in dealing with 
this problem of global warming. 

The amendment is bad for American industry. It is bad for the 
farmers. It is bad for consumers. It tries to stop work on the most 
important tools for holding down costs as we combat global warm- 
ing. And depending on how you interpret the language itself, it 
could also have a serious chilling effect on our international re- 
search activities. So it is difficult to understand the rationale here, 
and we certainly have great difficulties with the rider. 

Senator Kerry. I do not want to abuse the time too much, but 
there is another problem I’d like to focus on. You go to a place like 
North Dakota, or you go to some northern place, they like the fact 
that it is warmer. Their heating bills are less. They figure that 
their gardens are going to last longer; they get a longer summer. 

I mean, there is a psychological difficulty here to get people to 
focus on what may happen to your water tables, to your crops, to 
the movement of whole forests. Do you agree that there are very 
significant down sides that have not yet been properly quantified 
to people so that you can create a consensus on this? 

Dr. Lane. Indeed I do agree, Senator. I think this national as- 
sessment I spoke about, which attempts, for the first time, to pro- 
vide some wisdom on what the regional effects of global climate 
change might be, will help us understand better the answer to your 
question. 

There appear to be some positive benefits to increasing tempera- 
ture in certain parts of the country, certain parts of the world. Peo- 
ple might like a little warmer evenings, little warmer winters, but 
that is kind of taking an isolationist’s view. You know, if you put 
a big wall up around your state or your community, if that is the 
view of the world, then you might like it a little warmer. 

On the other hand, there are some very real questions. How fast 
can the ecology keep up with the climate change? So suppose the 
forests that need to move in response to climate change cannot 
move fast enough, and so then they are gone. That opens the way 
for all kinds of invasive species, plant and animal, that might be 
very harmful. So we simply do not know the answers to those kinds 
of questions. 

