Dr. Trenberth. The sea level is rising because of two things. 
About — one of the estimates is that about maybe  percent of the 
heat from the global warming overall is going into the ocean. That 
causes expansion of the ocean and the evidence suggests now that, 
indeed, the oceans are warming up. 

The second thing is the melting of glaciers. Glaciers are melting 
almost everywhere around the world. The only places where they 
are not melting is because of increases in precipitation; increases 
in snow. And that is mainly in Scandinavia. And so these are the 
main reasons for the rise in sea level. 

The amount of moisture in the atmosphere is really very small 
compared with that in the oceans. And so anything that is stored 
in the atmosphere has a minuscule effect on sea level changes. 

But over the United States where we have the best measure- 
ments and — unfortunately, these measurements are really only re- 
liable for about the past  years or so — there is good evidence that 
the amount of moisture in the atmosphere has increased by about 
 percent. 

That is a large amount. It is more than we would expect from 
just the greenhouse effect alone of global warming, but it is one of 
the effects, which means that there is more moisture that is hang- 
ing around to get caught up in storms. And it makes the storms 
more severe than they otherwise would be, rainfall rates heavier 
than they otherwise would be, such as we have just seen, for in- 
stance, in eastern Oklahoma and — and Missouri with the flooding 
that occurred there. And drying, of course, occurs somewhere else 
in the system. In this case, there has been a lot of drying over the 
Southwest. 

The Chairman. Dr. Watson, what has caused scientific con- 
fidence to increase between the IPCC’s  assessment and now? 



 


Dr. Watson. Well, even in the  assessment, we could not ex- 
plain the observed changes in the Earth’s climate on natural phe- 
nomena alone. And that led to the very famous phrase, and that 
is, “There is now — the scientific evidence now shows a discernible 
human influence on the earth’s climate system.” 

And as Dr. Mahlman said, the likely conclusions from the third 
assessment report, which is currently undergoing very careful peer 
review, are likely to confirm the findings of the second assessment 
report. 

We have got improved models. We have continuing data sets. Ob- 
viously, the research done by the U.S. Global Change Research 
Program has helped us get a slightly better understanding of some 
of these phenomena. 

But I do not believe that there has been a radical change, in my 
opinion, of thinking over the last few years. I think there has been 
a consolidation of the thinking that we had in , which, of 
course, as you know, led most governments in the world to nego- 
tiate the Kyoto Protocol. 

The Chairman. Go ahead, Doctor. 

Dr. Mahlman. If I might just add to that. The observational 
record is very important here. The warmest years on record have 
occurred since the  report,  being the warmest year on 
record. And that is not something to be neglected. 

The other thing is the reconstruction, which Dr. Bradley showed, 
of the pulling together of all of the paleoclimatic data and synthe- 
sizing that to give us a better picture as to what the natural varia- 
bility has been like in the past. That this puts the current warming 
in a much better historical context has been a significant factor, as 
well. 

And the third thing, in addition to the improvements in mod- 
eling, I would point to is improved statistical analysis and detection 
methods that have been applied to this problem. 

The Chairman. Dr. Christy, would you like to respond to that? 
I do not — I am not sure you — I do not believe you share exactly 
those views according to your testimony. 

Dr. Christy. The — all of us that work on the IPCC — and my 
chapter is the observations chapter — we will document in the IPCC 
indications of rapid climate changes that have occurred in the past 
under natural conditions, most of which can be explained by un- 
usual situations in the earth. 

I would like to comment, though, on what we affectionately call 
the hockey stick diagram that Dr. Bradley showed, because it has 
this steady decline and then this rapid increase. I want to describe 
a feature of that diagram, which is not a criticism. 

The information that went into the first half of that record is 
very limited and as you go to the end of the record to the year 
, a considerably larger amount of data went into that part, so 
that there could be a — a refinement of what the temperature record 
looks like at the end. 

If you just took the information that was available at the begin- 
ning and kept only that to the end, you would not see this dramatic 
spike at the end. And so it is different information that allows you 
to see what has happened in the last  years than what is shown 
at the beginning. 



 


The Chairman. But you do not disagree with the fundamental 
premise that the other witnesses have asserted that there is an in- 
crease in global warming. It is attributed to human activity. 

Dr. Christy. The Earth’s temperature has risen. I do not dis- 
agree with that. And I agree that a portion of that is due to human 
effects, but I would not say all of it is due to human effects. I do 
not think anyone here might either. 

The Chairman. Dr. Mahlman, I know you want to speak. 

And then, Dr. Bradley, maybe you would like to respond to the 
hockey stick issue. 

Dr. Mahlman. Yes. If I were to have answered the question first, 
I would have raised the same two points that Dr. Trenberth raised, 
namely the fact that it is getting warmer, and noticeably so since 
the last IPCC assessment; and then also the amazing ,-year 
record from Drs. Mann and Bradley. 

And the other thing I would add to that is that, post-IPCC , 
the IPCC process made their best guess as to what the forcing 
agents for climate were over the past  years, and asked the 
leading model groups to make independent calculations of a retro- 
spective run-through from  to . Effectively, all of the mod- 
els pretty much nailed this increase in temperature. And models 
with different physics, different constructions still get essentially 
the same kind of answer. 

Now, in each one of these cases, you can make the counter-argu- 
ment and say, “Well, that’s certainly not definitive evidence.” And 
that would be a valid point. 

But on the other hand, the fact that there are three new and es- 
sentially totally independent pieces of information that came since 
the last IPCC, in my mind, that shrinks the betting odds, shrinks 
the range of uncertainty. It does not make uncertainty go away. 
