). In recent years the position of the hooded seal whelping patch near Jan Mayen 
has changed position likely as an effect of decreased sea ice in East Greenland, and the 
number of seal there has decreased (Haug, pers. comm.). 

Cooper et al. () observed at least nine apparently orphaned Pacific walrus in waters as deep 
as , m in July and August  in the Canada Basin of the Arctic Ocean. Given limited 
visibility from the ship, many additional calves may have been separated in the overall study 
area. These conditions appear to be related to the transport of unusually warm (° C) Bering Sea 
water into this area north of Alaska. Walruses invest considerable maternal resources while 
caring for calves on seasonally ice-covered continental shelves for periods of up to  years or 
more and only rarely separate from their young. Although these observations suggest that the 
Paci fic walrus population may be ill-adapted to rapid seasonal sea-ice retreat off Arctic conti- 
nental shelves, the adult females could have been killed during Alaska Native subsistence hunts 
from the villages of Wainwright and Barrow. 

Decreases in Arctic cod abundance have already been recorded and correlated with shrinking ice 
cover. Gaston et al. () inferred changes in Arctic cod abundance in northern Hudson Bay by 
analyzing the composition of the diet fed to thick-billed murre chicks {Uria lotnvia) (Gaston et 
al. ). Between - and , the percentage of cod in the diet of thick-billed murre 
chicks fell from   .% to  .%, while the percentage of capelin (Mallotus villosus) increased 
from .% to % over the same time period. The extent of ice cover, greater than % on July 

 



 


l'*of each year, also declined significantly between  and . Gaston et al. (:) 
concluded that the trends observed related to real changes in fish populations that suggest a 
switch from an Arctic to a subarctic fish community occurred from  onwards. Given the 
relative ecology of arctic cod and capelin, the trends identified seem best explained by changes 
in the oceanography of northern Hudson Bay, perhaps driven by temperature increases over 
recent decades. 

Babaluk et al. () report the first records of sockeye {Oncorhynchus nerkd) and pink salmon 
(Oncorhynchus gorbuscha) from Banks Island and other records of Pacific salmon in NWT. The 
authors report capture of eight sexually mature sockeye and one sexually mature pink salmon in 
the subsistence fishery in the Sachs River estuary at Sachs Harbour, Banks Island, NWT in 
August  . They also report a first record for coho salmon (Oncorhynchus kisutch) in Great 
Bear Lake, NWT. These capture locations are well outside the known distributions for the 
species. A pink salmon captured in the West Channel, Mackenzie River near Aklavik, NWT, and 
a chum salmon (Oncorhynchus kela) from Cache Creek, NT, also represent new capture 
locations within the distribution of the species. In sum, these numerous sightings of extra- 
limitai occurrence of a variety of species are indicative of environmental change in the marine 
systems, likely associated with the warming trend of marine waters. Some of these species could 
potentially become established and may provide prey for ringed seals and/or polar bears. 


b. Seal productivity 

Ringed seal pups are bom between mid-March and mid-April, nursed for about six weeks, and 
weaned prior to spring break-up in June (Smith , Ferguson et al. ). During the weeks of 
nursing, ringed seal pups spend about half of their time in lairs excavated in snow covering the 
top of the sea ice, and about half underwater diving (Smith ). During this time period both 
ringed seal pups and adults are hunted by polar bears (Ferguson et al. ). One common 
hunting method used by polar bears is to locate a seal lair by smell and then crash through the 
top of the den and seize the surprised seal (Stirling ). 


 



 


Ferguson et al. () demonstrated that decreasing snow depth, possibly influenced by the 
timing of spring break-up, may have a detrimental effect on ringed seal recruitment in Western 
Hudson Bay. These researchers examined trends in ringed seal recruitment in Western Hudson 
Bay relative to snow depth, snowfall, rainfall, temperature in April and May, the North Atlantic 
Oscillation (“NAO”) from the previous winter, and timing of spring break-up. Samples from  
ringed seals killed by Inuit hunters between - and - were used to determine 
the age of seals killed and to generate a survivorship curve which represents the number of seals 
born in any year that survived to be included in the hunt (Ferguson et al. ). The relative 
difference from the expected survivorship was the dependent variable in correlated regression 
analyses of environmental factors (Ferguson et al. ). Snowfall and ringed sea! recruitment 
varied from lower than average in the s, to higher in the s and lower in the s 
(Fergu-son et al. ). 

The study demonstrated that decreasing snow depth in April and May may be linked to 
decreased recruitment in ringed seals in Hudson Bay (Ferguson et al. ). Reduced snowfall 
may also result in less snow drift accumulation leeward of pressure ridges, and consequently 
reduced protection for pups from predators that are afforded easier access (Ferguson et al. ). 
Warming temperatures may also melt snow covered ringed seal birth lairs and contribute to the 
decreased recruitment (Ferguson et al. ). Therefore, pups in lairs with thin snow roofs are 
more vulnerable to predation than pups in lairs with thick roofs (Ferguson et al. ). Ringed 
seal pup survival can also be affected by hypothermia resulting from exposure if lairs collapse 
(Ferguson et al. ). Continued access to birth lairs for thermoregulation is probably critical to 
the survival of pups when temperatures fall below ° C (Stirling and Smith ). Ferguson et 
al. ( p. ) concluded “Earlier spring break-up of sea ice together with snow trends suggest 
continued low pup survival in Western Hudson Bay.” 

In a similar study of variation in reproduction and body condition of the ringed seal in Prince 
Albert Sound, Harwood et al. () found that an early spring break-up in  negatively 
impacted the growth, condition, and probably the survival of un weaned pups. Early breakup in 

 



 


 was believed to have caused an interruption in lactation in adult females, which in turn 
negatively affected the condition and growth of pups. The authors indicate that the event 
occurred when food appeared to be abundant and available for the other age classes of ringed 
seals (Harwood et al. ). Earlier ice break-ups similar to those documented by Harwood et 
al. () and Ferguson et al. () are predicted to be more frequent in occurrence based on 
climate change models and as a result a decrease in productivity and abundance of ringed seals is 
predicted. Similar to earlier break-up or reduced snow cover, increased rain on snow events 
during the late winter could also negatively impact ringed seal recruitment by damaging or 
eliminating snow covered pupping lairs, increasing exposure and the risk of hypothermia, and 
facilitating predation by polar bears and Arctic foxes {Alopex lagopus) (Stirling and Smith ), 
In April and May of , researchers evaluated the distribution and density of ringed seal lairs 
on the Hall Peninsula of southeastern Baffin Island in Nunavut (Stirling and Smith ). During 
this study predation on seals by polar bears was also evaluated from on ice and aerial 
observations (Stirling and Smith ). The role of polar bear predation and environmental 
factors on ringed seal distribution (Hammill and Smith , Hammill and Smith ) and 
reproduction (Stirling and Lunn ) has been documented for other populations as well. Rain 
fell steadily or sporadically on the study area during April -  (Stirling and Smith ). 

Before the rain event in April, there were two other periods during late March and early April 
when daily maximum temperatures were at or close to freezing (Stirling and Smith ). 
Outside of these periods weather was normal for this area. The roofs of % (/ ) of the haul- 
out and birth lairs found by the end of March and % (/) of those located in the first week 
of April had already melted and collapsed, something not seen before at these latitudes (Stirling 
and Smith ). After the rain event of April, at least % of the lairs in one area had collapsed 
(Stirling and Smith ). Following the rain event, many instances of adult seals and pups 
laying on the bare ice, exposing the pups to hypothermia were noted. Predation of pups by polar 
bears was observed, and the researchers “suspect that most of the pups in these areas were 
eventually killed by polar bears (Stirling and Archibald ), arctic foxes (Smith ), or 
possibly gulls (Lydersen and Smith  ). Stirling and Smith () also observed ravens 
(Corvus corvax) feeding on the carcasses of ringed seal pups, but did not know if they killed the 
pups or were only scavenging (Stirling and Smith ). 


 



 


Stirling and Smith () state that the observations from  have direct relevance to the 
impact of climate change on polar bears: 

Should early season rain become regular and widespread at some future time, we 
predict that mortality of ringed seal pups will increase, especially in more 
