as we say, across America, should be grateful to them. 

Senator Lieberman. Hear, hear. I agree. I thank you all, not only 
for your testimony that you have offered here and the answers that 
you have given to our questions, but each of you has submitted tes- 
timony that I know you worked on for the record of the Sub- 
committee. It is really worth reading. It is very, very important and 
to me very impressive. 

I will say that in the time that I have been interested in this 
problem, I will either give credit or blame to Tom Lovejoy for hav- 
ing done some of the first work. We go back to Yale together. But 
he is self-evidently younger than I. 

Senator Warner. Does that old school tie hunt out in Montana, 
Tom? That dog don’t hunt out there, does it. 



 


[Laughter.] 

Senator Lieberman. In the time that he has heen working on 
this, and helped others of us wonder about it, we have gone from 
basically projecting scientific models to some of the consequences to 
seeing some of the consequences. And you have testified today very 
quietly, very methodically, to what you have observed, although I 
do think that some weight of your testimony cries out quite loudly 
for us to try to find a way to respond to this challenge. 

So I thank you very much. The record of the hearing will be kept 
open for  days, if you want to submit any additional comments, 
if we want to burden you with any additional questions for you to 
answer. But I thank you very, very much for the work you have 
done here. Senator Warner, I thank you for your interest in this. 
I truly look forward to working through this with you to some good 
result. 

The hearing is adjourned. 

[Whereupon, at : p.m., the committee was adjourned.] 

[Additional statements submitted for the record follow:] 

Statement of Thomas E. Lovejoy, President, Heinz Center for Science, 
Economics and the Environment 

Thank you for the opportunity to testify on climate change and its effects on wild- 
life, namely the rest of life on earth or biodiversity. I am Thomas Lovejoy, President 
of the Heinz Center for Science, Economics and the Environment, a non-partisan no- 
advocacy environmental policy center that engages business. Government, academia 
and environmental groups in developing environmental policy. 

I have been engaged in the topic of this hearing for more than two decades, hav- 
ing produced the first book on the subject with Rob Peters in  and just  years 
ago a completely new one with Lee Hannah, a copy of which I present here. The 
distinct difference between the two, and indeed what led to doing a new one, is that 
today there are well documented and statistically significant examples of nature re- 
sponding to climate change. Some of these changes involve different timing in the 
annual cycles such as migration or flowering, others involve changes in where spe- 
cies occur, yet others involve threshold changes in ecosystems, and some involve sys- 
temic changes such as the acidification of the oceans. The data have moved from 
the anecdotal to the statistically significant and they demonstrate unequivocally 
that nature is on the move. There is by now a global scientific literature on this 
subject but I will restrict myself here to American science and examples. 

Climate change is not new in the history of the earth, but it is new in the history 
of human civilization and our dependence on the natural world. For the last ten 
thousand years, the entire human enterprise has been built on the assumption of 
a stable climate, including the origin of agriculture which in turn made human set- 
tlements possible, and our entire recorded history. For that period the patterns of 
nature and of individual species and organisms have been attuned to the unusual 
period of stability. Today we can see the first stirrings. The map of geographical 
growing zones that constitute a bible for gardeners as to what they can or cannot 
grow, has recently been revised to accurately reflect the climate change that has al- 
ready taken place. Tree swallows were laying eggs nine days earlier by  in com- 
parison to  (), In the western United States there is earlier flowering by  
days per decade for lilacs and . days per decade for honeysuckle (). In the mid- 
Atlantic experimental evidence shows that poison ivy is favored by higher concentra- 
tions of the greenhouse gas CO  . One of the best studied butterfly species in the 
United States, the Edith’s Checkerspot has changed its geographical range generally 
moving northward and upslope (). 

One of the immediate consequences and a foreshadowing of things to come are 
mismatches between species and their environment and linked species. For example 
if one species depends on temperature for cues and the other day length, climate 
change will change one and not the other. This has been occurring between the 
checker spot and the flower species on which it depends (). In the arctic some 
seabird species which feed on the Arctic cod, a species which lives on the underside 
of the ice, are no longer able to breed successfully because the ice edge is too far 
from the land on which they must nest (). 



 


The important issue before us is not the stirrings we can already document but 
the changes that further climate change is likely to engender. Here we can turn for 
glimpses of the future by pairing climate model projections with what we know of 
how nature responded to natural climate change in the past — such as during the 
glacial interglacial swings which preceded the stable climate “sweet spot” which has 
been so favorable to human civilization. We can anticipate multiple and massive 
mismatching and wrenching changes in the ecosystems on which we depend. It is 
quite clear from the fossil record that biological communities do not move as units 
like Birnam Wood in Macbeth, but rather that individual species move individually 
at different rates and sometimes in different directions as they attempt to track 
their required conditions. Basically ecosystems will disassemble and the individual 
species will assemble into novel biological communities: both a nightmare for nat- 
ural resource managers as well as for the rest of us, as the shuffling of the ecologi- 
cal decks favors opportunistic species such as weeds, pests and diseases. 

It is already clear that there will be threshold changes in ecosystems. One clear- 
cut example has been occurring in the coniferous forest of western Canada and the 
northwest United States. There, the naturally occurring pine bark beetle — always 
part of the ecosystem but held largely in check by other species, has had the balance 
tipped in its favor by a succession of mild winters and elevated summer night time 
temperatures. There has been massive die off of trees, the red color of which makes 
the landscape reminiscent of autumn color in New England (). Even if it were not 
to spread farther (and there is no obvious biological barrier) it has had a huge im- 
pact on the timber industry and all species that live in those forest, as well creating 
conditions for forest fires of a magnitude we have never seen. 

Threshold changes and more gradual linear changes in ecosystems are driven not 
only by temperature difference but also by change in precipitation patterns. Obvi- 
ously that will be a problem for freshwater ecosystems already coping with tempera- 
ture change. In the American southwest there already is a dramatic example of a 
threshold change driven by a marked drop in precipitation: in northern Arizona 
drought has caused a complete die off of trees (). 

It is important to note that the oceans and marine organisms are similarly vul- 
nerable to climate change. (The United States has the greatest amount of marine 
environment of any Nation because of its extensive economic zones). Coral reefs 
prove to be particularly temperature sensitive and experience bleaching events in 
which the algal partner of the coral animals is ejected turning that Technicolor 
world into something approaching a black and white movie. Even more disturbing 
we have only recently learned () that the oceans are increasing in acidity because 
of the additional carbon dioxide in the atmosphere. This is essentially simple high 
school chemistry: the more CO  in the atmosphere the more acid the oceans become. 
They are already  percent more acid (. pH unit). Increasing acidity has pro- 
found implications for all organisms that build shells from calcium carbonate from 
corals to clams to tiny plankton at the base of most food chains. The calcium car- 
bonate equilibrium is pH dependent. 

If this is the case with current climate change, there could be profound effects if 
climate change is allowed beyond that which is already programmed by current lev- 
els of greenhouse gas concentrations. All five of the global climate models for exam- 
ple show that with double pre-industrial levels of CO  the sugar maple will no 
