Statements: 

Clark, Jamie Rappaport, Executive Vice President, Defenders of Wildlife .  

International Union for Conservation of Nature (lUCN)  

National Wildlife Federation, Nationwide Opinion, Survey of Hunters 

and Anglers, March/April   

Schweiger, Larry J., President & CEO, National Wildlife Federation  

U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service  


(III) 




GLOBAL WARMING AND WILDLIFE 


WEDNESDAY, FEBRUARY ,  

U.S. Senate, 

Committee on Environment and Public Works, 
Subcommittee on Private Sector and Consumer 
Solutions to Global Warming and Wildlife Protection, 

Washington, DC. 

The committee met, pursuant to notice, at : a.m. in room 
, Dirksen Senate Office Building, the Hon. Joseph Lieberman 
(chairman of the committee) presiding. 

Present: Senators Lieberman, Warner, Boxer, Inhofe, Isakson, 
Alexander 

OPENING STATEMENT OF THE HON. JOSEPH I. LIEBERMAN, 
U.S. SENATOR FROM THE STATE OF CONNECTICUT 

Senator Lieberman. Good morning, and welcome to this first 
hearing of the Subcommittee on Private Sector and Consumer Solu- 
tions to Global Warming and Wildlife Protection. 

It is my honor to convene this first hearing. In doing so, I want 
to thank the Chairman of the overall Committee on Environment 
and Public Works, Senator Boxer, for creating this subcommittee 
focused on these challenges. It is a measure of her commitment and 
I think the committee’s, on a bipartisan basis, to get something 
done, and particularly to seize the moment and the momentum 
that is building across our country and in most importantly, in the 
world of science and scientific inquiry and conclusion that global 
warming is real and that we have got to do something about it to 
protect ourselves and those who will follow us here on Earth. 

I am very happy and honored that Senator Warner has agreed 
to become the ranking Republican on this subcommittee. He is a 
dear friend, a great Senator and I know wants to go forward and 
see if we can get some things done. I thank the other members who 
are here. Senator Inhofe, the ranking Republican on the overall 
committee, and Senator Isakson. 

Last Friday, the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, 
known generally as the IPCC, issued its most recent report, in 
which it found a greater than  percent probability, this is the 
language of science, but this number has gone up dramatically in 
each of the IPCC reports, more than  percent probability that 
greenhouse gases release by human activities, such as burning coal 
in power plants or using gasoline from oil in our cars and trucks, 
have caused most of the global warming observed over the last  
years. If we fail to reduce our emissions of greenhouse gases now, 
or as soon as possible, the report says, the global average surface 

(  ) 



 


air temperature will rise by  to  degrees Fahrenheit by the end 
of this century. That is an astounding number, an enormous jump 
in global temperatures, which has reached the point where it is 
comprehensible by us non-scientists, to see how significant the po- 
tential changes are here. 

As a result, according to the IPCC, sea levels will rise, snow 
cover will contract and sea ice will recede. Heat waves will become 
more frequent, hurricanes and typhoons will become more intense 
and rainfall will become less frequent in the sub-tropics. I don’t 
read this report as a plea for panic, but it certainly is a summons 
to action, and quickly. The purpose of today’s hearing is to build 
on our knowledge of the impacts, real and potential, of global 
warming on wildlife in different regions of this country and the 
world, to see how climate change is already having an effect on the 
species and what further impacts the experts we have before us 
would expect if the IPCC, based on the IPCC report. 

Let me just give you as one recent example, just  months ago, 
within the last  months, the Director of the U.S. Fish and Wildlife 
Service has identified a warming climate and the resulting melting 
of sea ice as the primary reason polar bears may now be threat- 
ened as a species and may in fact be endangered, as a matter of 
law. We will hear today that the polar bear is not the only species 
so endangered by the warming of the globe, and that Arctic is not 
the only region of the world with such climate-sensitive species. 

I must say that the diversity of voices in this country, not talking 
about the world, expressing concern about the harm done to wild- 
life by global warming, is striking and impressive. A poll conducted 
last spring by the National Wildlife Federation found that  per- 
cent of hunters and anglers in this country believe global warming 
is an urgent problem requiring immediate action. Seventy-five per- 
cent believe Congress should pass legislation that sets a clear na- 
tional goal for reducing global warming pollution with mandatory 
time lines. 

I am going to ask unanimous consent to put that National Wild- 
life Federation report into the record. 

[The referenced material can be found on page .] 

Senator Lieberman. Last month, prominent evangelical leaders 
in this country, including the Rev. Richard Cizik of the National 
Association of Evangelicals and the Rev. Jim Ball of the Evan- 
gelical Environmental Network signed a statement asserting that 
the earth is “seriously imperiled by human behavior,” that is a 
quote, and “the harm is seen throughout the natural world, includ- 
ing in the form of global warming.” 

The IPCC’s new assessment finds that greenhouse gases we have 
emitted over the past decades will inevitably cause some global 
warming. There is no stopping it. When Congress hopefully soon 
enacts legislation to reduce our greenhouse gas emissions, the leg- 
islation will, I hope, include measures designed to help wildlife spe- 
cies deal with the changes that are now unavoidable, while obvi- 
ously reducing greater changes in the future. 

The bill that I recently re-introduced with Senator McCain and 
others includes such measures. I believe we can make these provi- 
sions even stronger, and I look forward to working with my col- 



 


