Senator Warner. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like to take 
my round and then following your questions, maybe a few more. 

Just again on a personal note here, I am not much of a traveling 
Senator, at least other than to Iraq and Afghanistan, where I have 
been going constantly for  years, as most of us have, too. But I 
was thinking, Mr. Chairman, and I say to both distinguished chair- 
men, I look back on the mistakes I have made in my  years in 
the Senate. And one was the failure to join John Chafee when he 
was chairman of this committee on some marvelous trips he put to- 
gether. I remember I wanted to go down and study the rain forest 
in Brazil and others, where he actually went out and put a hands- 
on attitude. 

And I am thinking this subject is so important, and I will put 
this question to each of you to answer in your own way, is there 
a possible benefit if members of this committee, maybe you could 
assign some members to do one and some members to do another, 
if you were to organize a field trip somewhere geographically in 
your own area where we could go out and see with our own eyes, 
possibly, some of the facts that you bring to bear. 

And probably more importantly, I talked to some of the old- tim- 
ers. I am particular partial to old-timers now. 

[Laughter.] 

Senator Warner. But I remember going with my father into the 
upper reaches of the Blue Ridge Mountains as a small boy, trout 
fishing. And the trout were in abundance. Today, the acid rain has 
virtually removed them from many of the streams in my beloved 
Blue Ridge Mountains. Because those mountains are in the direct 
path of the effluent that comes out of the industrial valleys of 
American and the coal burning facilities, that is another whole 



 


story. I am not here to talk against coal, or I would be voted out 
of office tomorrow, given my State’s position in coal. But I have 
fought for many years on trying to clean up these plants. 

Regrettably, if I may digress a minute, literally millions and mil- 
lions of dollars. Bob Byrd and I and the other coal States have 
taken out of the Senate to study clean coal technology, they are 
building a brand new coal plant, I mean a big coal-fired plant in 
Virginia, and they are not spending a dollar on trying to clean up 
the effluent. Now, maybe some modification, I understand there is 
something in that plant, isn’t there? Well, I can’t even get the staff 
to talk about it. Maybe I had better correct the record. But none 
of this clean coal technology is coming into effect on the coal plants. 

But anyway, back to my question. If for instance my good friend, 
my new friend and going to be a good one, Mr. Stalling here from 
Montana, I would be glad to head the mission to Montana. 

Senator Lieberman. I was just going to say that I was going to 
head the mission to go trout fishing with Mr. Stalling. 

[Laughter.] 

Senator Warner. I have been to the Antarctic and I have seen 
the polar bears. You go up there. 

[Laughter.] 

Senator Lieberman. Dr. Kelly, I will see you. 

Senator Warner. And talk to some of the old-timers who with 
their own eyes, talk about all this scientific data, have seen, as my 
father if he were living would vouch and I can vouch, we have seen 
it in our own States through the years, those of us who still walk 
through the hills. So that we can bring back to the Senate some 
of our own ideas. 

Now, I will start out here in order. Do you think a field trip, you 
could organize it on your particular subjects, to some geographic 
area in this country that would be of value? 

Mr. Lovejoy. Absolutely. Seeing is believing. 

Senator Warner. What would we see? 

Mr. Lovejoy. I think it would be important to start off with 
something really dramatic, like the dying forests of the northwest 
from that pine bark beetle. 

Senator Warner. I have seen that recently. 

Mr. Lovejoy. There are some stretches in northern Arizona 
where the trees are just gone because of climate change drought. 

Senator Warner. All right, so you could put together for maybe 
a two-day trip or something, something that would be beneficial, 
and you would round up a couple of old guys like myself who could 
actually relate to it, is that right? 

Mr. Lovejoy. Absolutely. 

Senator Warner. Good. Mr. Mann. 

Mr. Mann. I would be delighted to host such a trip. I can take 
you everywhere from the remains of the current SAV, the sub- 
merged aquatic vegetations, if there are any striped bass around, 
we will give you a rod and reel, and failing that we will cheat and 
use a troll net. If I can get my friends in the Virginia Department 
of Agriculture and Consumer Services, very good friends who have 
worked with me on this, we can certainly find you some places 
where there are some invasive species and we can maybe, if there 



 


is enough time, even get you into the forestry areas. I would be 
happy, happy to host such a trip. 

Senator Warner. Mr. Stalling. 

Mr. Stalling. Oh, yes, I would be thrilled to take people up to 
the Rocky Mountain front where the Great Plains meet the Rockies 
on the east side of Glacier National Park, which is a place where 
legislation was recently passed, in an effort led by hunters, to pro- 
tect from irresponsible gas an oil development. But there are im- 
pacts there as far as the loss of white bark pine and the declining 
glaciers and impacts to some of the last strongholds for pure 
strains of west slope cutthroat trout, like Badger Creek and Two 
Medicine Creek that seem to be drying up every year. 

Senator Warner. All right, seriously, I sent Mr. Stalling a note 
that in , in preparation for trying to build myself up to go into 
World War II, which I did the last year, my father bought me a 
train ticket to Missoula, Montana, your town, and I got a job with 
the Forest Service as a firefighter. It is interesting, I went back 
with the Forest Service here  years ago, out at Coeur d’Alene, to 
find our camps, which were hard to find. I saw the devastation to 
the white pine from that beetle. It is tragic, these magnificent trees 
just dying as far as the eye can see. That is one of the most valu- 
able pieces of lumber that we have. 

Mr. Stalling. Another value to going up there would be you 
would be able to meet a lot of hunters and anglers and tribal lead- 
ers and ranchers and all kinds of folks who are very concerned 
about this issue. 

Senator Warner. All right. I am talking about people who have 
seen it with their own eyes. 
