population began to decline because of changing environmental conditions, the existing harvest 
was no longer sustainable, and the additive effects of climate change and over-harvest most 
likely accelerated the decline in abundance between  and , The harvest sex ratio of  


 



 


males per female has resulted in skewed sex ratio within the population of % female and % 
male polar bears (Regehr et al., unpubl. data). 

Concurrent with the recent re-assessment of the size of the WH population, an increased number 
of polar bears have been reported in and around human settlements along the coast of Western 
Hudson Bay. In some communities, this increase in polar bear sightings has been interpreted as 
evidence that the size of the WH population is increasing. Based on this perception, the 
government of Nunavut in December  increased its quota for the number of polar bears that 
could be harvested from the WH population from  to  polar bears. In order to sustain this 
increased level of harvest, Nunavut estimated that the size of the WH population would have to 
be at least , bears which is the population estimate currently used by Nunavut for 
management purposes. An alternate explanation for the apparent increase in polar bears in the 
vicinity of human settlements and hunting camps is that, because of declines in body condition 
associated with the earlier sea ice break-up, polar bears in Western Hudson Bay have less time to 
accumulate the fat reserves that they depend on during the open water season. As polar bears 
deplete their fat reserves toward the end of the open water season, they are more likely to seek 
alternative food sources around human settlements to sustain themselves until freeze-up (Stirling 
and Parkinson ). 

. Southern Hudson Bay (SH) 

Boundaries of the SH polar bear population are based on movements of marked bears and 
telemetry studies (Jonkel et al. , Kolenosky and Prevett , Kolenosky et al. , Taylor 
and Lee ). Recently completed research using satellite telemetry collared bears was aimed at 
refining the boundaries of this population and estimating the population size and rates of birth 
and death (Obbard et al., unpubl. data). The current estimate of the size of the population comes 
from a -year (-) mark-recapture study, conducted mainly along the Ontario coastline 
(Kolenosky et al. ). This study and the more recent telemetry data have documented 
seasonal fidelity to the Ontario coast during the ice-free season, and some intermixing with the 
WH and FB populations during months when the bay is frozen over. In , the results of a 


 



 


modelling workshop included an increase in the population estimate from  to  , bears 
because portions of the eastern and western coastal areas were not included during original 
sampling. Additionally, the area away from the coast may have been under-sampled due to 
difficulties in detecting polar bears inland in treed habitat (i.e. below the tree line). Thus, some 
classes of bears, especially pregnant females, may have been under-sampled. The estimate of 
, bears in this status report is considered dated. The final year of a mark-recapture inventory 
was completed in fall  and a new population estimate should be available soon. 

Based on the estimate of , bears, the total harvest by Nunavut, Ontario, and Quebec appears 
to be sustainable. Recent analysis of coastal survey data (Stirling et al. ) suggests that polar 
bear numbers in SH have remained unchanged in recent years. A pattern of decline in body 
condition was documented for the SH population when comparing bears captured in  - 
with those captured in - (Obbard et al, ); however, it is unknown whether changes in 
demographic parameters like those described by Stirling et al. () and Derocher et al. () 
have occurred. 


. Kane Basin (KB) 

Based on the movements of adult females with satellite telemetry collars and recaptures of 
tagged animals, the boundaries of the KB polar bear population include the North Water Polynya 
(to the south of KB), and Greenland and Ellesmere Island to the west, north, and east (Taylor et 
al. b). Polar bears in Kane Basin do not differ genetically from those in Baffin Bay (Paetkau 
et al. ). Prior to , this population was essentially unharvested in Canadian territory 
because of its distance from Grise Fiord, the closest Canadian community, and because 
conditions for travel in the region are typically difficult. However, this population has 
occasionally been harvested by hunters from Grise Fiord since , and continues to be 
harvested on the Greenland side of Kane Basin. In some years, Greenland hunters have also 
harvested polar bears in western Kane Basin and Smith Sound (Rosing-Asvid and Born , 
), 


 



 


Few polar bears were encountered by researchers along the Greenland coast from  through 
 , possibly because of previously intense harvest pressure by Greenland hunters. The current 
estimate of the KB population is  (Taylor, unpubl. data) and the best estimate of the 
Greenland kill is  bears per year during - (Bom b, Born and Sonne ). 
However, the actual number being taken by Greenland hunters is uncertain (Born , Born and 
Sonne ) and must be validated. The Canadian quota for this population is  and if Canadian 
Inuit continue to harvest from this area, over-harvest and population depletion could occur. The 
annual combined Canadian and Greenlandic take of - from the KB population is 
unsustainable (Table ). This population is classified as declining by the PBSG (Aars et at. 
). Although the habitat appears suitable for polar bears on both the Greenland and Canadian 
sides of Kane Basin, the densities of polar bears on the Greenland side were much lower than on 
the Canadian side, suggesting that this population may have been larger in past years, and could 
be managed for population increase. Co-management discussions between Greenland and 
Canada are continuing. Greenland has decided to move to a quota system taking effect on  
January  (Lonstrup ). The total  quota is  bears for the municipality of Qaanaaq 
(NW Greenland) that harvest polar bears in Kane Basin. However, it has not been specifically 
stated how many of the  bears can be taken in Kane Basin. 


. Baffin Bay (BB) 

Based on the movements of adult females with satellite collars and recaptures of tagged animals, 
the area in which the BB population occurs is bounded by the North Water Polynya to the north, 
Greenland to the east and Baffin Island to the west (Taylor and Lee , Taylor et al. b). A 
relatively distinct southern boundary at Cape Dyer, Baffin Island, is evident from the movements 
of tagged bears (Stirling et al. ) and recent movement data from polar bears monitored by 
satellite telemetry (Taylor et al. b). A study of microsatellite variation did not reveal any 
genetic differences between polar bears in Baffin Bay and Kane Basin, although Baffin Bay 
bears differed significantly from Davis Strait and Lancaster Sound bears (Paetkau et al. ). 
An initial population estimate of - bears was based on mark-recapture data collected in 


 



 


spring - in which the capture effort was restricted to shore-fast ice and the floe edge 
off northeast Baffin Island (Schweinsburg and Lee, unpubl. data). However, recent work has 
shown that an unknown proportion of the population is typically offshore during the spring and, 
therefore, unavailable for capture. A second study was carried out annually during the months of 
September and October -, when all polar bears were ashore in summer retreat areas on 
Bylot and Baffin islands (Taylor el al. ). Based on those data Taylor et al. () estimated 
the number of polar bears at , bears. 

The BB population is shared with Greenland, which until January ,  did not limit the 
number of polar bears harvested. Using mark-recapture, Taylor et al. () estimated the 
Greenland annual removal at  - bears for the period of  -. However, Bom () 
had reported that the estimated Greenland average annual catch of polar bears from the BB 
population was  inl-. More recently, Bom and Sonne () indicated the BB 
average annual kill from - for Greenland was  (range: - bears per year) with 
an increasing trend. In December , based on reports from Inuit hunters that polar bear 
numbers in BB had grown substantially, Nunavut increased its BB polar bear quota from  to 
  bears. 

The BB population appears to be substantially over-harvested and is classified as declining by 
the PBSG (Aars et al. , Stirling and Parkinson ). The current () estimate of 
population size is less than  , bears based on simulations using the pooled Canadian and 
