disagreements about effects of the “feedbacks” of the climate system. While increas- 
ing CO  will, by itself, tend to increase the surface temperature of the Earth, it will 
also change other parameters, such as the amount of water vapor or the extent of 
clouds, which also affect the climate system. For example, if the climate warms due 
to increased CO  , then this will evaporate more water vapor into the atmosphere. 
Water vapor is a powerful greenhouse gas, so this will amplify the warming. This 
is an example of a positive feedback. On the other hand, the increase in CO  might 
also increase low clouds. These clouds reflect sunlight, so if they increase it would 
cool the Earth, moderating somewhat the warming effects of the CO  increase. 
These feedbacks are only roughly understood, and improving our understanding of 
them would significantly improve our ability to predict the future climate. 

Changes in the amount of solar radiation would definitely affect the climate, and 
there are indications that changes in solar radiation may have been an important 
contributor to climate change over the past few centuries. However, changes in out- 
put of the sun cannot, by themselves, entirely explain the observed warming over 
the last century. Our best estimates are that changes in solar output could explain 
about  percent of the surface temperature increase observed in the last  years. 
The rapidly increasing concentrations of greenhouse gases also mean that solar vari- 
ability will be an ever-smaller component of climate change in the future. 

There are also important questions about the relationship of temperature change 
to other changes in the physical climate system. One of the expected consequences 
of warming is acceleration of the Earth’s hydrological cycle. The increased evapo- 
ration of water described above will transfer water more rapidly from the land and 
oceans to the atmosphere, and could result in an increased incidence of both 
droughts and the extreme rainfall events that lead to flooding. There is already evi- 
dence that such change has begun in the U.S., where the incidence of heavy 
downpours (where more than  inches of rain falls in a -hour period) has in- 
creased by about % over the last century. We know that there will be significant 
regional variation in these changes, but our ability to project regional-scale precipi- 
tation change is very limited, and we do not have a good understanding of how pre- 
cipitation change will interact with other stresses on managed and natural eco- 
systems. 

We also need to quantify the relative contributions of the oceans and terrestrial 
plants to removing carbon from the atmosphere. Human activities add about  bil- 
lion tons of carbon to the atmosphere every year. About  billion tons remain in the 
atmosphere, while  billion are absorbed by terrestrial and ocean “sinks.” We know 
that land ecosystems play an important role in carbon sequestration, but important 
questions remain about the magnitude and geographic distribution of terrestrial 
sinks. For example, there is consensus that more carbon is being taken up than is 
released by land ecosystems in the Northern Hemisphere, but we don’t know if the 
amount is on the order of tens of millions or hundreds of millions of tons. And where 
in the Northern Hemisphere is carbon is being sequestered? It could be mostly in 
North America, or it might be in Siberia. 

More importantly, we don’t know whether it is the above ground vegetation or the 
soils that are responsible for the apparent increase in sequestration. We also don’t 
know what is causing this and whether it will persist. Is it from nitrogen fertiliza- 
tion, an effect that will disappear when soils become nitrogen-saturated, or as indus- 
trial and automobile pollution is decreased? Is it from carbon fertilization, an effect 
that could slowly decline with increasing atmospheric concentrations? Is it from 
plants growing on abandoned farmland, or from increased use of “low-till” agricul- 
tural practices? Is it from growth of many young forests created recently under re- 
vised logging laws, an effect that will decline as the forests mature? Or is it simply 
from forest trees growing better in warmer, moister conditions, an effect that may 
continue indefinitely? Finally, we know that the amount of carbon the global bio- 
sphere stores and releases each year can vary widely. However, we don’t know how 
much of that sequestered CO  in the terrestrial biosphere is transitory, being re- 
turned to the atmosphere in a year or two to continue contributing to atmospheric 
CO  increases. We also don’t know how much carbon is retained in soils for the dec- 
ades or centuries required to ameliorate atmospheric increases. Different answers 
to these questions will determine very different trajectories of future atmospheric 
CO  change. 



 


We also know that local plant and animal species are being mixed into ecosystems 
all over the world at increasing rates. Climate change may exacerbate this problem. 
We also know that when these exotic species spread aggressively, they can reduce 
and displace current species, disrupt ecosystem functioning, and do enormous eco- 
nomic damage. The National Academy of Sciences estimates that pubic and private- 
sector spending on Zebra Mussel control, a problem we did not even anticipate in 
the s, will total $ billion in . Given that expected rates of change over 
the next century will alter the ideal ranges of plant and animal species faster than 
they can migrate, ecosystem disruption is likely. 

New Directions in the U.S. Global Change Research Program (USGCRP) 

One of the consequences of increased understanding is the definition of new re- 
search questions. The process of revising and updating research strategies in re- 
sponse to new findings and new questions goes on every year. It is a regular part 
of managing large research programs, and the USGCRP is no exception. But peri- 
odically, it is also valuable to step back and take a longer-term view of what has 
been accomplished and what new research challenges are arising. One of the most 
important contributions of the National Research Council to the USGCRP is pre- 
cisely this kind of taking stock. In , the USGCRP requested the NRC to under- 
take a major study of emerging issues in global change science. The result was Glob- 
al Environmental Change: Research Pathways for the Next Decade, which consists 
of a summary issued in mid  and a full report published in . The “Path- 
ways” report identified a comprehensive set of science questions, and identified sev- 
eral cross-cutting areas of special concern, including carbon cycle science, water 
cycle science, and climate change research “on temporal and spatial scales relevant 
to human activities.” These recommendations played an important part in the defi- 
nition and initiation of a series of new activities in the USGCRP: the Carbon Cycle 
Science Initiative, an increased emphasis on water cycle research, and the initiation 
of the first National Assessment of the Potential Consequences of Climate Varia- 
bility and Change for the US. 

The USGCRP Carbon Cycle Science Initiative was established in the FY 
budget. The focus of this activity is on improving our understanding of how carbon 
moves through the Earth’s terrestrial ecosystems, soils, ocean, and atmosphere, with 
$ million proposed in the FY budget (a $ million increase over FY). 
This on-going effort will provide critical scientific information on the fate of carbon 
in the environment, the sources and sinks of carbon on continental and regional 
scales, and how sinks might change naturally over time or be modified by agricul- 
tural or forestry practices. USDA, DOE, DOI/USGS, NASA, NSF, DOC/NOAA, and 
the Smithsonian Institution will all play important roles in this effort, guided by 
a science plan that has been drafted with participation by many of the leading sci- 
entists in this field. 

The Carbon Cycle Science Initiative will employ a wide variety of research activi- 
ties in a comprehensive examination of the carbon cycle as an integrated system, 
with an initial emphasis on North America. Comparison of North America to other 
regions will also be important for understanding the relative importance of our re- 
gion in the global context. Atmospheric and oceanographic field sampling campaigns 
over the continent and adjacent ocean basins will be combined with atmospheric 
transport models to develop more robust estimates of the continental distribution 
and subcontinental-scale magnitude of North American carbon sinks. Local-scale ex- 
periments conducted in various regions will begin to identify the mechanisms in- 
volved in the operation of carbon sinks on land and in the ocean; the quantities of 
carbon assimilated by ecosystems, and how quantities might change to be enhanced 
in the future. 

The initiative will also include evaluation of information from past and current 
land-use changes, both from remotely sensed and historical records, to assess how 
human activity has affected carbon storage on land. Potential management strate- 
gies for maximizing carbon storage will be studied, including evaluation of the vari- 
ability, sustainability, lifetime, and related uncertainties of different managed se- 
questration approaches. Finally, enhanced long-term monitoring of the atmosphere, 
ocean, forests, agricultural lands, and range lands, using improved inventory tech- 
niques and new remote sensing, will be used to determine long-term changes in car- 
bon stocks. Integration of new observations and understanding of carbon cycle proc- 
esses in regional and global carbon system models will enable us to more accurately 
project future atmospheric concentrations of carbon dioxide and other greenhouse 
gases. 

The highest priority for FY will continue to be on understanding and quanti- 
fying North American carbon sources and sinks, and on filling critical gaps in our 
understanding of the causes of carbon sinks on land as well as processes controlling 



 


