mining interannual variations but suspect for trends. 

Reconciling temperature records 

All three records have been improved and developed in recent years. In particular 
several corrections have been made to the satellite record (e.g., for orbital decay), 
and these have improved the agreement. Using the radiosonde record to estimate 
the temperatures of the layer seen by satellite shows very good agreement, so that 
the radiosonde record can be used to extend the satellite record back to about  
(Fig. ). While tropospheric temperature trends from  to  are small, longer 
term trends are more clearly positive and closer to those at the surface. 

It is evident that the trends in the satellite record are distinctly less than those 
in the surface record after , and this arises primarily because they are meas- 
uring quite different things. The differences come from the vertical structure of the 
temperature changes with time, which are complicated by features, such as tem- 
perature inversions, in which the surface is disconnected from the atmosphere aloft. 
Low level inversions trap pollutants near the surface and are common over 
extratropical continents in winter, as well as throughout much of the tropics and 
subtropics. The physical forcing factors believed to be involved in causing differences 
in trends include (  ) stratospheric ozone depletion which preferentially cools the sat- 
ellite record; () episodic volcanic eruptions which cool the MSU more; () increases 
in greenhouse gases which warms MSU more; () changes in visible pollution 
(aerosols) which have complex regional effects that are not well known in vertical 
structure; () solar variations which are fairly small in this interval. 

Other physical factors include () El Nino and other natural variability which 
seems to produce a larger MSU response than at the surface by about  to %; 
() day-night differences which relate to maximum versus minimum temperature 
trends; and () land-ocean differences. The much greater increases in minimum tem- 
perature, related to increasing cloud cover, occur through a shallow layer and are 
not seen as much by satellite as maximum temperature changes which are distrib- 
uted throughout the atmosphere by convection. The extent to which the changes in 
cloud cover arise from changes in atmospheric pollution or are a response to climate 
change is quite uncertain. Also ocean surface temperatures are muted, land tem- 
perature changes are much larger, and these differences are paramount at the sur- 
face but less evident in the troposphere where winds are much stronger. 



 


Not all of these effects have been included in models that deal with global warm- 
ing or future climate change projections, but more sophisticated climate model sim- 
ulations are expected in which best estimates of all the forcings will be included. 
Further improvements are also likely in the observational records of all three types. 
However, it is believed that the records are reasonably physically consistent with 
each other once all the forcing factors are taken into account. Accordingly, the re- 
cent warming at the surface is undoubtedly real, substantially greater than the av- 
erage rate during the th century, and is in no way invalidated by the satellite 
record. 

A reasonable interpretation of the observational record is that global warming 
from increased greenhouse gases is resulting in global temperatures that are now 
above and beyond those arising from natural variability. The main reasons tropo- 
spheric temperatures are not keeping pace are because of stratospheric ozone deple- 
tion and increases in cloud cover. Consequently larger surface temperature in- 
creases occur over land and at nighttime. While observationally uncertain globally, 
although with strong evidence over the United States, increases in surface drying, 
atmospheric moisture amounts and precipitation rates are expected as part of an 
increase in the hydrological cycle. This increases risk of floods, droughts and associ- 
ated fires; these are all extremes which are very costly to the environment and to 
society. 


Fig. . Global mean seasonal temperature anomalies from the MSU-LT after , the equivalent from 
radiosondes, and the surface from  on. 


Seasonal Global Mean Temperatures 

Satellite (MSU), surface (CRU and UKMO) and balloon (HadRT.) 



I MjUy Ovs tr* tv C/.Vn»JPrvfi etvy, A*>***eV UK M *t O.'ftc* 



 


The Chairman. Dr. Watson. 

STATEMENT OF DR. ROBERT WATSON, CHAIRMAN, 
INTERGOVERNMENTAL PANEL ON CLIMATE CHANGE 

Dr. Watson. Thank you, Senator. It is a pleasure to be here 
today to testify on the issue of climate change. I am testifying in 
my capacity as the Chairman of the Intergovernmental Panel on 
Climate Change. 

The IPCC conducts peer reviewed, comprehensive assessments of 
the climate system every  years, and periodic technical papers, 
special reports, and methodological studies as needed. 

These assessments provide the scientific and technical basis for 
the international negotiations. The IPCC assessments involve ex- 
perts from all relevant disciplines, all stakeholder groups and from 
around the world. 

The second IPCC assessment report was prepared and peer-re- 
viewed by over , experts from over  countries. 

During the last year, the IPCC has published four special re- 
ports, one on aviation and the global atmosphere; one on tech- 
nology transfer; one on emissions scenarios; and the one that I per- 
sonally chaired and finished last week on land-use, land-use 
change and forestry. 

We are in the middle of preparing and peer-reviewing the third 
assessment report, which will be finished early next year. 

There is no doubt that human-induced climate change is one of 
the most important environmental issues facing society worldwide. 
Climate change is inevitable. It is only a question of how much, 
when and where. 

Human activities have significantly changed the composition of 
the Earth’s atmosphere during the last  years. The atmospheric 
abundance of carbon dioxides increased about  percent, largely 
due to the combustion of fossil fuels and changes in land-use, pri- 
marily — primarily deforestation in the tropics. 

The Earth’s surface temperature warmed . to . degrees centi- 
grade over the last  years. The last two decades are the warm- 
est of the last century. And the  warmest years of the last cen- 
tury have all occurred since . And this century is clearly the 
warmest century in the last , years. 

The spacial and temporal patterns of precipitation are changing. 
There have been observed increases in precipitation in the mid- 
and high-latitude and decreases in the sub-tropics. 

And there has been an increase in heavy precipitation events and 
a decrease in light precipitation events, at least in the United 
States. 

Many parts of the world have suffered major heat waves, floods 
and droughts during the last few years, leading to significant eco- 
nomic losses and loss of life. 

While individual events cannot be directly linked to human-in- 
duced climate change, the frequency and magnitude of these types 
of events are expected to increase in a warmer world. 

Glaciers are retreating worldwide. Sea level has increased  to 
 centimeters in the last  years. And Arctic ice is thinning. 
The observed changes in the Earth’s climate cannot be explained 
