known. The cooling is estimated to range from  to perhaps as much as - W 
nr  and so the cooling could be as much as .°C. Over land since , the max- 
imum temperature is rising at a rate of about .°C/decade less than the minimum 
temperature and this has been shown to be mainly due to the increase in cloudi- 
ness. So there is huge uncertainty to this answer. 

[Please note, the numbers in this answer are in the context of the IPCC estimates 
of radiative forcing. These include . W nr  for the sum of the main well mixed 
greenhouse gases (not including ozone) to date and perhaps a total of about . W 
nr  for all radiative forcings. I use a translation into a temperature change of  W 
m-  (the value for doubling carbon dioxide alone) corresponding to .°C. This total 
would then correspond to over .°C increase in temperature versus .°C observed; 
the difference being due to delays in the system response.] 

Question . You mentioned in your written statement that changes in extremes 
changes in climate will be much greater than changes in the mean as a result of 



 


global warming and the increased amount of moisture in the air. Can you elaborate 
on the types of extremes we may be experiencing? 

Answer. A relatively small change in the mean of any quantity can alter the fre- 
quency of extremes by % or more. By their very nature, extremes occur rarely, 
and so observationally based statistics on them and their changes are hard to come 
by. The databases to determine their changes are less available and the demands 
on accuracy are much greater, and so actual measured changes in extremes are 
often uncertain. 

Changes in some extremes have been documented in the United States and to a 
much lesser extent elsewhere. In the United States, precipitation is increasing, and 
most of that increase is in the heaviest (top %) rainfall rates. Extremes of daily 
rainfall of over  inches per day have increased about % over the past century. 
(Because it typically rains % or less of the time, hourly rather than daily rainfall 
data should be used for this analysis, but are much less readily available). Much 
below normal temperatures (lowest %) are decreasing and much above normal 
temperatures (top %) are increasing for the U.S. (although some record high tem- 
peratures still hark from the s in the Dust Bowl era). In general, extremes are 
observed to be increasing. 

What we expect, but have little documentation of, is that rainfall rates are in- 
creasing, so that when it rains, it rains harder, and there is thus more runoff and 
a greater risk of flooding. Whether flooding occurs or not depends on whether it is 
mitigated by building drainage ditches, levees, culverts, etc. through planning by 
the Corp of Engineers and local councils in the U.S. In many developing countries, 
however, the risk of flooding has been exacerbated by deforestation that greatly in- 
creases runoff. In most places, increased building in coastal areas and flood plains 
has increased vulnerability to flooding. It is also suspected that droughts set in 
more quickly through increased drying. Plant therefore wilt faster and droughts be- 
come more severe and are apt to last a bit longer with global warming. The result 
is greatly increased risk of wild fire and for “control burn” fires to get out of control. 
Heat waves are also more likely. The “heat index,” which combines humidity and 
temperature effects, is likely to venture into the uncomfortable range more often 
and over much greater areas. 

Question . Figure  of your statement indicates a decrease in the average mean 
global temperature in the year . Can you explain the decrease? 

Answer. The global mean temperature had a peak in the early s and there was 
a decline or leveling off until about the s. Firstly, observations during World 
War II were less abundant than before or after but also occurred in new areas (like 
the Pacific atolls) and so some of the temperature peak might not be real (e.g., one 
can not stand on the deck of a ship and read a thermometer at night with a light 
during war, and so the thermometer is taken inside where it may be warmer.) How- 
ever, a massive long-lived El Nino from  to  no doubt contributed to the 
warmth. Secondly, following the war there was great industrial development that 
is known to have increased the amount of aerosol in the atmosphere sharply, and 
so this contributes a cooling effect. Thirdly, the warming from about  to  
was probably in part caused by increases in solar radiation, which leveled off in the 
s. Climate models run with reasonable estimates of the changes in aerosols and 
sun plus greenhouse gas increases are able to reproduce this feature. 

Question . One of the recommendations of the NRC report (page ) states that 
the scientific community should explore the possibility of exploiting the sophisti- 
cated protocols that are now routinely used to ensure the quality control and con- 
sistency of the data ingested into operational numerical weather prediction models, 
to improve the reliability of the data sets used to monitor global climate change. 

Would you explain this recommendation and discuss how it should be imple- 
mented? 

Answer. During the ingestion of data into four dimensional data assimilation sys- 
tems, extensive quality control of the observations occurs: ) through comparison of 
observations with estimates of the observed values from the previous forecast, and 
) comparison with adjacent observations of all kinds in a consistent physical 
(model) framework. Sometimes this enables correction for some kinds of errors and 
it allows systematic errors to be estimated. The result is that a quality control flag 
can be assigned to each observation and information exists on whether the observa- 
tion was used or rejected, and how accurate it appears to be. This information 
should be retained and archived. In the case of rejected or missing data, an accurate 
estimate of what the observation should have been can be made, and this estimate 



 


can be utilized to improve the data set. Similarly, more intelligent decisions can be 
made to quality control the whole data set and make it more reliable. 

My recommendation is to have the numerical weather prediction centers, in col- 
laboration with climate scientists, select a subset of observations (in particular a 
subset of radiosonde observations) and generate an enhanced data set that includes, 
with the original observation, the quality control output and estimates of correct 
values in cases of missing or erroneous data. This could feasibly be done for tem- 
perature, and perhaps humidity and wind measurements during a reanalysis of past 
data. In particular, monthly summaries of estimates of offset bias should prove very 
valuable. Then independent analysis of the more comprehensive data set should en- 
able more reliable trend estimates from the radiosondes. 


Response to Written Questions Submitted by Hon. John McCain to 
Robert Watson 

Question . If you consider all of the peer-reviewed assessments that the IPCC has 
made over the years, have there been any distinctive trends in the findings? Have 
any of the studies contradicted each other? 

Answer. There has clearly been a longer observational record and an evolution in 
our understanding of the Earth’s climate system and the potential influence of 
human activities. Our understanding of the fundamental process that control the 
Earth’s climate have clearly improved, although significant uncertainties still re- 
main. This, improved understanding of the processes that control the Earth’s cli- 
mate system, combined with more powerful computers, has led to significantly more 
sophisticated theoretical models that include a more realistic simulation of land, 
oceanic and atmospheric processes with increased spatial resolution. 

There have been no major changes in the conclusions of successive IPCC reports. 
In most cases, based on new research findings, there have been small changes in 
understanding but few, if any, substantial changes in our fundamental under- 
standing. 

Let me summarize how our understanding has evolved since the First IPCC as- 
sessment in  using just a few key issues to illustrate trends in findings. I have 
focussed my answer on the climate system rather than on the projected impacts of 
climate change on human health, socio-economic sectors and ecological systems or 
the projected approaches to mitigate climate change: 

. Past changes in atmospheric composition, climate and climate-related param- 
eters: 

• atmospheric composition: the atmospheric concentrations of the major green- 
house gases, i.e., carbon dioxide, methane and nitrous oxide have all continued 
to increase. However, the atmospheric concentrations of some of the 
chlorofluorocarbons have peaked and are now decreasing because of the effec- 
tiveness of the Montreal Protocol. 

