the whole normal law of humanity is contained in this sentiment of
self-preservation?”

“Ah!” cried Hippolyte, turning towards Evgenie Pavlovitch, and looking
at him with a queer sort of curiosity.

Then seeing that Radomski was laughing, he began to laugh himself,
nudged Colia, who was sitting beside him, with his elbow, and again
asked what time it was. He even pulled Colia’s silver watch out of his
hand, and looked at it eagerly. Then, as if he had forgotten everything,
he stretched himself out on the sofa, put his hands behind his head, and
looked up at the sky. After a minute or two he got up and came back
to the table to listen to Lebedeff’s outpourings, as the latter
passionately commentated on Evgenie Pavlovitch’s paradox.

“That is an artful and traitorous idea. A smart notion,” vociferated
the clerk, “thrown out as an apple of discord. But it is just. You are a
scoffer, a man of the world, a cavalry officer, and, though not without
brains, you do not realize how profound is your thought, nor how true.
Yes, the laws of self-preservation and of self-destruction are equally
powerful in this world. The devil will hold his empire over humanity
until a limit of time which is still unknown. You laugh? You do not
believe in the devil? Scepticism as to the devil is a French idea, and
it is also a frivolous idea. Do you know who the devil is? Do you know
his name? Although you don’t know his name you make a mockery of his
form, following the example of Voltaire. You sneer at his hoofs, at
his tail, at his horns--all of them the produce of your imagination! In
reality the devil is a great and terrible spirit, with neither
hoofs, nor tail, nor horns; it is you who have endowed him with these
attributes! But... he is not the question just now!”

“How do you know he is not the question now?” cried Hippolyte, laughing
hysterically.

“Another excellent idea, and worth considering!” replied Lebedeff. “But,
again, that is not the question. The question at this moment is whether
we have not weakened ‘the springs of life’ by the extension...”

“Of railways?” put in Colia eagerly.

“Not railways, properly speaking, presumptuous youth, but the general
tendency of which railways may be considered as the outward expression
and symbol. We hurry and push and hustle, for the good of humanity!
‘The world is becoming too noisy, too commercial!’ groans some solitary
thinker. ‘Undoubtedly it is, but the noise of waggons bearing bread to
starving humanity is of more value than tranquillity of soul,’ replies
another triumphantly, and passes on with an air of pride. As for me, I
don’t believe in these waggons bringing bread to humanity. For, founded
on no moral principle, these may well, even in the act of carrying bread
to humanity, coldly exclude a considerable portion of humanity from
enjoying it; that has been seen more than once.”

“What, these waggons may coldly exclude?” repeated someone.

“That has been seen already,” continued Lebedeff, not deigning to
notice the interruption. “Malthus was a friend of humanity, but, with
ill-founded moral principles, the friend of humanity is the devourer of
humanity, without mentioning his pride; for, touch the vanity of one of
these numberless philanthropists, and to avenge his self-esteem, he will
be ready at once to set fire to the whole globe; and to tell the truth,
we are all more or less like that. I, perhaps, might be the first to set
a light to the fuel, and then run away. But, again, I must repeat, that
is not the question.”

“What is it then, for goodness’ sake?”

“He is boring us!”

“The question is connected with the following anecdote of past times;
for I am obliged to relate a story. In our times, and in our country,
which I hope you love as much as I do, for as far as I am concerned, I
am ready to shed the last drop of my blood...

“Go on! Go on!”

“In our dear country, as indeed in the whole of Europe, a famine visits
humanity about four times a century, as far as I can remember; once in
every twenty-five years. I won’t swear to this being the exact figure,
but anyhow they have become comparatively rare.”

“Comparatively to what?”

“To the twelfth century, and those immediately preceding and following
it. We are told by historians that widespread famines occurred in those
days every two or three years, and such was the condition of things that
men actually had recourse to cannibalism, in secret, of course. One of
these cannibals, who had reached a good age, declared of his own free
will that during the course of his long and miserable life he had
personally killed and eaten, in the most profound secrecy, sixty monks,
not to mention several children; the number of the latter he thought was
about six, an insignificant total when compared with the enormous mass
of ecclesiastics consumed by him. As to adults, laymen that is to say,
he had never touched them.”

The president joined in the general outcry.

“That’s impossible!” said he in an aggrieved tone. “I am often
discussing subjects of this nature with him, gentlemen, but for the
most part he talks nonsense enough to make one deaf: this story has no
pretence of being true.”

“General, remember the siege of Kars! And you, gentlemen, I assure you
my anecdote is the naked truth. I may remark that reality, although it
is governed by invariable law, has at times a resemblance to falsehood.
In fact, the truer a thing is the less true it sounds.”

“But could anyone possibly eat sixty monks?” objected the scoffing
listeners.

“It is quite clear that he did not eat them all at once, but in a
space of fifteen or twenty years: from that point of view the thing is
comprehensible and natural...”

“Natural?”

“And natural,” repeated Lebedeff with pedantic obstinacy. “Besides, a
Catholic monk is by nature excessively curious; it would be quite easy
therefore to entice him into a wood, or some secret place, on false
pretences, and there to deal with him as said. But I do not dispute in
the least that the number of persons consumed appears to denote a spice
of greediness.”

“It is perhaps true, gentlemen,” said the prince, quietly. He had
been listening in silence up to that moment without taking part in the
conversation, but laughing heartily with the others from time to time.
Evidently he was delighted to see that everybody was amused, that
everybody was talking at once, and even that everybody was drinking.
It seemed as if he were not intending to speak at all, when suddenly
he intervened in such a serious voice that everyone looked at him with
interest.

“It is true that there were frequent famines at that time, gentlemen.
I have often heard of them, though I do not know much history. But it
seems to me that it must have been so. When I was in Switzerland I used
to look with astonishment at the many ruins of feudal castles perched
on the top of steep and rocky heights, half a mile at least above
sea-level, so that to reach them one had to climb many miles of stony
tracks. A castle, as you know, is, a kind of mountain of stones--a
dreadful, almost an impossible, labour! Doubtless the builders were
all poor men, vassals, and had to pay heavy taxes, and to keep up the
priesthood. How, then, could they provide for themselves, and when
had they time to plough and sow their fields? The greater number must,
literally, have died of starvation. I have sometimes asked myself how
it was that these communities were not utterly swept off the face of the
earth, and how they could possibly survive. Lebedeff is not mistaken,
in my opinion, when he says that there were cannibals in those days,
perhaps in considerable numbers; but I do not understand why he should
have dragged in the monks, nor what he means by that.”

“It is undoubtedly because, in the twelfth century, monks were the only
