driven off.

“Well, how much longer is this going to last, Ivan Fedorovitch? What do
you think? Shall I soon be delivered from these odious youths?”

“My dear, I am quite ready; naturally... the prince.”

Ivan Fedorovitch held out his hand to Muishkin, but ran after his wife,
who was leaving with every sign of violent indignation, before he had
time to shake it. Adelaida, her fiance, and Alexandra, said good-bye to
their host with sincere friendliness. Evgenie Pavlovitch did the same,
and he alone seemed in good spirits.

“What I expected has happened! But I am sorry, you poor fellow, that
you should have had to suffer for it,” he murmured, with a most charming
smile.

Aglaya left without saying good-bye. But the evening was not to end
without a last adventure. An unexpected meeting was yet in store for
Lizabetha Prokofievna.

She had scarcely descended the terrace steps leading to the high road
that skirts the park at Pavlofsk, when suddenly there dashed by a smart
open carriage, drawn by a pair of beautiful white horses. Having passed
some ten yards beyond the house, the carriage suddenly drew up, and one
of the two ladies seated in it turned sharp round as though she had just
caught sight of some acquaintance whom she particularly wished to see.

“Evgenie Pavlovitch! Is that you?” cried a clear, sweet voice, which
caused the prince, and perhaps someone else, to tremble. “Well, I _am_
glad I’ve found you at last! I’ve sent to town for you twice today
myself! My messengers have been searching for you everywhere!”

Evgenie Pavlovitch stood on the steps like one struck by lightning.
Mrs. Epanchin stood still too, but not with the petrified expression of
Evgenie. She gazed haughtily at the audacious person who had addressed
her companion, and then turned a look of astonishment upon Evgenie
himself.

“There’s news!” continued the clear voice. “You need not be anxious
about Kupferof’s IOU’s--Rogojin has bought them up. I persuaded him
to!--I dare say we shall settle Biscup too, so it’s all right, you
see! _Au revoir_, tomorrow! And don’t worry!” The carriage moved on, and
disappeared.

“The woman’s mad!” cried Evgenie, at last, crimson with anger, and
looking confusedly around. “I don’t know what she’s talking about! What
IOU’s? Who is she?” Mrs. Epanchin continued to watch his face for a
couple of seconds; then she marched briskly and haughtily away towards
her own house, the rest following her.

A minute afterwards, Evgenie Pavlovitch reappeared on the terrace, in
great agitation.

“Prince,” he said, “tell me the truth; do you know what all this means?”

“I know nothing whatever about it!” replied the latter, who was,
himself, in a state of nervous excitement.

“No?”

“No!”

“Well, nor do I!” said Evgenie Pavlovitch, laughing suddenly. “I haven’t
the slightest knowledge of any such IOU’s as she mentioned, I swear I
haven’t--What’s the matter, are you fainting?”

“Oh, no--no--I’m all right, I assure you!”

XI.

The anger of the Epanchin family was unappeased for three days. As usual
the prince reproached himself, and had expected punishment, but he was
inwardly convinced that Lizabetha Prokofievna could not be seriously
angry with him, and that she probably was more angry with herself. He
was painfully surprised, therefore, when three days passed with no word
from her. Other things also troubled and perplexed him, and one of these
grew more important in his eyes as the days went by. He had begun to
blame himself for two opposite tendencies--on the one hand to extreme,
almost “senseless,” confidence in his fellows, on the other to a “vile,
gloomy suspiciousness.”

By the end of the third day the incident of the eccentric lady and
Evgenie Pavlovitch had attained enormous and mysterious proportions in
his mind. He sorrowfully asked himself whether he had been the cause of
this new “monstrosity,” or was it... but he refrained from saying who
else might be in fault. As for the letters N.P.B., he looked on that as
a harmless joke, a mere childish piece of mischief--so childish that
he felt it would be shameful, almost dishonourable, to attach any
importance to it.

The day after these scandalous events, however, the prince had the
honour of receiving a visit from Adelaida and her fiance, Prince S. They
came, ostensibly, to inquire after his health. They had wandered out for
a walk, and called in “by accident,” and talked for almost the whole
of the time they were with him about a certain most lovely tree in the
park, which Adelaida had set her heart upon for a picture. This, and a
little amiable conversation on Prince S.’s part, occupied the time, and
not a word was said about last evening’s episodes. At length Adelaida
burst out laughing, apologized, and explained that they had come
incognito; from which, and from the circumstance that they said nothing
about the prince’s either walking back with them or coming to see them
later on, the latter inferred that he was in Mrs. Epanchin’s black
books. Adelaida mentioned a watercolour that she would much like to show
him, and explained that she would either send it by Colia, or bring it
herself the next day--which to the prince seemed very suggestive.

At length, however, just as the visitors were on the point of departing,
Prince S. seemed suddenly to recollect himself. “Oh yes, by-the-by,” he
said, “do you happen to know, my dear Lef Nicolaievitch, who that lady
was who called out to Evgenie Pavlovitch last night, from the carriage?”

“It was Nastasia Philipovna,” said the prince; “didn’t you know that? I
cannot tell you who her companion was.”

“But what on earth did she mean? I assure you it is a real riddle
to me--to me, and to others, too!” Prince S. seemed to be under the
influence of sincere astonishment.

“She spoke of some bills of Evgenie Pavlovitch’s,” said the prince,
simply, “which Rogojin had bought up from someone; and implied that
Rogojin would not press him.”

“Oh, I heard that much, my dear fellow! But the thing is so impossibly
absurd! A man of property like Evgenie to give IOU’s to a money-lender,
and to be worried about them! It is ridiculous. Besides, he cannot
possibly be on such intimate terms with Nastasia Philipovna as she gave
us to understand; that’s the principal part of the mystery! He has given
me his word that he knows nothing whatever about the matter, and of
course I believe him. Well, the question is, my dear prince, do you know
anything about it? Has any sort of suspicion of the meaning of it come
across you?”

“No, I know nothing whatever about it. I assure you I had nothing at all
to do with it.”

“Oh, prince, how strange you have become! I assure you, I hardly know
you for your old self. How can you suppose that I ever suggested you
could have had a finger in such a business? But you are not quite
yourself today, I can see.” He embraced the prince, and kissed him.

“What do you mean, though,” asked Muishkin, “‘by such a business’? I
don’t see any particular ‘business’ about it at all!”

“Oh, undoubtedly, this person wished somehow, and for some reason, to
do Evgenie Pavlovitch a bad turn, by attributing to him--before
witnesses--qualities which he neither has nor can have,” replied Prince
S. drily enough.

Muiskhin looked disturbed, but continued to gaze intently and
