her family worries and anxieties had little or no foundation, or that
her imagination increased them to an absurd degree; but if you have a
wart on your forehead or nose, you imagine that all the world is looking
at it, and that people would make fun of you because of it, even if you
had discovered America! Doubtless Lizabetha Prokofievna was considered
“eccentric” in society, but she was none the less esteemed: the pity was
that she was ceasing to believe in that esteem. When she thought of
her daughters, she said to herself sorrowfully that she was a hindrance
rather than a help to their future, that her character and temper were
absurd, ridiculous, insupportable. Naturally, she put the blame on her
surroundings, and from morning to night was quarrelling with her husband
and children, whom she really loved to the point of self-sacrifice,
even, one might say, of passion.

She was, above all distressed by the idea that her daughters might grow
up “eccentric,” like herself; she believed that no other society girls
were like them. “They are growing into Nihilists!” she repeated over and
over again. For years she had tormented herself with this idea, and with
the question: “Why don’t they get married?”

“It is to annoy their mother; that is their one aim in life; it can be
nothing else. The fact is it is all of a piece with these modern ideas,
that wretched woman’s question! Six months ago Aglaya took a fancy to
cut off her magnificent hair. Why, even I, when I was young, had nothing
like it! The scissors were in her hand, and I had to go down on my knees
and implore her... She did it, I know, from sheer mischief, to spite
her mother, for she is a naughty, capricious girl, a real spoiled child
spiteful and mischievous to a degree! And then Alexandra wanted to shave
her head, not from caprice or mischief, but, like a little fool, simply
because Aglaya persuaded her she would sleep better without her hair,
and not suffer from headache! And how many suitors have they not had
during the last five years! Excellent offers, too! What more do they
want? Why don’t they get married? For no other reason than to vex their
mother--none--none!”

But Lizabetha Prokofievna felt somewhat consoled when she could say that
one of her girls, Adelaida, was settled at last. “It will be one off our
hands!” she declared aloud, though in private she expressed herself with
greater tenderness. The engagement was both happy and suitable, and was
therefore approved in society. Prince S. was a distinguished man, he
had money, and his future wife was devoted to him; what more could
be desired? Lizabetha Prokofievna had felt less anxious about this
daughter, however, although she considered her artistic tastes
suspicious. But to make up for them she was, as her mother expressed it,
“merry,” and had plenty of “common-sense.” It was Aglaya’s future which
disturbed her most. With regard to her eldest daughter, Alexandra, the
mother never quite knew whether there was cause for anxiety or not.
Sometimes she felt as if there was nothing to be expected from her. She
was twenty-five now, and must be fated to be an old maid, and “with such
beauty, too!” The mother spent whole nights in weeping and lamenting,
while all the time the cause of her grief slumbered peacefully. “What is
the matter with her? Is she a Nihilist, or simply a fool?”

But Lizabetha Prokofievna knew perfectly well how unnecessary was the
last question. She set a high value on Alexandra Ivanovna’s judgment,
and often consulted her in difficulties; but that she was a ‘wet
hen’ she never for a moment doubted. “She is so calm; nothing rouses
her--though wet hens are not always calm! Oh! I can’t understand
it!” Her eldest daughter inspired Lizabetha with a kind of puzzled
compassion. She did not feel this in Aglaya’s case, though the latter
was her idol. It may be said that these outbursts and epithets, such as
“wet hen” (in which the maternal solicitude usually showed itself),
only made Alexandra laugh. Sometimes the most trivial thing annoyed Mrs.
Epanchin, and drove her into a frenzy. For instance, Alexandra Ivanovna
liked to sleep late, and was always dreaming, though her dreams had the
peculiarity of being as innocent and naive as those of a child of seven;
and the very innocence of her dreams annoyed her mother. Once she dreamt
of nine hens, and this was the cause of quite a serious quarrel--no
one knew why. Another time she had--it was most unusual--a dream with
a spark of originality in it. She dreamt of a monk in a dark room, into
which she was too frightened to go. Adelaida and Aglaya rushed off with
shrieks of laughter to relate this to their mother, but she was quite
angry, and said her daughters were all fools.

“H’m! she is as stupid as a fool! A veritable ‘wet hen’! Nothing excites
her; and yet she is not happy; some days it makes one miserable only
to look at her! Why is she unhappy, I wonder?” At times Lizabetha
Prokofievna put this question to her husband, and as usual she spoke
in the threatening tone of one who demands an immediate answer. Ivan
Fedorovitch would frown, shrug his shoulders, and at last give his
opinion: “She needs a husband!”

“God forbid that he should share your ideas, Ivan Fedorovitch!” his wife
flashed back. “Or that he should be as gross and churlish as you!”

The general promptly made his escape, and Lizabetha Prokofievna after a
while grew calm again. That evening, of course, she would be unusually
attentive, gentle, and respectful to her “gross and churlish” husband,
her “dear, kind Ivan Fedorovitch,” for she had never left off loving
him. She was even still “in love” with him. He knew it well, and for his
part held her in the greatest esteem.

But the mother’s great and continual anxiety was Aglaya. “She is exactly
like me--my image in everything,” said Mrs. Epanchin to herself. “A
tyrant! A real little demon! A Nihilist! Eccentric, senseless and
mischievous! Good Lord, how unhappy she will be!”

But as we said before, the fact of Adelaida’s approaching marriage was
balm to the mother. For a whole month she forgot her fears and worries.

Adelaida’s fate was settled; and with her name that of Aglaya’s was
linked, in society gossip. People whispered that Aglaya, too, was “as
good as engaged;” and Aglaya always looked so sweet and behaved so
well (during this period), that the mother’s heart was full of joy. Of
course, Evgenie Pavlovitch must be thoroughly studied first, before
the final step should be taken; but, really, how lovely dear Aglaya had
become--she actually grew more beautiful every day! And then--Yes, and
then--this abominable prince showed his face again, and everything went
topsy-turvy at once, and everyone seemed as mad as March hares.

What had really happened?

If it had been any other family than the Epanchins’, nothing particular
would have happened. But, thanks to Mrs. Epanchin’s invariable fussiness
and anxiety, there could not be the slightest hitch in the simplest
matters of everyday life, but she immediately foresaw the most dreadful
and alarming consequences, and suffered accordingly.

What then must have been her condition, when, among all the imaginary
anxieties and calamities which so constantly beset her, she now saw
looming ahead a serious cause for annoyance--something really likely to
arouse doubts and suspicions!

“How dared they, how _dared_ they write that hateful anonymous letter
informing me that Aglaya is in communication with Nastasia Philipovna?”
 she thought, as she dragged the prince along towards her own house,
and again when she sat him down at the round table where the family was
already assembled. “How dared they so much as _think_ of such a thing? I
should _die_ with shame if I thought there was a particle of truth in it,
or if I were to show the letter to Aglaya herself! Who dares play these
jokes upon _us_, the Epanchins? _Why_ didn’t we go to the Yelagin instead
of coming down here? I _told_ you we had better go to the Yelagin this
summer, Ivan Fedorovitch. It’s all your fault. I dare say it was that
Varia who sent the letter. It’s all Ivan Fedorovitch. _That_ woman is
doing it all for him, I know she is, to show she can make a fool of him
now just as she did when he used to give her pearls.

“But after all is said, we are mixed up in it. Your daughters are mixed
up in it, Ivan Fedorovitch; young ladies in society, young ladies at an
age to be married; they were present, they heard everything there was to
hear. They were mixed up with that other scene, too, with those dreadful
youths. You must be pleased to remember they heard it all. I cannot
forgive that wretched prince. I never shall forgive him! And why, if you
please, has Aglaya had an attack of nerves for these last three
days? Why has she all but quarrelled with her sisters, even with
Alexandra--whom she respects so much that she always kisses her hands as
though she were her mother? What are all these riddles of hers that we
have to guess? What has Gavrila Ardalionovitch to do with it? Why did
she take upon herself to champion him this morning, and burst into tears
over it? Why is there an allusion to that cursed ‘poor knight’ in the
