any of them.

Four persons entered, led by General Ivolgin, in a state of great
excitement, and talking eloquently.

“He is for me, undoubtedly!” thought the prince, with a smile. Colia
also had joined the party, and was talking with animation to Hippolyte,
who listened with a jeering smile on his lips.

The prince begged the visitors to sit down. They were all so young that
it made the proceedings seem even more extraordinary. Ivan Fedorovitch,
who really understood nothing of what was going on, felt indignant at
the sight of these youths, and would have interfered in some way had it
not been for the extreme interest shown by his wife in the affair.
He therefore remained, partly through curiosity, partly through
good-nature, hoping that his presence might be of some use. But the bow
with which General Ivolgin greeted him irritated him anew; he frowned,
and decided to be absolutely silent.

As to the rest, one was a man of thirty, the retired officer, now a
boxer, who had been with Rogojin, and in his happier days had given
fifteen roubles at a time to beggars. Evidently he had joined the others
as a comrade to give them moral, and if necessary material, support. The
man who had been spoken of as “Pavlicheff’s son,” although he gave the
name of Antip Burdovsky, was about twenty-two years of age, fair,
thin and rather tall. He was remarkable for the poverty, not to say
uncleanliness, of his personal appearance: the sleeves of his overcoat
were greasy; his dirty waistcoat, buttoned up to his neck, showed not a
trace of linen; a filthy black silk scarf, twisted till it resembled a
cord, was round his neck, and his hands were unwashed. He looked round
with an air of insolent effrontery. His face, covered with pimples,
was neither thoughtful nor even contemptuous; it wore an expression
of complacent satisfaction in demanding his rights and in being an
aggrieved party. His voice trembled, and he spoke so fast, and with such
stammerings, that he might have been taken for a foreigner, though
the purest Russian blood ran in his veins. Lebedeff’s nephew, whom
the reader has seen already, accompanied him, and also the youth named
Hippolyte Terentieff. The latter was only seventeen or eighteen. He
had an intelligent face, though it was usually irritated and fretful
in expression. His skeleton-like figure, his ghastly complexion, the
brightness of his eyes, and the red spots of colour on his cheeks,
betrayed the victim of consumption to the most casual glance. He coughed
persistently, and panted for breath; it looked as though he had but
a few weeks more to live. He was nearly dead with fatigue, and fell,
rather than sat, into a chair. The rest bowed as they came in; and being
more or less abashed, put on an air of extreme self-assurance. In short,
their attitude was not that which one would have expected in men who
professed to despise all trivialities, all foolish mundane conventions,
and indeed everything, except their own personal interests.

“Antip Burdovsky,” stuttered the son of Pavlicheff.

“Vladimir Doktorenko,” said Lebedeff’s nephew briskly, and with a
certain pride, as if he boasted of his name.

“Keller,” murmured the retired officer.

“Hippolyte Terentieff,” cried the last-named, in a shrill voice.

They sat now in a row facing the prince, and frowned, and played with
their caps. All appeared ready to speak, and yet all were silent; the
defiant expression on their faces seemed to say, “No, sir, you don’t
take us in!” It could be felt that the first word spoken by anyone
present would bring a torrent of speech from the whole deputation.

VIII.

“I _did_ not expect you, gentlemen,” began the prince. “I have been ill
until to-day. A month ago,” he continued, addressing himself to Antip
Burdovsky, “I put your business into Gavrila Ardalionovitch Ivolgin’s
hands, as I told you then. I do not in the least object to having a
personal interview... but you will agree with me that this is hardly the
time... I propose that we go into another room, if you will not keep me
long... As you see, I have friends here, and believe me...”

“Friends as many as you please, but allow me,” interrupted the harsh
voice of Lebedeff’s nephew--“allow me to tell you that you might have
treated us rather more politely, and not have kept us waiting at least
two hours...

“No doubt... and I... is that acting like a prince? And you... you may
be a general! But I... I am not your valet! And I... I...” stammered
Antip Burdovsky.

He was extremely excited; his lips trembled, and the resentment of an
embittered soul was in his voice. But he spoke so indistinctly that
hardly a dozen words could be gathered.

“It was a princely action!” sneered Hippolyte.

“If anyone had treated me so,” grumbled the boxer.

“I mean to say that if I had been in Burdovsky’s place...I...”

“Gentlemen, I did not know you were there; I have only just been
informed, I assure you,” repeated Muishkin.

“We are not afraid of your friends, prince,” remarked Lebedeff’s nephew,
“for we are within our rights.”

The shrill tones of Hippolyte interrupted him. “What right have you...
by what right do you demand us to submit this matter, about Burdovsky...
to the judgment of your friends? We know only too well what the judgment
of your friends will be!...”

This beginning gave promise of a stormy discussion. The prince was
much discouraged, but at last he managed to make himself heard amid the
vociferations of his excited visitors.

“If you,” he said, addressing Burdovsky--“if you prefer not to speak
here, I offer again to go into another room with you... and as to your
waiting to see me, I repeat that I only this instant heard...”

“Well, you have no right, you have no right, no right at all!... Your
friends indeed!”... gabbled Burdovsky, defiantly examining the faces
round him, and becoming more and more excited. “You have no right!...”
 As he ended thus abruptly, he leant forward, staring at the prince with
his short-sighted, bloodshot eyes. The latter was so astonished, that he
did not reply, but looked steadily at him in return.

“Lef Nicolaievitch!” interposed Madame Epanchin, suddenly, “read this at
once, this very moment! It is about this business.”

She held out a weekly comic paper, pointing to an article on one of
its pages. Just as the visitors were coming in, Lebedeff, wishing to
ingratiate himself with the great lady, had pulled this paper from his
pocket, and presented it to her, indicating a few columns marked in
pencil. Lizabetha Prokofievna had had time to read some of it, and was
greatly upset.

“Would it not be better to peruse it alone... later,” asked the prince,
nervously.

“No, no, read it--read it at once directly, and aloud, aloud!” cried
she, calling Colia to her and giving him the journal.--“Read it aloud,
so that everyone may hear it!”

An impetuous woman, Lizabetha Prokofievna sometimes weighed her anchors
and put out to sea quite regardless of the possible storms she might
encounter. Ivan Fedorovitch felt a sudden pang of alarm, but the others
were merely curious, and somewhat surprised. Colia unfolded the paper,
and began to read, in his clear, high-pitched voice, the following
article:

“Proletarians and scions of nobility! An episode of the brigandage of
today and every day! Progress! Reform! Justice!”

“Strange things are going on in our so-called Holy Russia in this age of
reform and great enterprises; this age of patriotism in which hundreds
of millions are yearly sent abroad; in which industry is encouraged, and
