mourning, as you see; and this, this, oh, this,” pointing to the young man
on the divan...

“Well, go on! never mind me!” mocked the other. “Don’t be afraid!”

“Excellency! Have you read that account of the murder of the Zemarin
family, in the newspaper?” cried Lebedeff, all of a sudden.

“Yes,” said Muishkin, with some surprise.

“Well, that is the murderer! It is he--in fact--”

“What do you mean?” asked the visitor.

“I am speaking allegorically, of course; but he will be the murderer of
a Zemarin family in the future. He is getting ready. ...”

They all laughed, and the thought crossed the prince’s mind that perhaps
Lebedeff was really trifling in this way because he foresaw inconvenient
questions, and wanted to gain time.

“He is a traitor! a conspirator!” shouted Lebedeff, who seemed to have
lost all control over himself. “A monster! a slanderer! Ought I to treat
him as a nephew, the son of my sister Anisia?”

“Oh! do be quiet! You must be drunk! He has taken it into his head to
play the lawyer, prince, and he practices speechifying, and is always
repeating his eloquent pleadings to his children. And who do you think
was his last client? An old woman who had been robbed of five hundred
roubles, her all, by some rogue of a usurer, besought him to take up
her case, instead of which he defended the usurer himself, a Jew named
Zeidler, because this Jew promised to give him fifty roubles....”

“It was to be fifty if I won the case, only five if I lost,” interrupted
Lebedeff, speaking in a low tone, a great contrast to his earlier
manner.

“Well! naturally he came to grief: the law is not administered as it
used to be, and he only got laughed at for his pains. But he was much
pleased with himself in spite of that. ‘Most learned judge!’ said he,
‘picture this unhappy man, crippled by age and infirmities, who gains
his living by honourable toil--picture him, I repeat, robbed of his all,
of his last mouthful; remember, I entreat you, the words of that learned
legislator, “Let mercy and justice alike rule the courts of law.”’ Now,
would you believe it, excellency, every morning he recites this
speech to us from beginning to end, exactly as he spoke it before the
magistrate. To-day we have heard it for the fifth time. He was just
starting again when you arrived, so much does he admire it. He is now
preparing to undertake another case. I think, by the way, that you are
Prince Muishkin? Colia tells me you are the cleverest man he has ever
known....”

“The cleverest in the world,” interrupted his uncle hastily.

“I do not pay much attention to that opinion,” continued the young man
calmly. “Colia is very fond of you, but he,” pointing to Lebedeff, “is
flattering you. I can assure you I have no intention of flattering you,
or anyone else, but at least you have some common-sense. Well, will you
judge between us? Shall we ask the prince to act as arbitrator?” he went
on, addressing his uncle.

“I am so glad you chanced to come here, prince.”

“I agree,” said Lebedeff, firmly, looking round involuntarily at his
daughter, who had come nearer, and was listening attentively to the
conversation.

“What is it all about?” asked the prince, frowning. His head ached, and
he felt sure that Lebedeff was trying to cheat him in some way, and only
talking to put off the explanation that he had come for.

“I will tell you all the story. I am his nephew; he did speak the truth
there, although he is generally telling lies. I am at the University,
and have not yet finished my course. I mean to do so, and I shall, for
I have a determined character. I must, however, find something to do
for the present, and therefore I have got employment on the railway at
twenty-four roubles a month. I admit that my uncle has helped me once
or twice before. Well, I had twenty roubles in my pocket, and I gambled
them away. Can you believe that I should be so low, so base, as to lose
money in that way?”

“And the man who won it is a rogue, a rogue whom you ought not to have
paid!” cried Lebedeff.

“Yes, he is a rogue, but I was obliged to pay him,” said the young man.
“As to his being a rogue, he is assuredly that, and I am not saying it
because he beat you. He is an ex-lieutenant, prince, dismissed from the
service, a teacher of boxing, and one of Rogojin’s followers. They are
all lounging about the pavements now that Rogojin has turned them off.
Of course, the worst of it is that, knowing he was a rascal, and a
card-sharper, I none the less played palki with him, and risked my last
rouble. To tell the truth, I thought to myself, ‘If I lose, I will go
to my uncle, and I am sure he will not refuse to help me.’ Now that was
base--cowardly and base!”

“That is so,” observed Lebedeff quietly; “cowardly and base.”

“Well, wait a bit, before you begin to triumph,” said the nephew
viciously; for the words seemed to irritate him. “He is delighted! I
came to him here and told him everything: I acted honourably, for I did
not excuse myself. I spoke most severely of my conduct, as everyone here
can witness. But I must smarten myself up before I take up my new post,
for I am really like a tramp. Just look at my boots! I cannot possibly
appear like this, and if I am not at the bureau at the time appointed,
the job will be given to someone else; and I shall have to try for
another. Now I only beg for fifteen roubles, and I give my word that
I will never ask him for anything again. I am also ready to promise to
repay my debt in three months’ time, and I will keep my word, even if I
have to live on bread and water. My salary will amount to seventy-five
roubles in three months. The sum I now ask, added to what I have
borrowed already, will make a total of about thirty-five roubles, so
you see I shall have enough to pay him and confound him! if he wants
interest, he shall have that, too! Haven’t I always paid back the money
he lent me before? Why should he be so mean now? He grudges my having
paid that lieutenant; there can be no other reason! That’s the kind he
is--a dog in the manger!”

“And he won’t go away!” cried Lebedeff. “He has installed himself here,
and here he remains!”

“I have told you already, that I will not go away until I have got what
I ask. Why are you smiling, prince? You look as if you disapproved of
me.”

“I am not smiling, but I really think you are in the wrong, somewhat,”
 replied Muishkin, reluctantly.

“Don’t shuffle! Say plainly that you think that I am quite wrong,
without any ‘somewhat’! Why ‘somewhat’?”

“I will say you are quite wrong, if you wish.”

“If I wish! That’s good, I must say! Do you think I am deceived as to
the flagrant impropriety of my conduct? I am quite aware that his money
is his own, and that my action--is much like an attempt at extortion.
But you-you don’t know what life is! If people don’t learn by
experience, they never understand. They must be taught. My intentions
are perfectly honest; on my conscience he will lose nothing, and I will
pay back the money with interest. Added to which he has had the moral
satisfaction of seeing me disgraced. What does he want more? and what
is he good for if he never helps anyone? Look what he does himself! just
ask him about his dealings with others, how he deceives people! How did
he manage to buy this house? You may cut off my head if he has not let
you in for something--and if he is not trying to cheat you again. You are
smiling. You don’t believe me?”

“It seems to me that all this has nothing to do with your affairs,”
 remarked the prince.

“I have lain here now for three days,” cried the young man without
