considerably. However, he told Muishkin all he could, kindly and
in detail. The prince hardly knew anything, for this was the first
informant from the household whom he had met since the estrangement.

Evgenie reported that Aglaya had been really ill, and that for two
nights she had not slept at all, owing to high fever; that now she was
better and out of serious danger, but still in a nervous, hysterical
state.

“It’s a good thing that there is peace in the house, at all events,” he
continued. “They never utter a hint about the past, not only in Aglaya’s
presence, but even among themselves. The old people are talking of a
trip abroad in the autumn, immediately after Adelaida’s wedding; Aglaya
received the news in silence.”

Evgenie himself was very likely going abroad also; so were Prince S.
and his wife, if affairs allowed of it; the general was to stay at home.
They were all at their estate of Colmina now, about twenty miles or so
from St. Petersburg. Princess Bielokonski had not returned to Moscow
yet, and was apparently staying on for reasons of her own. Lizabetha
Prokofievna had insisted that it was quite impossible to remain in
Pavlofsk after what had happened. Evgenie had told her of all the
rumours current in town about the affair; so that there could be no talk
of their going to their house on the Yelagin as yet.

“And in point of fact, prince,” added Evgenie Pavlovitch, “you must
allow that they could hardly have stayed here, considering that they
knew of all that went on at your place, and in the face of your daily
visits to their house, visits which you insisted upon making in spite of
their refusal to see you.”

“Yes--yes, quite so; you are quite right. I wished to see Aglaya
Ivanovna, you know!” said the prince, nodding his head.

“Oh, my dear fellow,” cried Evgenie, warmly, with real sorrow in his
voice, “how could you permit all that to come about as it has? Of
course, of course, I know it was all so unexpected. I admit that you,
only naturally, lost your head, and--and could not stop the foolish
girl; that was not in your power. I quite see so much; but you really
should have understood how seriously she cared for you. She could not
bear to share you with another; and you could bring yourself to throw
away and shatter such a treasure! Oh, prince, prince!”

“Yes, yes, you are quite right again,” said the poor prince, in anguish
of mind. “I was wrong, I know. But it was only Aglaya who looked on
Nastasia Philipovna so; no one else did, you know.”

“But that’s just the worst of it all, don’t you see, that there was
absolutely nothing serious about the matter in reality!” cried Evgenie,
beside himself: “Excuse me, prince, but I have thought over all this; I
have thought a great deal over it; I know all that had happened before;
I know all that took place six months since; and I know there was
_nothing_ serious about the matter, it was but fancy, smoke, fantasy,
distorted by agitation, and only the alarmed jealousy of an absolutely
inexperienced girl could possibly have mistaken it for serious reality.”

Here Evgenie Pavlovitch quite let himself go, and gave the reins to his
indignation.

Clearly and reasonably, and with great psychological insight, he drew a
picture of the prince’s past relations with Nastasia Philipovna.
Evgenie Pavlovitch always had a ready tongue, but on this occasion his
eloquence, surprised himself. “From the very beginning,” he said, “you
began with a lie; what began with a lie was bound to end with a lie;
such is the law of nature. I do not agree, in fact I am angry, when I
hear you called an idiot; you are far too intelligent to deserve such
an epithet; but you are so far _strange_ as to be unlike others; that you
must allow, yourself. Now, I have come to the conclusion that the basis
of all that has happened, has been first of all your innate inexperience
(remark the expression ‘innate,’ prince). Then follows your unheard-of
simplicity of heart; then comes your absolute want of sense of
proportion (to this want you have several times confessed); and lastly,
a mass, an accumulation, of intellectual convictions which you, in your
unexampled honesty of soul, accept unquestionably as also innate and
natural and true. Admit, prince, that in your relations with Nastasia
Philipovna there has existed, from the very first, something democratic,
and the fascination, so to speak, of the ‘woman question’? I know all
about that scandalous scene at Nastasia Philipovna’s house when Rogojin
brought the money, six months ago. I’ll show you yourself as in a
looking-glass, if you like. I know exactly all that went on, in every
detail, and why things have turned out as they have. You thirsted, while
in Switzerland, for your home-country, for Russia; you read, doubtless,
many books about Russia, excellent books, I dare say, but hurtful to
_you_; and you arrived here; as it were, on fire with the longing to be
of service. Then, on the very day of your arrival, they tell you a sad
story of an ill-used woman; they tell _you_, a knight, pure and without
reproach, this tale of a poor woman! The same day you actually _see_
her; you are attracted by her beauty, her fantastic, almost demoniacal,
beauty--(I admit her beauty, of course).

“Add to all this your nervous nature, your epilepsy, and your sudden
arrival in a strange town--the day of meetings and of exciting scenes,
the day of unexpected acquaintanceships, the day of sudden actions,
the day of meeting with the three lovely Epanchin girls, and among
them Aglaya--add your fatigue, your excitement; add Nastasia’ s evening
party, and the tone of that party, and--what were you to expect of
yourself at such a moment as that?”

“Yes, yes, yes!” said the prince, once more, nodding his head, and
blushing slightly. “Yes, it was so, or nearly so--I know it. And
besides, you see, I had not slept the night before, in the train, or the
night before that, either, and I was very tired.”

“Of course, of course, quite so; that’s what I am driving at!”
 continued Evgenie, excitedly. “It is as clear as possible, and most
comprehensible, that you, in your enthusiasm, should plunge headlong
into the first chance that came of publicly airing your great idea that
you, a prince, and a pure-living man, did not consider a woman disgraced
if the sin were not her own, but that of a disgusting social libertine!
Oh, heavens! it’s comprehensible enough, my dear prince, but that is not
the question, unfortunately! The question is, was there any reality
and truth in your feelings? Was it nature, or nothing but intellectual
enthusiasm? What do you think yourself? We are told, of course, that a
far worse woman was _forgiven_, but we don’t find that she was told that
she had done well, or that she was worthy of honour and respect! Did not
your common-sense show you what was the real state of the case, a few
months later? The question is now, not whether she is an innocent woman
(I do not insist one way or the other--I do not wish to); but can her
whole career justify such intolerable pride, such insolent, rapacious
egotism as she has shown? Forgive me, I am too violent, perhaps, but--”

“Yes--I dare say it is all as you say; I dare say you are quite right,”
 muttered the prince once more. “She is very sensitive and easily put
out, of course; but still, she...”

“She is worthy of sympathy? Is that what you wished to say, my good
fellow? But then, for the mere sake of vindicating her worthiness of
sympathy, you should not have insulted and offended a noble and generous
girl in her presence! This is a terrible exaggeration of sympathy! How
can you love a girl, and yet so humiliate her as to throw her over for
the sake of another woman, before the very eyes of that other woman,
when you have already made her a formal proposal of marriage? And you
_did_ propose to her, you know; you did so before her parents and sisters.
Can you be an honest man, prince, if you act so? I ask you! And did you
not deceive that beautiful girl when you assured her of your love?”

“Yes, you are quite right. Oh! I feel that I am very guilty!” said
Muishkin, in deepest distress.

“But as if that is enough!” cried Evgenie, indignantly. “As if it is
enough simply to say: ‘I know I am very guilty!’ You are to blame, and
yet you persevere in evil-doing. Where was your heart, I should like to
know, your _christian heart_, all that time? Did she look as though she
were suffering less, at that moment? You saw her face--was she suffering
less than the other woman? How could you see her suffering and allow it
to continue? How could you?”

“But I did not allow it,” murmured the wretched prince.

“How--what do you mean you didn’t allow?”
