
“Come along, Colia, I want to see your father. I have an idea,” said the
prince.

XII.

Colia took the prince to a public-house in the Litaynaya, not far off.
In one of the side rooms there sat at a table--looking like one of the
regular guests of the establishment--Ardalion Alexandrovitch, with a
bottle before him, and a newspaper on his knee. He was waiting for
the prince, and no sooner did the latter appear than he began a long
harangue about something or other; but so far gone was he that the
prince could hardly understand a word.

“I have not got a ten-rouble note,” said the prince; “but here is a
twenty-five. Change it and give me back the fifteen, or I shall be left
without a farthing myself.”

“Oh, of course, of course; and you quite understand that I--”

“Yes; and I have another request to make, general. Have you ever been at
Nastasia Philipovna’s?”

“I? I? Do you mean me? Often, my friend, often! I only pretended I
had not in order to avoid a painful subject. You saw today, you were a
witness, that I did all that a kind, an indulgent father could do. Now
a father of altogether another type shall step into the scene. You shall
see; the old soldier shall lay bare this intrigue, or a shameless woman
will force her way into a respectable and noble family.”

“Yes, quite so. I wished to ask you whether you could show me the way
to Nastasia Philipovna’s tonight. I must go; I have business with her; I
was not invited but I was introduced. Anyhow I am ready to trespass the
laws of propriety if only I can get in somehow or other.”

“My dear young friend, you have hit on my very idea. It was not for this
rubbish I asked you to come over here” (he pocketed the money, however,
at this point), “it was to invite your alliance in the campaign against
Nastasia Philipovna tonight. How well it sounds, ‘General Ivolgin and
Prince Muishkin.’ That’ll fetch her, I think, eh? Capital! We’ll go at
nine; there’s time yet.”

“Where does she live?”

“Oh, a long way off, near the Great Theatre, just in the square
there--It won’t be a large party.”

The general sat on and on. He had ordered a fresh bottle when the prince
arrived; this took him an hour to drink, and then he had another, and
another, during the consumption of which he told pretty nearly the whole
story of his life. The prince was in despair. He felt that though he had
but applied to this miserable old drunkard because he saw no other way
of getting to Nastasia Philipovna’s, yet he had been very wrong to put
the slightest confidence in such a man.

At last he rose and declared that he would wait no longer. The general
rose too, drank the last drops that he could squeeze out of the bottle,
and staggered into the street.

Muishkin began to despair. He could not imagine how he had been so
foolish as to trust this man. He only wanted one thing, and that was to
get to Nastasia Philipovna’s, even at the cost of a certain amount
of impropriety. But now the scandal threatened to be more than he
had bargained for. By this time Ardalion Alexandrovitch was quite
intoxicated, and he kept his companion listening while he discoursed
eloquently and pathetically on subjects of all kinds, interspersed with
torrents of recrimination against the members of his family. He insisted
that all his troubles were caused by their bad conduct, and time alone
would put an end to them.

At last they reached the Litaynaya. The thaw increased steadily, a warm,
unhealthy wind blew through the streets, vehicles splashed through the
mud, and the iron shoes of horses and mules rang on the paving stones.
Crowds of melancholy people plodded wearily along the footpaths, with
here and there a drunken man among them.

“Do you see those brightly-lighted windows?” said the general. “Many of
my old comrades-in-arms live about here, and I, who served longer, and
suffered more than any of them, am walking on foot to the house of
a woman of rather questionable reputation! A man, look you, who has
thirteen bullets on his breast!... You don’t believe it? Well, I can
assure you it was entirely on my account that Pirogoff telegraphed
to Paris, and left Sebastopol at the greatest risk during the siege.
Nelaton, the Tuileries surgeon, demanded a safe conduct, in the name
of science, into the besieged city in order to attend my wounds. The
government knows all about it. ‘That’s the Ivolgin with thirteen bullets
in him!’ That’s how they speak of me.... Do you see that house, prince?
One of my old friends lives on the first floor, with his large family.
In this and five other houses, three overlooking Nevsky, two in the
Morskaya, are all that remain of my personal friends. Nina Alexandrovna
gave them up long ago, but I keep in touch with them still... I may
say I find refreshment in this little coterie, in thus meeting my old
acquaintances and subordinates, who worship me still, in spite of all.
General Sokolovitch (by the way, I have not called on him lately, or
seen Anna Fedorovna)... You know, my dear prince, when a person does
not receive company himself, he gives up going to other people’s houses
involuntarily. And yet... well... you look as if you didn’t believe
me.... Well now, why should I not present the son of my old friend
and companion to this delightful family--General Ivolgin and Prince
Muishkin? You will see a lovely girl--what am I saying--a lovely girl?
No, indeed, two, three! Ornaments of this city and of society: beauty,
education, culture--the woman question--poetry--everything! Added to
which is the fact that each one will have a dot of at least eighty
thousand roubles. No bad thing, eh?... In a word I absolutely must
introduce you to them: it is a duty, an obligation. General Ivolgin and
Prince Muishkin. Tableau!”

“At once? Now? You must have forgotten...” began the prince.

“No, I have forgotten nothing. Come! This is the house--up this
magnificent staircase. I am surprised not to see the porter, but .... it
is a holiday... and the man has gone off... Drunken fool! Why have they
not got rid of him? Sokolovitch owes all the happiness he has had in
the service and in his private life to me, and me alone, but... here we
are.”

The prince followed quietly, making no further objection for fear of
irritating the old man. At the same time he fervently hoped that General
Sokolovitch and his family would fade away like a mirage in the desert,
so that the visitors could escape, by merely returning downstairs. But
to his horror he saw that General Ivolgin was quite familiar with the
house, and really seemed to have friends there. At every step he named
some topographical or biographical detail that left nothing to be
desired on the score of accuracy. When they arrived at last, on the
first floor, and the general turned to ring the bell to the right,
the prince decided to run away, but a curious incident stopped him
momentarily.

“You have made a mistake, general,” said he. “The name on the door is
Koulakoff, and you were going to see General Sokolovitch.”

“Koulakoff... Koulakoff means nothing. This is Sokolovitch’s flat, and
I am ringing at his door.... What do I care for Koulakoff?... Here comes
someone to open.”

In fact, the door opened directly, and the footman informed the
visitors that the family were all away.

“What a pity! What a pity! It’s just my luck!” repeated Ardalion
Alexandrovitch over and over again, in regretful tones. “When your
master and mistress return, my man, tell them that General Ivolgin
and Prince Muishkin desired to present themselves, and that they were
extremely sorry, excessively grieved...”

Just then another person belonging to the household was seen at the
back of the hall. It was a woman of some forty years, dressed in sombre
colours, probably a housekeeper or a governess. Hearing the names she
came forward with a look of suspicion on her face.

“Marie Alexandrovna is not at home,” said she, staring hard at the
