
V.

Hippolyte, who had fallen asleep during Lebedeff’s discourse, now
suddenly woke up, just as though someone had jogged him in the side. He
shuddered, raised himself on his arm, gazed around, and grew very pale.
A look almost of terror crossed his face as he recollected.

“What! are they all off? Is it all over? Is the sun up?” He trembled,
and caught at the prince’s hand. “What time is it? Tell me, quick, for
goodness’ sake! How long have I slept?” he added, almost in despair,
just as though he had overslept something upon which his whole fate
depended.

“You have slept seven or perhaps eight minutes,” said Evgenie
Pavlovitch.

Hippolyte gazed eagerly at the latter, and mused for a few moments.

“Oh, is that all?” he said at last. “Then I--”

He drew a long, deep breath of relief, as it seemed. He realized that
all was not over as yet, that the sun had not risen, and that the guests
had merely gone to supper. He smiled, and two hectic spots appeared on
his cheeks.

“So you counted the minutes while I slept, did you, Evgenie Pavlovitch?”
 he said, ironically. “You have not taken your eyes off me all the
evening--I have noticed that much, you see! Ah, Rogojin! I’ve just
been dreaming about him, prince,” he added, frowning. “Yes, by the by,”
 starting up, “where’s the orator? Where’s Lebedeff? Has he finished?
What did he talk about? Is it true, prince, that you once declared that
‘beauty would save the world’? Great Heaven! The prince says that beauty
saves the world! And I declare that he only has such playful ideas
because he’s in love! Gentlemen, the prince is in love. I guessed it the
moment he came in. Don’t blush, prince; you make me sorry for you. What
beauty saves the world? Colia told me that you are a zealous Christian;
is it so? Colia says you call yourself a Christian.”

The prince regarded him attentively, but said nothing.

“You don’t answer me; perhaps you think I am very fond of you?” added
Hippolyte, as though the words had been drawn from him.

“No, I don’t think that. I know you don’t love me.”

“What, after yesterday? Wasn’t I honest with you?”

“I knew yesterday that you didn’t love me.”

“Why so? why so? Because I envy you, eh? You always think that, I know.
But do you know why I am saying all this? Look here! I must have some
more champagne--pour me out some, Keller, will you?”

“No, you’re not to drink any more, Hippolyte. I won’t let you.” The
prince moved the glass away.

“Well perhaps you’re right,” said Hippolyte, musing. “They might
say--yet, devil take them! what does it matter?--prince, what can it
matter what people will say of us _then_, eh? I believe I’m half asleep.
I’ve had such a dreadful dream--I’ve only just remembered it. Prince, I
don’t wish you such dreams as that, though sure enough, perhaps, I _don’t_
love you. Why wish a man evil, though you do not love him, eh? Give
me your hand--let me press it sincerely. There--you’ve given me your
hand--you must feel that I _do_ press it sincerely, don’t you? I don’t
think I shall drink any more. What time is it? Never mind, I know the
time. The time has come, at all events. What! they are laying supper
over there, are they? Then this table is free? Capital, gentlemen!
I--hem! these gentlemen are not listening. Prince, I will just read over
an article I have here. Supper is more interesting, of course, but--”

Here Hippolyte suddenly, and most unexpectedly, pulled out of his
breast-pocket a large sealed paper. This imposing-looking document he
placed upon the table before him.

The effect of this sudden action upon the company was instantaneous.
Evgenie Pavlovitch almost bounded off his chair in excitement. Rogojin
drew nearer to the table with a look on his face as if he knew what was
coming. Gania came nearer too; so did Lebedeff and the others--the paper
seemed to be an object of great interest to the company in general.

“What have you got there?” asked the prince, with some anxiety.

“At the first glimpse of the rising sun, prince, I will go to bed. I
told you I would, word of honour! You shall see!” cried Hippolyte.
“You think I’m not capable of opening this packet, do you?” He glared
defiantly round at the audience in general.

The prince observed that he was trembling all over.

“None of us ever thought such a thing!” Muishkin replied for all. “Why
should you suppose it of us? And what are you going to read, Hippolyte?
What is it?”

“Yes, what is it?” asked others. The packet sealed with red wax seemed
to attract everyone, as though it were a magnet.

“I wrote this yesterday, myself, just after I saw you, prince, and told
you I would come down here. I wrote all day and all night, and finished
it this morning early. Afterwards I had a dream.”

“Hadn’t we better hear it tomorrow?” asked the prince timidly.

“Tomorrow ‘there will be no more time!’” laughed Hippolyte,
hysterically. “You needn’t be afraid; I shall get through the whole
thing in forty minutes, at most an hour! Look how interested everybody
is! Everybody has drawn near. Look! look at them all staring at my
sealed packet! If I hadn’t sealed it up it wouldn’t have been half so
effective! Ha, ha! that’s mystery, that is! Now then, gentlemen, shall
I break the seal or not? Say the word; it’s a mystery, I tell you--a
secret! Prince, you know who said there would be ‘no more time’? It was
the great and powerful angel in the Apocalypse.”

“Better not read it now,” said the prince, putting his hand on the
packet.

“No, don’t read it!” cried Evgenie suddenly. He appeared so strangely
disturbed that many of those present could not help wondering.

“Reading? None of your reading now!” said somebody; “it’s supper-time.”
 “What sort of an article is it? For a paper? Probably it’s very
dull,” said another. But the prince’s timid gesture had impressed even
Hippolyte.

“Then I’m not to read it?” he whispered, nervously. “Am I not to read
it?” he repeated, gazing around at each face in turn. “What are you
afraid of, prince?” he turned and asked the latter suddenly.

“What should I be afraid of?”

“Has anyone a coin about them? Give me a twenty-copeck piece, somebody!”
 And Hippolyte leapt from his chair.

“Here you are,” said Lebedeff, handing him one; he thought the boy had
gone mad.

“Vera Lukianovna,” said Hippolyte, “toss it, will you? Heads, I read,
tails, I don’t.”

Vera Lebedeff tossed the coin into the air and let it fall on the table.

It was “heads.”

“Then I read it,” said Hippolyte, in the tone of one bowing to the fiat
of destiny. He could not have grown paler if a verdict of death had
suddenly been presented to him.

“But after all, what is it? Is it possible that I should have just
risked my fate by tossing up?” he went on, shuddering; and looked round
him again. His eyes had a curious expression of sincerity. “That is
