that calm, cold, little spitfire, Aglaya--(for she stood up to her
mother and answered her questions with inexpressible contempt, and mine
still more so, because, like a fool, I thought it my duty to assert
myself as head of the family)--when Aglaya stood up of a sudden and
informed us that ‘that madwoman’ (strangely enough, she used exactly the
same expression as you did) ‘has taken it into her head to marry me
to Prince Lef Nicolaievitch, and therefore is doing her best to choke
Evgenie Pavlovitch off, and rid the house of him.’ That’s what she said.
She would not give the slightest explanation; she burst out laughing,
banged the door, and went away. We all stood there with our mouths open.
Well, I was told afterwards of your little passage with Aglaya this
afternoon, and--and--dear prince--you are a good, sensible fellow, don’t
be angry if I speak out--she is laughing at you, my boy! She is enjoying
herself like a child, at your expense, and therefore, since she is a
child, don’t be angry with her, and don’t think anything of it. I assure
you, she is simply making a fool of you, just as she does with one and
all of us out of pure lack of something better to do. Well--good-bye!
You know our feelings, don’t you--our sincere feelings for yourself?
They are unalterable, you know, dear boy, under all circumstances,
but--Well, here we part; I must go down to the right. Rarely have I sat
so uncomfortably in my saddle, as they say, as I now sit. And people
talk of the charms of a country holiday!”

Left to himself at the cross-roads, the prince glanced around him,
quickly crossed the road towards the lighted window of a neighbouring
house, and unfolded a tiny scrap of paper which he had held clasped in
his right hand during the whole of his conversation with the general.

He read the note in the uncertain rays that fell from the window. It was
as follows:

“Tomorrow morning, I shall be at the green bench in the park at seven,
and shall wait there for you. I have made up my mind to speak to you
about a most important matter which closely concerns yourself.

“P.S.--I trust that you will not show this note to anyone. Though I
am ashamed of giving you such instructions, I feel that I must do so,
considering what you are. I therefore write the words, and blush for
your simple character.

“P.P.S.--It is the same green bench that I showed you before. There!
aren’t you ashamed of yourself? I felt that it was necessary to repeat
even that information.”

The note was written and folded anyhow, evidently in a great hurry, and
probably just before Aglaya had come down to the verandah.

In inexpressible agitation, amounting almost to fear, the prince slipped
quickly away from the window, away from the light, like a frightened
thief, but as he did so he collided violently with some gentleman who
seemed to spring from the earth at his feet.

“I was watching for you, prince,” said the individual.

“Is that you, Keller?” said the prince, in surprise.

“Yes, I’ve been looking for you. I waited for you at the Epanchins’
house, but of course I could not come in. I dogged you from behind
as you walked along with the general. Well, prince, here is Keller,
absolutely at your service--command him!--ready to sacrifice
himself--even to die in case of need.”

“But--why?”

“Oh, why?--Of course you’ll be challenged! That was young Lieutenant
Moloftsoff. I know him, or rather of him; he won’t pass an insult. He
will take no notice of Rogojin and myself, and, therefore, you are the
only one left to account for. You’ll have to pay the piper, prince. He
has been asking about you, and undoubtedly his friend will call on you
tomorrow--perhaps he is at your house already. If you would do me the
honour to have me for a second, prince, I should be happy. That’s why I
have been looking for you now.”

“Duel! You’ve come to talk about a duel, too!” The prince burst
out laughing, to the great astonishment of Keller. He laughed
unrestrainedly, and Keller, who had been on pins and needles, and in a
fever of excitement to offer himself as “second,” was very near being
offended.

“You caught him by the arms, you know, prince. No man of proper pride
can stand that sort of treatment in public.”

“Yes, and he gave me a fearful dig in the chest,” cried the prince,
still laughing. “What are we to fight about? I shall beg his pardon,
that’s all. But if we must fight--we’ll fight! Let him have a shot at
me, by all means; I should rather like it. Ha, ha, ha! I know how to
load a pistol now; do you know how to load a pistol, Keller? First, you
have to buy the powder, you know; it mustn’t be wet, and it mustn’t be
that coarse stuff that they load cannons with--it must be pistol powder.
Then you pour the powder in, and get hold of a bit of felt from some
door, and then shove the bullet in. But don’t shove the bullet in before
the powder, because the thing wouldn’t go off--do you hear, Keller, the
thing wouldn’t go off! Ha, ha, ha! Isn’t that a grand reason, Keller,
my friend, eh? Do you know, my dear fellow, I really must kiss you, and
embrace you, this very moment. Ha, ha! How was it you so suddenly popped
up in front of me as you did? Come to my house as soon as you can, and
we’ll have some champagne. We’ll all get drunk! Do you know I have a
dozen of champagne in Lebedeff’s cellar? Lebedeff sold them to me the
day after I arrived. I took the lot. We’ll invite everybody! Are you
going to do any sleeping tonight?”

“As much as usual, prince--why?”

“Pleasant dreams then--ha, ha!”

The prince crossed the road, and disappeared into the park, leaving the
astonished Keller in a state of ludicrous wonder. He had never before
seen the prince in such a strange condition of mind, and could not have
imagined the possibility of it.

“Fever, probably,” he said to himself, “for the man is all nerves, and
this business has been a little too much for him. He is not _afraid_,
that’s clear; that sort never funks! H’m! champagne! That was an
interesting item of news, at all events!--Twelve bottles! Dear me,
that’s a very respectable little stock indeed! I bet anything Lebedeff
lent somebody money on deposit of this dozen of champagne. Hum! he’s a
nice fellow, is this prince! I like this sort of man. Well, I needn’t be
wasting time here, and if it’s a case of champagne, why--there’s no time
like the present!”

That the prince was almost in a fever was no more than the truth. He
wandered about the park for a long while, and at last came to himself in
a lonely avenue. He was vaguely conscious that he had already paced this
particular walk--from that large, dark tree to the bench at the other
end--about a hundred yards altogether--at least thirty times backwards
and forwards.

As to recollecting what he had been thinking of all that time, he could
not. He caught himself, however, indulging in one thought which made him
roar with laughter, though there was nothing really to laugh at in it;
but he felt that he must laugh, and go on laughing.

It struck him that the idea of the duel might not have occurred to
Keller alone, but that his lesson in the art of pistol-loading might
have been not altogether accidental! “Pooh! nonsense!” he said to
himself, struck by another thought, of a sudden. “Why, she was immensely
surprised to find me there on the verandah, and laughed and talked about
_tea!_ And yet she had this little note in her hand, therefore she must
have known that I was sitting there. So why was she surprised? Ha, ha,
ha!”

He pulled the note out and kissed it; then paused and reflected. “How
strange it all is! how strange!” he muttered, melancholy enough now. In
moments of great joy, he invariably felt a sensation of melancholy come
over him--he could not tell why.

He looked intently around him, and wondered why he had come here; he was
very tired, so he approached the bench and sat down on it. Around him
was profound silence; the music in the Vauxhall was over. The park
seemed quite empty, though it was not, in reality, later than half-past
