The prince seemed to be considering the suggestion.

“You see, I am going into the country myself in three days, with my
children and belongings. The little one is delicate; she needs change
of air; and during our absence this house will be done up. I am going to
Pavlofsk.”

“You are going to Pavlofsk too?” asked the prince sharply. “Everybody
seems to be going there. Have you a house in that neighbourhood?”

“I don’t know of many people going to Pavlofsk, and as for the house,
Ivan Ptitsin has let me one of his villas rather cheaply. It is a
pleasant place, lying on a hill surrounded by trees, and one can live
there for a mere song. There is good music to be heard, so no wonder it
is popular. I shall stay in the lodge. As to the villa itself...”

“Have you let it?”

“N-no--not exactly.”

“Let it to me,” said the prince.

Now this was precisely what Lebedeff had made up his mind to do in the
last three minutes. Not that he had any difficulty in finding a tenant;
in fact the house was occupied at present by a chance visitor, who had
told Lebedeff that he would perhaps take it for the summer months. The
clerk knew very well that this “_perhaps_” meant “_certainly_,” but as he
thought he could make more out of a tenant like the prince, he felt
justified in speaking vaguely about the present inhabitant’s intentions.
“This is quite a coincidence,” thought he, and when the subject of price
was mentioned, he made a gesture with his hand, as if to waive away a
question of so little importance.

“Oh well, as you like!” said Muishkin. “I will think it over. You shall
lose nothing!”

They were walking slowly across the garden.

“But if you... I could...” stammered Lebedeff, “if... if you please,
prince, tell you something on the subject which would interest you, I am
sure.” He spoke in wheedling tones, and wriggled as he walked along.

Muishkin stopped short.

“Daria Alexeyevna also has a villa at Pavlofsk.”

“Well?”

“A certain person is very friendly with her, and intends to visit her
pretty often.”

“Well?”

“Aglaya Ivanovna...”

“Oh stop, Lebedeff!” interposed Muishkin, feeling as if he had been
touched on an open wound. “That... that has nothing to do with me. I
should like to know when you are going to start. The sooner the better
as far as I am concerned, for I am at an hotel.”

They had left the garden now, and were crossing the yard on their way to
the gate.

“Well, leave your hotel at once and come here; then we can all go
together to Pavlofsk the day after tomorrow.”

“I will think about it,” said the prince dreamily, and went off.

The clerk stood looking after his guest, struck by his sudden
absent-mindedness. He had not even remembered to say goodbye, and
Lebedeff was the more surprised at the omission, as he knew by
experience how courteous the prince usually was.

III.

It was now close on twelve o’clock.

The prince knew that if he called at the Epanchins’ now he would only
find the general, and that the latter might probably carry him straight
off to Pavlofsk with him; whereas there was one visit he was most
anxious to make without delay.

So at the risk of missing General Epanchin altogether, and thus
postponing his visit to Pavlofsk for a day, at least, the prince decided
to go and look for the house he desired to find.

The visit he was about to pay was, in some respects, a risky one. He was
in two minds about it, but knowing that the house was in the Gorohovaya,
not far from the Sadovaya, he determined to go in that direction, and to
try to make up his mind on the way.

Arrived at the point where the Gorohovaya crosses the Sadovaya, he was
surprised to find how excessively agitated he was. He had no idea that
his heart could beat so painfully.

One house in the Gorohovaya began to attract his attention long before
he reached it, and the prince remembered afterwards that he had said
to himself: “That is the house, I’m sure of it.” He came up to it quite
curious to discover whether he had guessed right, and felt that he would
be disagreeably impressed to find that he had actually done so. The
house was a large gloomy-looking structure, without the slightest claim
to architectural beauty, in colour a dirty green. There are a few of
these old houses, built towards the end of the last century, still
standing in that part of St. Petersburg, and showing little change
from their original form and colour. They are solidly built, and are
remarkable for the thickness of their walls, and for the fewness
of their windows, many of which are covered by gratings. On the
ground-floor there is usually a money-changer’s shop, and the owner
lives over it. Without as well as within, the houses seem inhospitable
and mysterious--an impression which is difficult to explain, unless it
has something to do with the actual architectural style. These houses
are almost exclusively inhabited by the merchant class.

Arrived at the gate, the prince looked up at the legend over it, which
ran:

“House of Rogojin, hereditary and honourable citizen.”

He hesitated no longer; but opened the glazed door at the bottom of the
outer stairs and made his way up to the second storey. The place was
dark and gloomy-looking; the walls of the stone staircase were painted
a dull red. Rogojin and his mother and brother occupied the whole of
the second floor. The servant who opened the door to Muishkin led him,
without taking his name, through several rooms and up and down many
steps until they arrived at a door, where he knocked.

Parfen Rogojin opened the door himself.

On seeing the prince he became deadly white, and apparently fixed to the
ground, so that he was more like a marble statue than a human being. The
prince had expected some surprise, but Rogojin evidently considered his
visit an impossible and miraculous event. He stared with an expression
almost of terror, and his lips twisted into a bewildered smile.

“Parfen! perhaps my visit is ill-timed. I--I can go away again if you
like,” said Muishkin at last, rather embarrassed.

“No, no; it’s all right, come in,” said Parfen, recollecting himself.

They were evidently on quite familiar terms. In Moscow they had had many
occasions of meeting; indeed, some few of those meetings were but too
vividly impressed upon their memories. They had not met now, however,
for three months.

The deathlike pallor, and a sort of slight convulsion about the lips,
had not left Rogojin’s face. Though he welcomed his guest, he was still
obviously much disturbed. As he invited the prince to sit down near the
table, the latter happened to turn towards him, and was startled by the
strange expression on his face. A painful recollection flashed into
his mind. He stood for a time, looking straight at Rogojin, whose eyes
