Evgenie Pavlovitch was silent, but Hippolyte kept his eyes fixed upon
him, waiting impatiently for more.

“Well, have you finished?” said Lizabetha Prokofievna to Evgenie. “Make
haste, sir; it is time he went to bed. Have you more to say?” She was
very angry.

“Yes, I have a little more,” said Evgenie Pavlovitch, with a smile. “It
seems to me that all you and your friends have said, Mr. Terentieff, and
all you have just put forward with such undeniable talent, may be summed
up in the triumph of right above all, independent of everything else, to
the exclusion of everything else; perhaps even before having discovered
what constitutes the right. I may be mistaken?”

“You are certainly mistaken; I do not even understand you. What else?”

Murmurs arose in the neighbourhood of Burdovsky and his companions;
Lebedeff’s nephew protested under his breath.

“I have nearly finished,” replied Evgenie Pavlovitch.

“I will only remark that from these premises one could conclude that
might is right--I mean the right of the clenched fist, and of personal
inclination. Indeed, the world has often come to that conclusion.
Prudhon upheld that might is right. In the American War some of the most
advanced Liberals took sides with the planters on the score that the
blacks were an inferior race to the whites, and that might was the right
of the white race.”

“Well?”

“You mean, no doubt, that you do not deny that might is right?”

“What then?”

“You are at least logical. I would only point out that from the right
of might, to the right of tigers and crocodiles, or even Daniloff and
Gorsky, is but a step.”

“I know nothing about that; what else?”

Hippolyte was scarcely listening. He kept saying “well?” and “what else?”
 mechanically, without the least curiosity, and by mere force of habit.

“Why, nothing else; that is all.”

“However, I bear you no grudge,” said Hippolyte suddenly, and, hardly
conscious of what he was doing, he held out his hand with a smile. The
gesture took Evgenie Pavlovitch by surprise, but with the utmost gravity
he touched the hand that was offered him in token of forgiveness.

“I can but thank you,” he said, in a tone too respectful to be sincere,
“for your kindness in letting me speak, for I have often noticed that
our Liberals never allow other people to have an opinion of their own,
and immediately answer their opponents with abuse, if they do not have
recourse to arguments of a still more unpleasant nature.”

“What you say is quite true,” observed General Epanchin; then, clasping
his hands behind his back, he returned to his place on the terrace
steps, where he yawned with an air of boredom.

“Come, sir, that will do; you weary me,” said Lizabetha Prokofievna
suddenly to Evgenie Pavlovitch.

Hippolyte rose all at once, looking troubled and almost frightened.

“It is time for me to go,” he said, glancing round in perplexity. “I
have detained you... I wanted to tell you everything... I thought you
all... for the last time... it was a whim...”

He evidently had sudden fits of returning animation, when he awoke
from his semi-delirium; then, recovering full self-possession for a
few moments, he would speak, in disconnected phrases which had perhaps
haunted him for a long while on his bed of suffering, during weary,
sleepless nights.

“Well, good-bye,” he said abruptly. “You think it is easy for me to say
good-bye to you? Ha, ha!”

Feeling that his question was somewhat gauche, he smiled angrily. Then
as if vexed that he could not ever express what he really meant, he said
irritably, in a loud voice:

“Excellency, I have the honour of inviting you to my funeral; that is,
if you will deign to honour it with your presence. I invite you all,
gentlemen, as well as the general.”

He burst out laughing again, but it was the laughter of a madman.
Lizabetha Prokofievna approached him anxiously and seized his arm.
He stared at her for a moment, still laughing, but soon his face grew
serious.

“Do you know that I came here to see those trees?” pointing to the
trees in the park. “It is not ridiculous, is it? Say that it is not
ridiculous!” he demanded urgently of Lizabetha Prokofievna. Then he
seemed to be plunged in thought. A moment later he raised his head, and
his eyes sought for someone. He was looking for Evgenie Pavlovitch, who
was close by on his right as before, but he had forgotten this, and
his eyes ranged over the assembled company. “Ah! you have not gone!” he
said, when he caught sight of him at last. “You kept on laughing just
now, because I thought of speaking to the people from the window for a
quarter of an hour. But I am not eighteen, you know; lying on that bed,
and looking out of that window, I have thought of all sorts of things
for such a long time that... a dead man has no age, you know. I was
saying that to myself only last week, when I was awake in the night. Do
you know what you fear most? You fear our sincerity more than anything,
although you despise us! The idea crossed my mind that night... You
thought I was making fun of you just now, Lizabetha Prokofievna? No, the
idea of mockery was far from me; I only meant to praise you. Colia
told me the prince called you a child--very well--but let me see, I had
something else to say...” He covered his face with his hands and tried
to collect his thoughts.

“Ah, yes--you were going away just now, and I thought to myself: ‘I
shall never see these people again--never again! This is the last time
I shall see the trees, too. I shall see nothing after this but the red
brick wall of Meyer’s house opposite my window. Tell them about it--try
to tell them,’ I thought. ‘Here is a beautiful young girl--you are a
dead man; make them understand that. Tell them that a dead man may
say anything--and Mrs. Grundy will not be angry--ha-ha! You are not
laughing?” He looked anxiously around. “But you know I get so many queer
ideas, lying there in bed. I have grown convinced that nature is full of
mockery--you called me an atheist just now, but you know this nature...
why are you laughing again? You are very cruel!” he added suddenly,
regarding them all with mournful reproach. “I have not corrupted Colia,”
 he concluded in a different and very serious tone, as if remembering
something again.

“Nobody here is laughing at you. Calm yourself,” said Lizabetha
Prokofievna, much moved. “You shall see a new doctor tomorrow; the
other was mistaken; but sit down, do not stand like that! You are
delirious--” Oh, what shall we do with him she cried in anguish, as she
made him sit down again in the arm-chair.

A tear glistened on her cheek. At the sight of it Hippolyte seemed
amazed. He lifted his hand timidly and, touched the tear with his
finger, smiling like a child.

“I... you,” he began joyfully. “You cannot tell how I... he always spoke
so enthusiastically of you, Colia here; I liked his enthusiasm. I was
not corrupting him! But I must leave him, too--I wanted to leave
them all--there was not one of them--not one! I wanted to be a man of
action--I had a right to be. Oh! what a lot of things I wanted! Now I
want nothing; I renounce all my wants; I swore to myself that I would
want nothing; let them seek the truth without me! Yes, nature is full
of mockery! Why”--he continued with sudden warmth--“does she create
the choicest beings only to mock at them? The only human being who is
recognized as perfect, when nature showed him to mankind, was given the
mission to say things which have caused the shedding of so much blood
that it would have drowned mankind if it had all been shed at once! Oh!
