wanted anything, and when the latter replied that he only wanted to be
left in peace, he would turn away obediently and make for the door on
tip-toe, with deprecatory gestures to imply that he had only just looked
in, that he would not speak a word, and would go away and not intrude
again; which did not prevent him from reappearing in ten minutes or
a quarter of an hour. Colia had free access to the prince, at which
Lebedeff was quite disgusted and indignant. He would listen at the door
for half an hour at a time while the two were talking. Colia found this
out, and naturally told the prince of his discovery.

“Do you think yourself my master, that you try to keep me under lock and
key like this?” said the prince to Lebedeff. “In the country, at least,
I intend to be free, and you may make up your mind that I mean to see
whom I like, and go where I please.”

“Why, of course,” replied the clerk, gesticulating with his hands.

The prince looked him sternly up and down.

“Well, Lukian Timofeyovitch, have you brought the little cupboard that
you had at the head of your bed with you here?”

“No, I left it where it was.”

“Impossible!”

“It cannot be moved; you would have to pull the wall down, it is so
firmly fixed.”

“Perhaps you have one like it here?”

“I have one that is even better, much better; that is really why I
bought this house.”

“Ah! What visitor did you turn away from my door, about an hour ago?”

“The-the general. I would not let him in; there is no need for him to
visit you, prince... I have the deepest esteem for him, he is a--a great
man. You don’t believe it? Well, you will see, and yet, most excellent
prince, you had much better not receive him.”

“May I ask why? and also why you walk about on tiptoe and always seem as
if you were going to whisper a secret in my ear whenever you come near
me?”

“I am vile, vile; I know it!” cried Lebedeff, beating his breast with a
contrite air. “But will not the general be too hospitable for you?”

“Too hospitable?”

“Yes. First, he proposes to come and live in my house. Well and good;
but he sticks at nothing; he immediately makes himself one of the
family. We have talked over our respective relations several times, and
discovered that we are connected by marriage. It seems also that you are
a sort of nephew on his mother’s side; he was explaining it to me again
only yesterday. If you are his nephew, it follows that I must also be a
relation of yours, most excellent prince. Never mind about that, it is
only a foible; but just now he assured me that all his life, from the
day he was made an ensign to the th of last June, he has entertained
at least two hundred guests at his table every day. Finally, he went so
far as to say that they never rose from the table; they dined, supped,
and had tea, for fifteen hours at a stretch. This went on for thirty
years without a break; there was barely time to change the table-cloth;
directly one person left, another took his place. On feast-days he
entertained as many as three hundred guests, and they numbered seven
hundred on the thousandth anniversary of the foundation of the Russian
Empire. It amounts to a passion with him; it makes one uneasy to hear of
it. It is terrible to have to entertain people who do things on such a
scale. That is why I wonder whether such a man is not too hospitable for
you and me.”

“But you seem to be on the best of terms with him?”

“Quite fraternal--I look upon it as a joke. Let us be brothers-in-law,
it is all the same to me,--rather an honour than not. But in spite of
the two hundred guests and the thousandth anniversary of the Russian
Empire, I can see that he is a very remarkable man. I am quite sincere.
You said just now that I always looked as if I was going to tell you a
secret; you are right. I have a secret to tell you: a certain person has
just let me know that she is very anxious for a secret interview with
you.”

“Why should it be secret? Not at all; I will call on her myself
tomorrow.”

“No, oh no!” cried Lebedeff, waving his arms; “if she is afraid, it is
not for the reason you think. By the way, do you know that the monster
comes every day to inquire after your health?”

“You call him a monster so often that it makes me suspicious.”

“You must have no suspicions, none whatever,” said Lebedeff quickly. “I
only want you to know that the person in question is not afraid of him,
but of something quite, quite different.”

“What on earth is she afraid of, then? Tell me plainly, without any more
beating about the bush,” said the prince, exasperated by the other’s
mysterious grimaces.

“Ah that is the secret,” said Lebedeff, with a smile.

“Whose secret?”

“Yours. You forbade me yourself to mention it before you, most excellent
prince,” murmured Lebedeff. Then, satisfied that he had worked up
Muishkin’s curiosity to the highest pitch, he added abruptly: “She is
afraid of Aglaya Ivanovna.”

The prince frowned for a moment in silence, and then said suddenly:

“Really, Lebedeff, I must leave your house. Where are Gavrila
Ardalionovitch and the Ptitsins? Are they here? Have you chased them
away, too?”

“They are coming, they are coming; and the general as well. I will open
all the doors; I will call all my daughters, all of them, this very
minute,” said Lebedeff in a low voice, thoroughly frightened, and waving
his hands as he ran from door to door.

At that moment Colia appeared on the terrace; he announced that
Lizabetha Prokofievna and her three daughters were close behind him.

Moved by this news, Lebedeff hurried up to the prince.

“Shall I call the Ptitsins, and Gavrila Ardalionovitch? Shall I let the
general in?” he asked.

“Why not? Let in anyone who wants to see me. I assure you, Lebedeff, you
have misunderstood my position from the very first; you have been wrong
all along. I have not the slightest reason to hide myself from anyone,”
 replied the prince gaily.

Seeing him laugh, Lebedeff thought fit to laugh also, and though much
agitated his satisfaction was quite visible.

Colia was right; the Epanchin ladies were only a few steps behind him.
As they approached the terrace other visitors appeared from Lebedeff’s
side of the house--the Ptitsins, Gania, and Ardalion Alexandrovitch.

The Epanchins had only just heard of the prince’s illness and of his
presence in Pavlofsk, from Colia; and up to this time had been in a
state of considerable bewilderment about him. The general brought the
prince’s card down from town, and Mrs. Epanchin had felt convinced that
he himself would follow his card at once; she was much excited.

In vain the girls assured her that a man who had not written for six
months would not be in such a dreadful hurry, and that probably he had
enough to do in town without needing to bustle down to Pavlofsk to see
them. Their mother was quite angry at the very idea of such a thing, and
announced her absolute conviction that he would turn up the next day at
