
“I don’t know in the least; I wasn’t present when the joke was made. It
_is_ a joke. I suppose, and that’s all.”

“Well, that’s a comfort, at all events. You don’t suppose she could take
any interest in you, do you? Why, she called you an ‘idiot’ herself.”

“I think you might have spared me that,” murmured the prince
reproachfully, almost in a whisper.

“Don’t be angry; she is a wilful, mad, spoilt girl. If she likes a
person she will pitch into him, and chaff him. I used to be just such
another. But for all that you needn’t flatter yourself, my boy; she is
not for you. I don’t believe it, and it is not to be. I tell you so at
once, so that you may take proper precautions. Now, I want to hear you
swear that you are not married to that woman?”

“Lizabetha Prokofievna, what are you thinking of?” cried the prince,
almost leaping to his feet in amazement.

“Why? You very nearly were, anyhow.”

“Yes--I nearly was,” whispered the prince, hanging his head.

“Well then, have you come here for _her?_ Are you in love with _her?_
With _that_ creature?”

“I did not come to marry at all,” replied the prince.

“Is there anything you hold sacred?”

“There is.”

“Then swear by it that you did not come here to marry _her!_”

“I’ll swear it by whatever you please.”

“I believe you. You may kiss me; I breathe freely at last. But you must
know, my dear friend, Aglaya does not love you, and she shall never be
your wife while I am out of my grave. So be warned in time. Do you hear
me?”

“Yes, I hear.”

The prince flushed up so much that he could not look her in the face.

“I have waited for you with the greatest impatience (not that you were
worth it). Every night I have drenched my pillow with tears, not for
you, my friend, not for you, don’t flatter yourself! I have my own
grief, always the same, always the same. But I’ll tell you why I have
been awaiting you so impatiently, because I believe that Providence
itself sent you to be a friend and a brother to me. I haven’t a friend
in the world except Princess Bielokonski, and she is growing as stupid
as a sheep from old age. Now then, tell me, yes or no? Do you know why
she called out from her carriage the other night?”

“I give you my word of honour that I had nothing to do with the matter
and know nothing about it.”

“Very well, I believe you. I have my own ideas about it. Up to yesterday
morning I thought it was really Evgenie Pavlovitch who was to blame; now
I cannot help agreeing with the others. But why he was made such a fool
of I cannot understand. However, he is not going to marry Aglaya, I can
tell you that. He may be a very excellent fellow, but--so it shall be.
I was not at all sure of accepting him before, but now I have quite made
up my mind that I won’t have him. ‘Put me in my coffin first and then
into my grave, and then you may marry my daughter to whomsoever you
please,’ so I said to the general this very morning. You see how I trust
you, my boy.”

“Yes, I see and understand.”

Mrs. Epanchin gazed keenly into the prince’s eyes. She was anxious to
see what impression the news as to Evgenie Pavlovitch had made upon him.

“Do you know anything about Gavrila Ardalionovitch?” she asked at last.

“Oh yes, I know a good deal.”

“Did you know he had communications with Aglaya?”

“No, I didn’t,” said the prince, trembling a little, and in great
agitation. “You say Gavrila Ardalionovitch has private communications
with Aglaya?--Impossible!”

“Only quite lately. His sister has been working like a rat to clear the
way for him all the winter.”

“I don’t believe it!” said the prince abruptly, after a short pause.
“Had it been so I should have known long ago.”

“Oh, of course, yes; he would have come and wept out his secret on your
bosom. Oh, you simpleton--you simpleton! Anyone can deceive you and take
you in like a--like a,--aren’t you ashamed to trust him? Can’t you see
that he humbugs you just as much as ever he pleases?”

“I know very well that he does deceive me occasionally, and he knows
that I know it, but--” The prince did not finish his sentence.

“And that’s why you trust him, eh? So I should have supposed. Good Lord,
was there ever such a man as you? Tfu! and are you aware, sir, that this
Gania, or his sister Varia, have brought her into correspondence with
Nastasia Philipovna?”

“Brought whom?” cried Muishkin.

“Aglaya.”

“I don’t believe it! It’s impossible! What object could they have?” He
jumped up from his chair in his excitement.

“Nor do I believe it, in spite of the proofs. The girl is self-willed
and fantastic, and insane! She’s wicked, wicked! I’ll repeat it for
a thousand years that she’s wicked; they _all_ are, just now, all my
daughters, even that ‘wet hen’ Alexandra. And yet I don’t believe it.
Because I don’t choose to believe it, perhaps; but I don’t. Why haven’t
you been?” she turned on the prince suddenly. “Why didn’t you come near
us all these three days, eh?”

The prince began to give his reasons, but she interrupted him again.

“Everybody takes you in and deceives you; you went to town yesterday. I
dare swear you went down on your knees to that rogue, and begged him to
accept your ten thousand roubles!”

“I never thought of doing any such thing. I have not seen him, and he is
not a rogue, in my opinion. I have had a letter from him.”

“Show it me!”

The prince took a paper from his pocket-book, and handed it to Lizabetha
Prokofievna. It ran as follows:


“SIR,

“In the eyes of the world I am sure that I have no cause for pride or
self-esteem. I am much too insignificant for that. But what may be so to
other men’s eyes is not so to yours. I am convinced that you are better
than other people. Doktorenko disagrees with me, but I am content to
differ from him on this point. I will never accept one single copeck
from you, but you have helped my mother, and I am bound to be grateful
to you for that, however weak it may seem. At any rate, I have changed
my opinion about you, and I think right to inform you of the fact; but I
also suppose that there can be no further intercourse between us.

“ANTIP BURDOVSKY.

“P.S.--The two hundred roubles I owe you shall certainly be repaid in
time.”
