and hurriedly raised the portrait to his lips. When, a minute after, he
reached the drawing-room door, his face was quite composed. But just as
he reached the door he met Aglaya coming out alone.

“Gavrila Ardalionovitch begged me to give you this,” he said, handing
her the note.

Aglaya stopped, took the letter, and gazed strangely into the prince’s
eyes. There was no confusion in her face; a little surprise, perhaps,
but that was all. By her look she seemed merely to challenge the prince
to an explanation as to how he and Gania happened to be connected in
this matter. But her expression was perfectly cool and quiet, and even
condescending.

So they stood for a moment or two, confronting one another. At length a
faint smile passed over her face, and she passed by him without a word.

Mrs. Epanchin examined the portrait of Nastasia Philipovna for some
little while, holding it critically at arm’s length.

“Yes, she is pretty,” she said at last, “even very pretty. I have seen
her twice, but only at a distance. So you admire this kind of beauty, do
you?” she asked the prince, suddenly.

“Yes, I do--this kind.”

“Do you mean especially this kind?”

“Yes, especially this kind.”

“Why?”

“There is much suffering in this face,” murmured the prince, more as
though talking to himself than answering the question.

“I think you are wandering a little, prince,” Mrs. Epanchin decided,
after a lengthened survey of his face; and she tossed the portrait on to
the table, haughtily.

Alexandra took it, and Adelaida came up, and both the girls examined the
photograph. Just then Aglaya entered the room.

“What a power!” cried Adelaida suddenly, as she earnestly examined the
portrait over her sister’s shoulder.

“Whom? What power?” asked her mother, crossly.

“Such beauty is real power,” said Adelaida. “With such beauty as that
one might overthrow the world.” She returned to her easel thoughtfully.

Aglaya merely glanced at the portrait--frowned, and put out her
underlip; then went and sat down on the sofa with folded hands. Mrs.
Epanchin rang the bell.

“Ask Gavrila Ardalionovitch to step this way,” said she to the man who
answered.

“Mamma!” cried Alexandra, significantly.

“I shall just say two words to him, that’s all,” said her mother,
silencing all objection by her manner; she was evidently seriously put
out. “You see, prince, it is all secrets with us, just now--all secrets.
It seems to be the etiquette of the house, for some reason or other.
Stupid nonsense, and in a matter which ought to be approached with all
candour and open-heartedness. There is a marriage being talked of, and I
don’t like this marriage--”

“Mamma, what are you saying?” said Alexandra again, hurriedly.

“Well, what, my dear girl? As if you can possibly like it yourself? The
heart is the great thing, and the rest is all rubbish--though one must
have sense as well. Perhaps sense is really the great thing. Don’t smile
like that, Aglaya. I don’t contradict myself. A fool with a heart and no
brains is just as unhappy as a fool with brains and no heart. I am one
and you are the other, and therefore both of us suffer, both of us are
unhappy.”

“Why are you so unhappy, mother?” asked Adelaida, who alone of all the
company seemed to have preserved her good temper and spirits up to now.

“In the first place, because of my carefully brought-up daughters,” said
Mrs. Epanchin, cuttingly; “and as that is the best reason I can give you
we need not bother about any other at present. Enough of words, now!
We shall see how both of you (I don’t count Aglaya) will manage your
business, and whether you, most revered Alexandra Ivanovna, will be
happy with your fine mate.”

“Ah!” she added, as Gania suddenly entered the room, “here’s another
marrying subject. How do you do?” she continued, in response to Gania’s
bow; but she did not invite him to sit down. “You are going to be
married?”

“Married? how--what marriage?” murmured Gania, overwhelmed with
confusion.

“Are you about to take a wife? I ask,--if you prefer that expression.”

“No, no I--I--no!” said Gania, bringing out his lie with a tell-tale
blush of shame. He glanced keenly at Aglaya, who was sitting some way
off, and dropped his eyes immediately.

Aglaya gazed coldly, intently, and composedly at him, without taking her
eyes off his face, and watched his confusion.

“No? You say no, do you?” continued the pitiless Mrs. General. “Very
well, I shall remember that you told me this Wednesday morning, in
answer to my question, that you are not going to be married. What day is
it, Wednesday, isn’t it?”

“Yes, I think so!” said Adelaida.

“You never know the day of the week; what’s the day of the month?”

“Twenty-seventh!” said Gania.

“Twenty-seventh; very well. Good-bye now; you have a good deal to do,
I’m sure, and I must dress and go out. Take your portrait. Give my
respects to your unfortunate mother, Nina Alexandrovna. _Au revoir_, dear
prince, come in and see us often, do; and I shall tell old Princess
Bielokonski about you. I shall go and see her on purpose. And listen,
my dear boy, I feel sure that God has sent you to Petersburg from
Switzerland on purpose for me. Maybe you will have other things to do,
besides, but you are sent chiefly for my sake, I feel sure of it. God
sent you to me! Au revoir! Alexandra, come with me, my dear.”

Mrs. Epanchin left the room.

Gania--confused, annoyed, furious--took up his portrait, and turned to
the prince with a nasty smile on his face.

“Prince,” he said, “I am just going home. If you have not changed your
mind as to living with us, perhaps you would like to come with me. You
don’t know the address, I believe?”

“Wait a minute, prince,” said Aglaya, suddenly rising from her seat, “do
write something in my album first, will you? Father says you are a most
talented caligraphist; I’ll bring you my book in a minute.” She left the
room.

“Well, _au revoir_, prince,” said Adelaida, “I must be going too.” She
pressed the prince’s hand warmly, and gave him a friendly smile as she
left the room. She did not so much as look at Gania.

“This is your doing, prince,” said Gania, turning on the latter so soon
as the others were all out of the room. “This is your doing, sir! _You_
have been telling them that I am going to be married!” He said this in
a hurried whisper, his eyes flashing with rage and his face ablaze. “You
shameless tattler!”

“I assure you, you are under a delusion,” said the prince, calmly and
