lacking. But let us put that aside and return to the point. Tell me what
induced you to publish this article. Every word of it is a calumny, and
I think, gentlemen, that you have been guilty of a mean action.”

“Allow me--”

“Sir--”

“What? What? What?” cried all the visitors at once, in violent
agitation.

“As to the article,” said Hippolyte in his croaking voice, “I have told
you already that we none of us approve of it! There is the writer,” he
added, pointing to the boxer, who sat beside him. “I quite admit that he
has written it in his old regimental manner, with an equal disregard
for style and decency. I know he is a cross between a fool and an
adventurer; I make no bones about telling him so to his face every day.
But after all he is half justified; publicity is the lawful right of
every man; consequently, Burdovsky is not excepted. Let him answer for
his own blunders. As to the objection which I made just now in the name
of all, to the presence of your friends, I think I ought to explain,
gentlemen, that I only did so to assert our rights, though we really
wished to have witnesses; we had agreed unanimously upon the point
before we came in. We do not care who your witnesses may be, or
whether they are your friends or not. As they cannot fail to recognize
Burdovsky’s right (seeing that it is mathematically demonstrable), it is
just as well that the witnesses should be your friends. The truth will
only be more plainly evident.”

“It is quite true; we had agreed upon that point,” said Lebedeff’s
nephew, in confirmation.

“If that is the case, why did you begin by making such a fuss about it?”
 asked the astonished prince.

The boxer was dying to get in a few words; owing, no doubt, to the
presence of the ladies, he was becoming quite jovial.

“As to the article, prince,” he said, “I admit that I wrote it, in spite
of the severe criticism of my poor friend, in whom I always overlook
many things because of his unfortunate state of health. But I wrote and
published it in the form of a letter, in the paper of a friend. I showed
it to no one but Burdovsky, and I did not read it all through, even to
him. He immediately gave me permission to publish it, but you will admit
that I might have done so without his consent. Publicity is a noble,
beneficent, and universal right. I hope, prince, that you are too
progressive to deny this?”

“I deny nothing, but you must confess that your article--”

“Is a bit thick, you mean? Well, in a way that is in the public
interest; you will admit that yourself, and after all one cannot
overlook a blatant fact. So much the worse for the guilty parties,
but the public welfare must come before everything. As to certain
inaccuracies and figures of speech, so to speak, you will also admit
that the motive, aim, and intention, are the chief thing. It is a
question, above all, of making a wholesome example; the individual case
can be examined afterwards; and as to the style--well, the thing was
meant to be humorous, so to speak, and, after all, everybody writes like
that; you must admit it yourself! Ha, ha!”

“But, gentlemen, I assure you that you are quite astray,” exclaimed the
prince. “You have published this article upon the supposition that I
would never consent to satisfy Mr. Burdovsky. Acting on that conviction,
you have tried to intimidate me by this publication and to be revenged
for my supposed refusal. But what did you know of my intentions? It may
be that I have resolved to satisfy Mr. Burdovsky’s claim. I now declare
openly, in the presence of these witnesses, that I will do so.”

“The noble and intelligent word of an intelligent and most noble man, at
last!” exclaimed the boxer.

“Good God!” exclaimed Lizabetha Prokofievna involuntarily.

“This is intolerable,” growled the general.

“Allow me, gentlemen, allow me,” urged the prince.

“I will explain matters to you. Five weeks ago I received a visit from
Tchebaroff, your agent, Mr. Burdovsky. You have given a very flattering
description of him in your article, Mr. Keller,” he continued, turning
to the boxer with a smile, “but he did not please me at all. I saw at
once that Tchebaroff was the moving spirit in the matter, and, to speak
frankly, I thought he might have induced you, Mr. Burdovsky, to make
this claim, by taking advantage of your simplicity.”

“You have no right.... I am not simple,” stammered Burdovsky, much
agitated.

“You have no sort of right to suppose such things,” said Lebedeff’s
nephew in a tone of authority.

“It is most offensive!” shrieked Hippolyte; “it is an insulting
suggestion, false, and most ill-timed.”

“I beg your pardon, gentlemen; please excuse me,” said the prince. “I
thought absolute frankness on both sides would be best, but have it your
own way. I told Tchebaroff that, as I was not in Petersburg, I would
commission a friend to look into the matter without delay, and that I
would let you know, Mr. Burdovsky. Gentlemen, I have no hesitation in
telling you that it was the fact of Tchebaroff’s intervention that made
me suspect a fraud. Oh! do not take offence at my words, gentlemen,
for Heaven’s sake do not be so touchy!” cried the prince, seeing that
Burdovsky was getting excited again, and that the rest were preparing
to protest. “If I say I suspected a fraud, there is nothing personal in
that. I had never seen any of you then; I did not even know your names;
I only judged by Tchebaroff; I am speaking quite generally--if you only
knew how I have been ‘done’ since I came into my fortune!”

“You are shockingly naive, prince,” said Lebedeff’s nephew in mocking
tones.

“Besides, though you are a prince and a millionaire, and even though
you may really be simple and good-hearted, you can hardly be outside the
general law,” Hippolyte declared loudly.

“Perhaps not; it is very possible,” the prince agreed hastily, “though I
do not know what general law you allude to. I will go on--only please
do not take offence without good cause. I assure you I do not mean to
offend you in the least. Really, it is impossible to speak three words
sincerely without your flying into a rage! At first I was amazed when
Tchebaroff told me that Pavlicheff had a son, and that he was in such
a miserable position. Pavlicheff was my benefactor, and my father’s
friend. Oh, Mr. Keller, why does your article impute things to my father
without the slightest foundation? He never squandered the funds of his
company nor ill-treated his subordinates, I am absolutely certain of it;
I cannot imagine how you could bring yourself to write such a calumny!
But your assertions concerning Pavlicheff are absolutely intolerable!
You do not scruple to make a libertine of that noble man; you call him a
sensualist as coolly as if you were speaking the truth, and yet it would
not be possible to find a chaster man. He was even a scholar of note,
and in correspondence with several celebrated scientists, and spent
large sums in the interests of science. As to his kind heart and his
good actions, you were right indeed when you said that I was almost an
idiot at that time, and could hardly understand anything--(I could
speak and understand Russian, though),--but now I can appreciate what I
remember--”

“Excuse me,” interrupted Hippolyte, “is not this rather sentimental? You
said you wished to come to the point; please remember that it is after
nine o’clock.”

“Very well, gentlemen--very well,” replied the prince. “At first I
received the news with mistrust, then I said to myself that I might be
mistaken, and that Pavlicheff might possibly have had a son. But I was
absolutely amazed at the readiness with which the son had revealed
the secret of his birth at the expense of his mother’s honour. For
Tchebaroff had already menaced me with publicity in our interview....”

“What nonsense!” Lebedeff’s nephew interrupted violently.
