consistent with this report.

There were rumours current as to Gania, too; but circumstances soon
contradicted these. He had fallen seriously ill, and his illness
precluded his appearance in society, and even at business, for over a
month. As soon as he had recovered, however, he threw up his situation
in the public company under General Epanchin’s direction, for some
unknown reason, and the post was given to another. He never went
near the Epanchins’ house at all, and was exceedingly irritable and
depressed.

Varvara Ardalionovna married Ptitsin this winter, and it was said that
the fact of Gania’s retirement from business was the ultimate cause of
the marriage, since Gania was now not only unable to support his family,
but even required help himself.

We may mention that Gania was no longer mentioned in the Epanchin
household any more than the prince was; but that a certain circumstance
in connection with the fatal evening at Nastasia’s house became known
to the general, and, in fact, to all the family the very next day. This
fact was that Gania had come home that night, but had refused to go to
bed. He had awaited the prince’s return from Ekaterinhof with feverish
impatience.

On the latter’s arrival, at six in the morning, Gania had gone to him
in his room, bringing with him the singed packet of money, which he had
insisted that the prince should return to Nastasia Philipovna without
delay. It was said that when Gania entered the prince’s room, he came
with anything but friendly feelings, and in a condition of despair and
misery; but that after a short conversation, he had stayed on for a
couple of hours with him, sobbing continuously and bitterly the whole
time. They had parted upon terms of cordial friendship.

The Epanchins heard about this, as well as about the episode at Nastasia
Philipovna’s. It was strange, perhaps, that the facts should become so
quickly, and fairly accurately, known. As far as Gania was concerned,
it might have been supposed that the news had come through Varvara
Ardalionovna, who had suddenly become a frequent visitor of the Epanchin
girls, greatly to their mother’s surprise. But though Varvara had seen
fit, for some reason, to make friends with them, it was not likely
that she would have talked to them about her brother. She had plenty of
pride, in spite of the fact that in thus acting she was seeking intimacy
with people who had practically shown her brother the door. She and the
Epanchin girls had been acquainted in childhood, although of late
they had met but rarely. Even now Varvara hardly ever appeared in the
drawing-room, but would slip in by a back way. Lizabetha Prokofievna,
who disliked Varvara, although she had a great respect for her mother,
was much annoyed by this sudden intimacy, and put it down to the general
“contrariness” of her daughters, who were “always on the lookout for
some new way of opposing her.” Nevertheless, Varvara continued her
visits.

A month after Muishkin’s departure, Mrs. Epanchin received a letter from
her old friend Princess Bielokonski (who had lately left for Moscow),
which letter put her into the greatest good humour. She did not divulge
its contents either to her daughters or the general, but her conduct
towards the former became affectionate in the extreme. She even made
some sort of confession to them, but they were unable to understand what
it was about. She actually relaxed towards the general a little--he had
been long disgraced--and though she managed to quarrel with them all the
next day, yet she soon came round, and from her general behaviour it was
to be concluded that she had had good news of some sort, which she would
like, but could not make up her mind, to disclose.

However, a week later she received another letter from the same source,
and at last resolved to speak.

She solemnly announced that she had heard from old Princess Bielokonski,
who had given her most comforting news about “that queer young prince.”
 Her friend had hunted him up, and found that all was going well with
him. He had since called in person upon her, making an extremely
favourable impression, for the princess had received him each day since,
and had introduced him into several good houses.

The girls could see that their mother concealed a great deal from them,
and left out large pieces of the letter in reading it to them.

However, the ice was broken, and it suddenly became possible to mention
the prince’s name again. And again it became evident how very strong was
the impression the young man had made in the household by his one visit
there. Mrs. Epanchin was surprised at the effect which the news from
Moscow had upon the girls, and they were no less surprised that after
solemnly remarking that her most striking characteristic was “being
mistaken in people” she should have troubled to obtain for the prince
the favour and protection of so powerful an old lady as the Princess
Bielokonski. As soon as the ice was thus broken, the general lost no
time in showing that he, too, took the greatest interest in the subject.
He admitted that he was interested, but said that it was merely in the
business side of the question. It appeared that, in the interests of
the prince, he had made arrangements in Moscow for a careful watch to be
kept upon the prince’s business affairs, and especially upon Salaskin.
All that had been said as to the prince being an undoubted heir to a
fortune turned out to be perfectly true; but the fortune proved to be
much smaller than was at first reported. The estate was considerably
encumbered with debts; creditors turned up on all sides, and the prince,
in spite of all advice and entreaty, insisted upon managing all matters
of claim himself--which, of course, meant satisfying everybody all
round, although half the claims were absolutely fraudulent.

Mrs. Epanchin confirmed all this. She said the princess had written to
much the same effect, and added that there was no curing a fool. But
it was plain, from her expression of face, how strongly she approved of
this particular young fool’s doings. In conclusion, the general observed
that his wife took as great an interest in the prince as though he were
her own son; and that she had commenced to be especially affectionate
towards Aglaya was a self-evident fact.

All this caused the general to look grave and important. But, alas! this
agreeable state of affairs very soon changed once more.

A couple of weeks went by, and suddenly the general and his wife were
once more gloomy and silent, and the ice was as firm as ever. The fact
was, the general, who had heard first, how Nastasia Philipovna had fled
to Moscow and had been discovered there by Rogojin; that she had then
disappeared once more, and been found again by Rogojin, and how after
that she had almost promised to marry him, now received news that she
had once more disappeared, almost on the very day fixed for her wedding,
flying somewhere into the interior of Russia this time, and that
Prince Muishkin had left all his affairs in the hands of Salaskin and
disappeared also--but whether he was with Nastasia, or had only set off
in search of her, was unknown.

Lizabetha Prokofievna received confirmatory news from the princess--and
alas, two months after the prince’s first departure from St. Petersburg,
darkness and mystery once more enveloped his whereabouts and actions,
and in the Epanchin family the ice of silence once more formed over the
subject. Varia, however, informed the girls of what had happened, she
having received the news from Ptitsin, who generally knew more than most
people.

To make an end, we may say that there were many changes in the Epanchin
household in the spring, so that it was not difficult to forget the
prince, who sent no news of himself.

The Epanchin family had at last made up their minds to spend the summer
abroad, all except the general, who could not waste time in “travelling
for enjoyment,” of course. This arrangement was brought about by the
persistence of the girls, who insisted that they were never allowed
to go abroad because their parents were too anxious to marry them off.
Perhaps their parents had at last come to the conclusion that husbands
might be found abroad, and that a summer’s travel might bear fruit. The
marriage between Alexandra and Totski had been broken off. Since the
prince’s departure from St. Petersburg no more had been said about it;
the subject had been dropped without ceremony, much to the joy of Mrs.
General, who, announced that she was “ready to cross herself with both
hands” in gratitude for the escape. The general, however, regretted
Totski for a long while. “Such a fortune!” he sighed, “and such a good,
easy-going fellow!”

After a time it became known that Totski had married a French marquise,
