reading a book--wasn’t that sympathy beginning? Did it not show that he
comprehended his relations with her? And his story of waiting day and
night for her forgiveness? That didn’t look quite like passion alone.

And as to her face, could it inspire nothing but passion? Could her
face inspire passion at all now? Oh, it inspired suffering, grief,
overwhelming grief of the soul! A poignant, agonizing memory swept over
the prince’s heart.

Yes, agonizing. He remembered how he had suffered that first day when he
thought he observed in her the symptoms of madness. He had almost fallen
into despair. How could he have lost his hold upon her when she ran away
from him to Rogojin? He ought to have run after her himself, rather than
wait for news as he had done. Can Rogojin have failed to observe, up
to now, that she is mad? Rogojin attributes her strangeness to other
causes, to passion! What insane jealousy! What was it he had hinted at
in that suggestion of his? The prince suddenly blushed, and shuddered to
his very heart.

But why recall all this? There was insanity on both sides. For him, the
prince, to love this woman with passion, was unthinkable. It would be
cruel and inhuman. Yes. Rogojin is not fair to himself; he has a large
heart; he has aptitude for sympathy. When he learns the truth, and finds
what a pitiable being is this injured, broken, half-insane creature, he
will forgive her all the torment she has caused him. He will become her
slave, her brother, her friend. Compassion will teach even Rogojin,
it will show him how to reason. Compassion is the chief law of human
existence. Oh, how guilty he felt towards Rogojin! And, for a few warm,
hasty words spoken in Moscow, Parfen had called him “brother,” while
he--but no, this was delirium! It would all come right! That gloomy
Parfen had implied that his faith was waning; he must suffer dreadfully.
He said he liked to look at that picture; it was not that he liked
it, but he felt the need of looking at it. Rogojin was not merely a
passionate soul; he was a fighter. He was fighting for the restoration
of his dying faith. He must have something to hold on to and believe,
and someone to believe in. What a strange picture that of Holbein’s is!
Why, this is the street, and here’s the house, No. .

The prince rang the bell, and asked for Nastasia Philipovna. The lady of
the house came out, and stated that Nastasia had gone to stay with Daria
Alexeyevna at Pavlofsk, and might be there some days.

Madame Filisoff was a little woman of forty, with a cunning face, and
crafty, piercing eyes. When, with an air of mystery, she asked her
visitor’s name, he refused at first to answer, but in a moment he
changed his mind, and left strict instructions that it should be given
to Nastasia Philipovna. The urgency of his request seemed to impress
Madame Filisoff, and she put on a knowing expression, as if to say, “You
need not be afraid, I quite understand.” The prince’s name evidently
was a great surprise to her. He stood and looked absently at her for a
moment, then turned, and took the road back to his hotel. But he went
away not as he came. A great change had suddenly come over him. He went
blindly forward; his knees shook under him; he was tormented by “ideas”;
his lips were blue, and trembled with a feeble, meaningless smile. His
demon was upon him once more.

What had happened to him? Why was his brow clammy with drops of
moisture, his knees shaking beneath him, and his soul oppressed with a
cold gloom? Was it because he had just seen these dreadful eyes again?
Why, he had left the Summer Garden on purpose to see them; that had been
his “idea.” He had wished to assure himself that he would see them once
more at that house. Then why was he so overwhelmed now, having seen them
as he expected? just as though he had not expected to see them! Yes,
they were the very same eyes; and no doubt about it. The same that he
had seen in the crowd that morning at the station, the same that he
had surprised in Rogojin’s rooms some hours later, when the latter had
replied to his inquiry with a sneering laugh, “Well, whose eyes were
they?” Then for the third time they had appeared just as he was getting
into the train on his way to see Aglaya. He had had a strong impulse to
rush up to Rogojin, and repeat his words of the morning “Whose eyes
are they?” Instead he had fled from the station, and knew nothing more,
until he found himself gazing into the window of a cutler’s shop, and
wondering if a knife with a staghorn handle would cost more than sixty
copecks. And as the prince sat dreaming in the Summer Garden under a
lime-tree, a wicked demon had come and whispered in his car: “Rogojin
has been spying upon you and watching you all the morning in a frenzy
of desperation. When he finds you have not gone to Pavlofsk--a terrible
discovery for him--he will surely go at once to that house in Petersburg
Side, and watch for you there, although only this morning you gave
your word of honour not to see _her_, and swore that you had not come to
Petersburg for that purpose.” And thereupon the prince had hastened off
to that house, and what was there in the fact that he had met Rogojin
there? He had only seen a wretched, suffering creature, whose state of
mind was gloomy and miserable, but most comprehensible. In the morning
Rogojin had seemed to be trying to keep out of the way; but at the
station this afternoon he had stood out, he had concealed himself,
indeed, less than the prince himself; at the house, now, he had stood
fifty yards off on the other side of the road, with folded hands,
watching, plainly in view and apparently desirous of being seen. He had
stood there like an accuser, like a judge, not like a--a what?

And why had not the prince approached him and spoken to him, instead
of turning away and pretending he had seen nothing, although their eyes
met? (Yes, their eyes had met, and they had looked at each other.) Why,
he had himself wished to take Rogojin by the hand and go in together, he
had himself determined to go to him on the morrow and tell him that he
had seen her, he had repudiated the demon as he walked to the house, and
his heart had been full of joy.

Was there something in the whole aspect of the man, today, sufficient
to justify the prince’s terror, and the awful suspicions of his demon?
Something seen, but indescribable, which filled him with dreadful
presentiments? Yes, he was convinced of it--convinced of what? (Oh, how
mean and hideous of him to feel this conviction, this presentiment! How
he blamed himself for it!) “Speak if you dare, and tell me, what is the
presentiment?” he repeated to himself, over and over again. “Put it into
words, speak out clearly and distinctly. Oh, miserable coward that I
am!” The prince flushed with shame for his own baseness. “How shall I
ever look this man in the face again? My God, what a day! And what a
nightmare, what a nightmare!”

There was a moment, during this long, wretched walk back from the
Petersburg Side, when the prince felt an irresistible desire to go
straight to Rogojin’s, wait for him, embrace him with tears of shame and
contrition, and tell him of his distrust, and finish with it--once for
all.

But here he was back at his hotel.

How often during the day he had thought of this hotel with loathing--its
corridor, its rooms, its stairs. How he had dreaded coming back to it,
for some reason.

“What a regular old woman I am today,” he had said to himself each time,
with annoyance. “I believe in every foolish presentiment that comes into
my head.”

He stopped for a moment at the door; a great flush of shame came over
him. “I am a coward, a wretched coward,” he said, and moved forward
again; but once more he paused.

Among all the incidents of the day, one recurred to his mind to the
exclusion of the rest; although now that his self-control was regained,
and he was no longer under the influence of a nightmare, he was able
to think of it calmly. It concerned the knife on Rogojin’s table. “Why
should not Rogojin have as many knives on his table as he chooses?”
 thought the prince, wondering at his suspicions, as he had done when he
found himself looking into the cutler’s window. “What could it have to
do with me?” he said to himself again, and stopped as if rooted to the
ground by a kind of paralysis of limb such as attacks people under the
stress of some humiliating recollection.

The doorway was dark and gloomy at any time; but just at this moment
it was rendered doubly so by the fact that the thunder-storm had just
broken, and the rain was coming down in torrents.

And in the semi-darkness the prince distinguished a man standing close
to the stairs, apparently waiting.

There was nothing particularly significant in the fact that a man was
