questioningly into Prince S.’s face. The latter, however, remained
silent.

“Then it was not simply a matter of bills?” Muishkin said at last, with
some impatience. “It was not as she said?”

“But I ask you, my dear sir, how can there be anything in common between
Evgenie Pavlovitch, and--her, and again Rogojin? I tell you he is a man
of immense wealth--as I know for a fact; and he has further expectations
from his uncle. Simply Nastasia Philipovna--”

Prince S. paused, as though unwilling to continue talking about Nastasia
Philipovna.

“Then at all events he knows her!” remarked the prince, after a moment’s
silence.

“Oh, that may be. He may have known her some time ago--two or three
years, at least. He used to know Totski. But it is impossible that
there should be any intimacy between them. She has not even been in the
place--many people don’t even know that she has returned from Moscow! I
have only observed her carriage about for the last three days or so.”

“It’s a lovely carriage,” said Adelaida.

“Yes, it was a beautiful turn-out, certainly!”

The visitors left the house, however, on no less friendly terms than
before. But the visit was of the greatest importance to the prince, from
his own point of view. Admitting that he had his suspicions, from
the moment of the occurrence of last night, perhaps even before, that
Nastasia had some mysterious end in view, yet this visit confirmed his
suspicions and justified his fears. It was all clear to him; Prince S.
was wrong, perhaps, in his view of the matter, but he was somewhere near
the truth, and was right in so far as that he understood there to be
an intrigue of some sort going on. Perhaps Prince S. saw it all more
clearly than he had allowed his hearers to understand. At all events,
nothing could be plainer than that he and Adelaida had come for the
express purpose of obtaining explanations, and that they suspected him
of being concerned in the affair. And if all this were so, then _she_ must
have some terrible object in view! What was it? There was no stopping
_her_, as Muishkin knew from experience, in the performance of anything
she had set her mind on! “Oh, she is mad, mad!” thought the poor prince.

But there were many other puzzling occurrences that day, which required
immediate explanation, and the prince felt very sad. A visit from Vera
Lebedeff distracted him a little. She brought the infant Lubotchka with
her as usual, and talked cheerfully for some time. Then came her younger
sister, and later the brother, who attended a school close by. He
informed Muishkin that his father had lately found a new interpretation
of the star called “wormwood,” which fell upon the water-springs, as
described in the Apocalypse. He had decided that it meant the network of
railroads spread over the face of Europe at the present time. The
prince refused to believe that Lebedeff could have given such an
interpretation, and they decided to ask him about it at the earliest
opportunity. Vera related how Keller had taken up his abode with them on
the previous evening. She thought he would remain for some time, as he
was greatly pleased with the society of General Ivolgin and of the
whole family. But he declared that he had only come to them in order
to complete his education! The prince always enjoyed the company of
Lebedeff’s children, and today it was especially welcome, for Colia did
not appear all day. Early that morning he had started for Petersburg.
Lebedeff also was away on business. But Gavrila Ardalionovitch had
promised to visit Muishkin, who eagerly awaited his coming.

About seven in the evening, soon after dinner, he arrived. At the first
glance it struck the prince that he, at any rate, must know all the
details of last night’s affair. Indeed, it would have been impossible
for him to remain in ignorance considering the intimate relationship
between him, Varvara Ardalionovna, and Ptitsin. But although he and the
prince were intimate, in a sense, and although the latter had placed
the Burdovsky affair in his hands--and this was not the only mark of
confidence he had received--it seemed curious how many matters there
were that were tacitly avoided in their conversations. Muishkin thought
that Gania at times appeared to desire more cordiality and frankness.
It was apparent now, when he entered, that he was convinced that the
moment for breaking the ice between them had come at last.

But all the same Gania was in haste, for his sister was waiting at
Lebedeff’s to consult him on an urgent matter of business. If he had
anticipated impatient questions, or impulsive confidences, he was
soon undeceived. The prince was thoughtful, reserved, even a little
absent-minded, and asked none of the questions--one in particular--that
Gania had expected. So he imitated the prince’s demeanour, and talked
fast and brilliantly upon all subjects but the one on which their
thoughts were engaged. Among other things Gania told his host that
Nastasia Philipovna had been only four days in Pavlofsk, and that
everyone was talking about her already. She was staying with Daria
Alexeyevna, in an ugly little house in Mattrossky Street, but drove
about in the smartest carriage in the place. A crowd of followers
had pursued her from the first, young and old. Some escorted her on
horse-back when she took the air in her carriage.

She was as capricious as ever in the choice of her acquaintances, and
admitted few into her narrow circle. Yet she already had a numerous
following and many champions on whom she could depend in time of need.
One gentleman on his holiday had broken off his engagement on her
account, and an old general had quarrelled with his only son for the
same reason.

She was accompanied sometimes in her carriage by a girl of sixteen,
a distant relative of her hostess. This young lady sang very well; in
fact, her music had given a kind of notoriety to their little house.
Nastasia, however, was behaving with great discretion on the whole. She
dressed quietly, though with such taste as to drive all the ladies
in Pavlofsk mad with envy, of that, as well as of her beauty and her
carriage and horses.

“As for yesterday’s episode,” continued Gania, “of course it was
pre-arranged.” Here he paused, as though expecting to be asked how
he knew that. But the prince did not inquire. Concerning Evgenie
Pavlovitch, Gania stated, without being asked, that he believed the
former had not known Nastasia Philipovna in past years, but that he had
probably been introduced to her by somebody in the park during these
four days. As to the question of the IOU’s she had spoken of, there
might easily be something in that; for though Evgenie was undoubtedly
a man of wealth, yet certain of his affairs were equally undoubtedly in
disorder. Arrived at this interesting point, Gania suddenly broke off,
and said no more about Nastasia’s prank of the previous evening.

At last Varvara Ardalionovna came in search of her brother, and remained
for a few minutes. Without Muishkin’s asking her, she informed him that
Evgenie Pavlovitch was spending the day in Petersburg, and perhaps would
remain there over tomorrow; and that her husband had also gone to town,
probably in connection with Evgenie Pavlovitch’s affairs.

“Lizabetha Prokofievna is in a really fiendish temper today,” she
added, as she went out, “but the most curious thing is that Aglaya has
quarrelled with her whole family; not only with her father and mother,
but with her sisters also. It is not a good sign.” She said all this
quite casually, though it was extremely important in the eyes of
the prince, and went off with her brother. Regarding the episode of
“Pavlicheff’s son,” Gania had been absolutely silent, partly from a kind
of false modesty, partly, perhaps, to “spare the prince’s feelings.” The
latter, however, thanked him again for the trouble he had taken in the
affair.

Muishkin was glad enough to be left alone. He went out of the garden,
crossed the road, and entered the park. He wished to reflect, and to
make up his mind as to a certain “step.” This step was one of those
things, however, which are not thought out, as a rule, but decided for
or against hastily, and without much reflection. The fact is, he felt a
longing to leave all this and go away--go anywhere, if only it were
far enough, and at once, without bidding farewell to anyone. He felt a
presentiment that if he remained but a few days more in this place, and
among these people, he would be fixed there irrevocably and permanently.
However, in a very few minutes he decided that to run away was
impossible; that it would be cowardly; that great problems lay before
him, and that he had no right to leave them unsolved, or at least to
refuse to give all his energy and strength to the attempt to solve them.
