“It’s all a joke, mamma; it’s just a joke like the ‘poor
knight’--nothing more whatever, I assure you!” Alexandra whispered
in her ear. “She is chaffing him--making a fool of him, after her
own private fashion, that’s all! But she carries it just a little
too far--she is a regular little actress. How she frightened us just
now--didn’t she?--and all for a lark!”

“Well, it’s lucky she has happened upon an idiot, then, that’s all I
can say!” whispered Lizabetha Prokofievna, who was somewhat comforted,
however, by her daughter’s remark.

The prince had heard himself referred to as “idiot,” and had shuddered
at the moment; but his shudder, it so happened, was not caused by the
word applied to him. The fact was that in the crowd, not far from where
he was sitting, a pale familiar face, with curly black hair, and a
well-known smile and expression, had flashed across his vision for a
moment, and disappeared again. Very likely he had imagined it! There
only remained to him the impression of a strange smile, two eyes, and
a bright green tie. Whether the man had disappeared among the crowd, or
whether he had turned towards the Vauxhall, the prince could not say.

But a moment or two afterwards he began to glance keenly about him. That
first vision might only too likely be the forerunner of a second; it was
almost certain to be so. Surely he had not forgotten the possibility
of such a meeting when he came to the Vauxhall? True enough, he had not
remarked where he was coming to when he set out with Aglaya; he had not
been in a condition to remark anything at all.

Had he been more careful to observe his companion, he would have seen
that for the last quarter of an hour Aglaya had also been glancing
around in apparent anxiety, as though she expected to see someone, or
something particular, among the crowd of people. Now, at the moment when
his own anxiety became so marked, her excitement also increased visibly,
and when he looked about him, she did the same.

The reason for their anxiety soon became apparent. From that very side
entrance to the Vauxhall, near which the prince and all the Epanchin
party were seated, there suddenly appeared quite a large knot of
persons, at least a dozen.

Heading this little band walked three ladies, two of whom were
remarkably lovely; and there was nothing surprising in the fact that
they should have had a large troop of admirers following in their wake.

But there was something in the appearance of both the ladies and their
admirers which was peculiar, quite different for that of the rest of the
public assembled around the orchestra.

Nearly everyone observed the little band advancing, and all pretended
not to see or notice them, except a few young fellows who exchanged
glances and smiled, saying something to one another in whispers.

It was impossible to avoid noticing them, however, in reality, for they
made their presence only too conspicuous by laughing and talking loudly.
It was to be supposed that some of them were more than half drunk,
although they were well enough dressed, some even particularly well.
There were one or two, however, who were very strange-looking creatures,
with flushed faces and extraordinary clothes; some were military men;
not all were quite young; one or two were middle-aged gentlemen of
decidedly disagreeable appearance, men who are avoided in society like
the plague, decked out in large gold studs and rings, and magnificently
“got up,” generally.

Among our suburban resorts there are some which enjoy a specially
high reputation for respectability and fashion; but the most careful
individual is not absolutely exempt from the danger of a tile falling
suddenly upon his head from his neighbour’s roof.

Such a tile was about to descend upon the elegant and decorous public
now assembled to hear the music.

In order to pass from the Vauxhall to the band-stand, the visitor has
to descend two or three steps. Just at these steps the group paused, as
though it feared to proceed further; but very quickly one of the three
ladies, who formed its apex, stepped forward into the charmed circle,
followed by two members of her suite.

One of these was a middle-aged man of very respectable appearance, but
with the stamp of parvenu upon him, a man whom nobody knew, and who
evidently knew nobody. The other follower was younger and far less
respectable-looking.

No one else followed the eccentric lady; but as she descended the steps
she did not even look behind her, as though it were absolutely the same
to her whether anyone were following or not. She laughed and talked
loudly, however, just as before. She was dressed with great taste, but
with rather more magnificence than was needed for the occasion, perhaps.

She walked past the orchestra, to where an open carriage was waiting,
near the road.

The prince had not seen _her_ for more than three months. All these days
since his arrival from Petersburg he had intended to pay her a visit,
but some mysterious presentiment had restrained him. He could not
picture to himself what impression this meeting with her would make upon
him, though he had often tried to imagine it, with fear and trembling.
One fact was quite certain, and that was that the meeting would be
painful.

Several times during the last six months he had recalled the effect
which the first sight of this face had had upon him, when he only saw
its portrait. He recollected well that even the portrait face had left
but too painful an impression.

That month in the provinces, when he had seen this woman nearly every
day, had affected him so deeply that he could not now look back upon
it calmly. In the very look of this woman there was something which
tortured him. In conversation with Rogojin he had attributed this
sensation to pity--immeasurable pity, and this was the truth. The sight
of the portrait face alone had filled his heart full of the agony of
real sympathy; and this feeling of sympathy, nay, of actual _suffering_,
for her, had never left his heart since that hour, and was still in full
force. Oh yes, and more powerful than ever!

But the prince was not satisfied with what he had said to Rogojin. Only
at this moment, when she suddenly made her appearance before him, did
he realize to the full the exact emotion which she called up in him, and
which he had not described correctly to Rogojin.

And, indeed, there were no words in which he could have expressed his
horror, yes, _horror_, for he was now fully convinced from his own private
knowledge of her, that the woman was mad.

If, loving a woman above everything in the world, or at least having a
foretaste of the possibility of such love for her, one were suddenly to
behold her on a chain, behind bars and under the lash of a keeper, one
would feel something like what the poor prince now felt.

“What’s the matter?” asked Aglaya, in a whisper, giving his sleeve a
little tug.

He turned his head towards her and glanced at her black and (for some
reason) flashing eyes, tried to smile, and then, apparently forgetting
her in an instant, turned to the right once more, and continued to watch
the startling apparition before him.

Nastasia Philipovna was at this moment passing the young ladies’ chairs.

Evgenie Pavlovitch continued some apparently extremely funny and
interesting anecdote to Alexandra, speaking quickly and with much
animation. The prince remembered that at this moment Aglaya remarked in
a half-whisper:

“_What_ a--”

She did not finish her indefinite sentence; she restrained herself in a
moment; but it was enough.

Nastasia Philipovna, who up to now had been walking along as though she
had not noticed the Epanchin party, suddenly turned her head in their
