brighter. The prince murmured something to him, but Hippolyte only
signed that he must be left alone for a while, and sat silent. At last
he came to himself.

“I am off,” he said, hoarsely, and with difficulty.

“Shall I see you home?” asked the prince, rising from his seat, but
suddenly stopping short as he remembered Aglaya’s prohibition against
leaving the house. Hippolyte laughed.

“I don’t mean that I am going to leave your house,” he continued,
still gasping and coughing. “On the contrary, I thought it absolutely
necessary to come and see you; otherwise I should not have troubled you.
I am off there, you know, and this time I believe, seriously, that I am
off! It’s all over. I did not come here for sympathy, believe me. I lay
down this morning at ten o’clock with the intention of not rising again
before that time; but I thought it over and rose just once more in
order to come here; from which you may deduce that I had some reason for
wishing to come.”

“It grieves me to see you so, Hippolyte. Why didn’t you send me a
message? I would have come up and saved you this trouble.”

“Well, well! Enough! You’ve pitied me, and that’s all that good manners
exact. I forgot, how are you?”

“I’m all right; yesterday I was a little--”

“I know, I heard; the china vase caught it! I’m sorry I wasn’t there.
I’ve come about something important. In the first place I had, the
pleasure of seeing Gavrila Ardalionovitch and Aglaya Ivanovna enjoying a
rendezvous on the green bench in the park. I was astonished to see what
a fool a man can look. I remarked upon the fact to Aglaya Ivanovna when
he had gone. I don’t think anything ever surprises you, prince!” added
Hippolyte, gazing incredulously at the prince’s calm demeanour. “To be
astonished by nothing is a sign, they say, of a great intellect. In my
opinion it would serve equally well as a sign of great foolishness. I
am not hinting about you; pardon me! I am very unfortunate today in my
expressions.”

“I knew yesterday that Gavrila Ardalionovitch--” began the prince, and
paused in evident confusion, though Hippolyte had shown annoyance at his
betraying no surprise.

“You knew it? Come, that’s news! But no--perhaps better not tell me. And
were you a witness of the meeting?”

“If you were there yourself you must have known that I was _not_ there!”

“Oh! but you may have been sitting behind the bushes somewhere. However,
I am very glad, on your account, of course. I was beginning to be afraid
that Mr. Gania--might have the preference!”

“May I ask you, Hippolyte, not to talk of this subject? And not to use
such expressions?”

“Especially as you know all, eh?”

“You are wrong. I know scarcely anything, and Aglaya Ivanovna is aware
that I know nothing. I knew nothing whatever about this meeting. You say
there was a meeting. Very well; let’s leave it so--”

“Why, what do you mean? You said you knew, and now suddenly you know
nothing! You say ‘very well; let’s leave it so.’ But I say, don’t be
so confiding, especially as you know nothing. You are confiding simply
_because_ you know nothing. But do you know what these good people have
in their minds’ eye--Gania and his sister? Perhaps you are suspicious?
Well, well, I’ll drop the subject!” he added, hastily, observing the
prince’s impatient gesture. “But I’ve come to you on my own business;
I wish to make you a clear explanation. What a nuisance it is that one
cannot die without explanations! I have made such a quantity of them
already. Do you wish to hear what I have to say?”

“Speak away, I am listening.”

“Very well, but I’ll change my mind, and begin about Gania. Just fancy
to begin with, if you can, that I, too, was given an appointment at
the green bench today! However, I won’t deceive you; I asked for the
appointment. I said I had a secret to disclose. I don’t know whether I
came there too early, I think I must have; but scarcely had I sat down
beside Aglaya Ivanovna than I saw Gavrila Ardalionovitch and his sister
Varia coming along, arm in arm, just as though they were enjoying a
morning walk together. Both of them seemed very much astonished, not
to say disturbed, at seeing me; they evidently had not expected
the pleasure. Aglaya Ivanovna blushed up, and was actually a little
confused. I don’t know whether it was merely because I was there, or
whether Gania’s beauty was too much for her! But anyway, she turned
crimson, and then finished up the business in a very funny manner.
She jumped up from her seat, bowed back to Gania, smiled to Varia, and
suddenly observed: ‘I only came here to express my gratitude for all
your kind wishes on my behalf, and to say that if I find I need your
services, believe me--’ Here she bowed them away, as it were, and they
both marched off again, looking very foolish. Gania evidently could not
make head nor tail of the matter, and turned as red as a lobster; but
Varia understood at once that they must get away as quickly as they
could, so she dragged Gania away; she is a great deal cleverer than he
is. As for myself, I went there to arrange a meeting to be held between
Aglaya Ivanovna and Nastasia Philipovna.”

“Nastasia Philipovna!” cried the prince.

“Aha! I think you are growing less cool, my friend, and are beginning
to be a trifle surprised, aren’t you? I’m glad that you are not above
ordinary human feelings, for once. I’ll console you a little now, after
your consternation. See what I get for serving a young and high-souled
maiden! This morning I received a slap in the face from the lady!”

“A--a moral one?” asked the prince, involuntarily.

“Yes--not a physical one! I don’t suppose anyone--even a woman--would
raise a hand against me now. Even Gania would hesitate! I did think at
one time yesterday, that he would fly at me, though. I bet anything that
I know what you are thinking of now! You are thinking: ‘Of course one
can’t strike the little wretch, but one could suffocate him with a
pillow, or a wet towel, when he is asleep! One _ought_ to get rid of him
somehow.’ I can see in your face that you are thinking that at this very
second.”

“I never thought of such a thing for a moment,” said the prince, with
disgust.

“I don’t know--I dreamed last night that I was being suffocated with a
wet cloth by--somebody. I’ll tell you who it was--Rogojin! What do you
think, can a man be suffocated with a wet cloth?”

“I don’t know.”

“I’ve heard so. Well, we’ll leave that question just now. Why am I a
scandal-monger? Why did she call me a scandal-monger? And mind, _after_
she had heard every word I had to tell her, and had asked all sorts of
questions besides--but such is the way of women. For _her_ sake I entered
into relations with Rogojin--an interesting man! At _her_ request I
arranged a personal interview between herself and Nastasia Philipovna.
Could she have been angry because I hinted that she was enjoying
Nastasia Philipovna’s ‘leavings’? Why, I have been impressing it upon
her all this while for her own good. Two letters have I written her in
that strain, and I began straight off today about its being humiliating
for her. Besides, the word ‘leavings’ is not my invention. At all
events, they all used it at Gania’s, and she used it herself. So why am
I a scandal-monger? I see--I see you are tremendously amused, at this
moment! Probably you are laughing at me and fitting those silly lines to
my case--

“‘Maybe sad Love upon his setting smiles, And with vain hopes his
farewell hour beguiles.’

“Ha, ha, ha!”

Hippolyte suddenly burst into a fit of hysterical laughter, which turned
into a choking cough.
