expressions in your dictionary; do, you’ll make a grand effect! I’m
sorry that you seem to be able to come into a room as gracefully as you
do; where did you learn the art? Do you think you can drink a cup of tea
decently, when you know everybody is looking at you, on purpose to see
how you do it?”

“Yes, I think I can.”

“Can you? I’m sorry for it then, for I should have had a good laugh at
you otherwise. Do break _something_ at least, in the drawing-room! Upset
the Chinese vase, won’t you? It’s a valuable one; _do_ break it. Mamma
values it, and she’ll go out of her mind--it was a present. She’ll cry
before everyone, you’ll see! Wave your hand about, you know, as you
always do, and just smash it. Sit down near it on purpose.”

“On the contrary, I shall sit as far from it as I can. Thanks for the
hint.”

“Ha, ha! Then you are afraid you _will_ wave your arms about! I wouldn’t
mind betting that you’ll talk about some lofty subject, something
serious and learned. How delightful, how tactful that will be!”

“I should think it would be very foolish indeed, unless it happened to
come in appropriately.”

“Look here, once for all,” cried Aglaya, boiling over, “if I hear you
talking about capital punishment, or the economical condition of
Russia, or about Beauty redeeming the world, or anything of that sort,
I’ll--well, of course I shall laugh and seem very pleased, but I warn
you beforehand, don’t look me in the face again! I’m serious now,
mind, this time I _am really_ serious.” She certainly did say this very
seriously, so much so, that she looked quite different from what she
usually was, and the prince could not help noticing the fact. She did
not seem to be joking in the slightest degree.

“Well, you’ve put me into such a fright that I shall certainly make
a fool of myself, and very likely break something too. I wasn’t a bit
alarmed before, but now I’m as nervous as can be.”

“Then don’t speak at all. Sit still and don’t talk.”

“Oh, I can’t do that, you know! I shall say something foolish out of
pure ‘funk,’ and break something for the same excellent reason; I know
I shall. Perhaps I shall slip and fall on the slippery floor; I’ve done
that before now, you know. I shall dream of it all night now. Why did
you say anything about it?”

Aglaya looked blackly at him.

“Do you know what, I had better not come at all tomorrow! I’ll plead
sick-list and stay away,” said the prince, with decision.

Aglaya stamped her foot, and grew quite pale with anger.

“Oh, my goodness! Just listen to that! ‘Better not come,’ when the party
is on purpose for him! Good Lord! What a delightful thing it is to have
to do with such a--such a stupid as you are!”

“Well, I’ll come, I’ll come,” interrupted the prince, hastily, “and I’ll
give you my word of honour that I will sit the whole evening and not say
a word.”

“I believe that’s the best thing you can do. You said you’d ‘plead
sick-list’ just now; where in the world do you get hold of such
expressions? Why do you talk to me like this? Are you trying to irritate
me, or what?”

“Forgive me, it’s a schoolboy expression. I won’t do it again. I know
quite well, I see it, that you are anxious on my account (now, don’t be
angry), and it makes me very happy to see it. You wouldn’t believe
how frightened I am of misbehaving somehow, and how glad I am of your
instructions. But all this panic is simply nonsense, you know, Aglaya! I
give you my word it is; I am so pleased that you are such a child, such
a dear good child. How _charming_ you can be if you like, Aglaya.”

Aglaya wanted to be angry, of course, but suddenly some quite unexpected
feeling seized upon her heart, all in a moment.

“And you won’t reproach me for all these rude words of mine--some
day--afterwards?” she asked, of a sudden.

“What an idea! Of course not. And what are you blushing for again? And
there comes that frown once more! You’ve taken to looking too gloomy
sometimes, Aglaya, much more than you used to. I know why it is.”

“Be quiet, do be quiet!”

“No, no, I had much better speak out. I have long wished to say it, and
_have_ said it, but that’s not enough, for you didn’t believe me. Between
us two there stands a being who--”

“Be quiet, be quiet, be quiet, be quiet!” Aglaya struck in, suddenly,
seizing his hand in hers, and gazing at him almost in terror.

At this moment she was called by someone. She broke loose from him with
an air of relief and ran away.

The prince was in a fever all night. It was strange, but he had suffered
from fever for several nights in succession. On this particular night,
while in semi-delirium, he had an idea: what if on the morrow he were
to have a fit before everybody? The thought seemed to freeze his blood
within him. All night he fancied himself in some extraordinary society
of strange persons. The worst of it was that he was talking nonsense;
he knew that he ought not to speak at all, and yet he talked the whole
time; he seemed to be trying to persuade them all to something. Evgenie
and Hippolyte were among the guests, and appeared to be great friends.

He awoke towards nine o’clock with a headache, full of confused ideas
and strange impressions. For some reason or other he felt most anxious
to see Rogojin, to see and talk to him, but what he wished to say he
could not tell. Next, he determined to go and see Hippolyte. His mind
was in a confused state, so much so that the incidents of the morning
seemed to be imperfectly realized, though acutely felt.

One of these incidents was a visit from Lebedeff. Lebedeff came rather
early--before ten--but he was tipsy already. Though the prince was not
in an observant condition, yet he could not avoid seeing that for at
least three days--ever since General Ivolgin had left the house Lebedeff
had been behaving very badly. He looked untidy and dirty at all times
of the day, and it was said that he had begun to rage about in his own
house, and that his temper was very bad. As soon as he arrived this
morning, he began to hold forth, beating his breast and apparently
blaming himself for something.

“I’ve--I’ve had a reward for my meanness--I’ve had a slap in the face,”
 he concluded, tragically.

“A slap in the face? From whom? And so early in the morning?”

“Early?” said Lebedeff, sarcastically. “Time counts for nothing, even in
physical chastisement; but my slap in the face was not physical, it was
moral.”

He suddenly took a seat, very unceremoniously, and began his story. It
was very disconnected; the prince frowned, and wished he could get away;
but suddenly a few words struck him. He sat stiff with wonder--Lebedeff
said some extraordinary things.

In the first place he began about some letter; the name of Aglaya
Ivanovna came in. Then suddenly he broke off and began to accuse the
prince of something; he was apparently offended with him. At first he
declared that the prince had trusted him with his confidences as to “a
certain person” (Nastasia Philipovna), but that of late his friendship
had been thrust back into his bosom, and his innocent question as to
“approaching family changes” had been curtly put aside, which Lebedeff
declared, with tipsy tears, he could not bear; especially as he knew so
much already both from Rogojin and Nastasia Philipovna and her friend,
and from Varvara Ardalionovna, and even from Aglaya Ivanovna, through
his daughter Vera. “And who told Lizabetha Prokofievna something in
secret, by letter? Who told her all about the movements of a certain
