
She went on talking and chatting without a pause, with occasional little
bursts of laughter between.

“Thank God--thank God!” said Lizabetha Prokofievna to herself, without
quite knowing why she felt so relieved.

“What extraordinary people they are!” thought Prince S., for perhaps
the hundredth time since he had entered into intimate relations with the
family; but--he liked these “extraordinary people,” all the same. As for
Prince Lef Nicolaievitch himself, Prince S. did not seem quite to like
him, somehow. He was decidedly preoccupied and a little disturbed as
they all started off.

Evgenie Pavlovitch seemed to be in a lively humour. He made Adelaida and
Alexandra laugh all the way to the Vauxhall; but they both laughed
so very readily and promptly that the worthy Evgenie began at last to
suspect that they were not listening to him at all.

At this idea, he burst out laughing all at once, in quite unaffected
mirth, and without giving any explanation.

The sisters, who also appeared to be in high spirits, never tired of
glancing at Aglaya and the prince, who were walking in front. It was
evident that their younger sister was a thorough puzzle to them both.

Prince S. tried hard to get up a conversation with Mrs. Epanchin upon
outside subjects, probably with the good intention of distracting and
amusing her; but he bored her dreadfully. She was absent-minded to a
degree, and answered at cross purposes, and sometimes not at all.

But the puzzle and mystery of Aglaya was not yet over for the evening.
The last exhibition fell to the lot of the prince alone. When they had
proceeded some hundred paces or so from the house, Aglaya said to her
obstinately silent cavalier in a quick half-whisper:

“Look to the right!”

The prince glanced in the direction indicated.

“Look closer. Do you see that bench, in the park there, just by those
three big trees--that green bench?”

The prince replied that he saw it.

“Do you like the position of it? Sometimes of a morning early, at seven
o’clock, when all the rest are still asleep, I come out and sit there
alone.”

The prince muttered that the spot was a lovely one.

“Now, go away, I don’t wish to have your arm any longer; or perhaps,
better, continue to give me your arm, and walk along beside me, but
don’t speak a word to me. I wish to think by myself.”

The warning was certainly unnecessary; for the prince would not have
said a word all the rest of the time whether forbidden to speak or not.
His heart beat loud and painfully when Aglaya spoke of the bench; could
she--but no! he banished the thought, after an instant’s deliberation.

At Pavlofsk, on weekdays, the public is more select than it is on
Sundays and Saturdays, when the townsfolk come down to walk about and
enjoy the park.

The ladies dress elegantly, on these days, and it is the fashion to
gather round the band, which is probably the best of our pleasure-garden
bands, and plays the newest pieces. The behaviour of the public is most
correct and proper, and there is an appearance of friendly intimacy
among the usual frequenters. Many come for nothing but to look at their
acquaintances, but there are others who come for the sake of the music.
It is very seldom that anything happens to break the harmony of the
proceedings, though, of course, accidents will happen everywhere.

On this particular evening the weather was lovely, and there were
a large number of people present. All the places anywhere near the
orchestra were occupied.

Our friends took chairs near the side exit. The crowd and the music
cheered Mrs. Epanchin a little, and amused the girls; they bowed and
shook hands with some of their friends and nodded at a distance to
others; they examined the ladies’ dresses, noticed comicalities
and eccentricities among the people, and laughed and talked among
themselves. Evgenie Pavlovitch, too, found plenty of friends to bow to.
Several people noticed Aglaya and the prince, who were still together.

Before very long two or three young men had come up, and one or two
remained to talk; all of these young men appeared to be on intimate
terms with Evgenie Pavlovitch. Among them was a young officer, a
remarkably handsome fellow--very good-natured and a great chatterbox. He
tried to get up a conversation with Aglaya, and did his best to secure
her attention. Aglaya behaved very graciously to him, and chatted
and laughed merrily. Evgenie Pavlovitch begged the prince’s leave to
introduce their friend to him. The prince hardly realized what was
wanted of him, but the introduction came off; the two men bowed and
shook hands.

Evgenie Pavlovitch’s friend asked the prince some question, but the
latter did not reply, or if he did, he muttered something so strangely
indistinct that there was nothing to be made of it. The officer stared
intently at him, then glanced at Evgenie, divined why the latter had
introduced him, and gave his undivided attention to Aglaya again. Only
Evgenie Pavlovitch observed that Aglaya flushed up for a moment at this.

The prince did not notice that others were talking and making themselves
agreeable to Aglaya; in fact, at moments, he almost forgot that he was
sitting by her himself. At other moments he felt a longing to go away
somewhere and be alone with his thoughts, and to feel that no one knew
where he was.

Or if that were impossible he would like to be alone at home, on the
terrace--without either Lebedeff or his children, or anyone else about
him, and to lie there and think--a day and night and another day again!
He thought of the mountains--and especially of a certain spot which he
used to frequent, whence he would look down upon the distant valleys and
fields, and see the waterfall, far off, like a little silver thread,
and the old ruined castle in the distance. Oh! how he longed to be there
now--alone with his thoughts--to think of one thing all his life--one
thing! A thousand years would not be too much time! And let everyone
here forget him--forget him utterly! How much better it would have been
if they had never known him--if all this could but prove to be a dream.
Perhaps it was a dream!

Now and then he looked at Aglaya for five minutes at a time, without
taking his eyes off her face; but his expression was very strange;
he would gaze at her as though she were an object a couple of miles
distant, or as though he were looking at her portrait and not at herself
at all.

“Why do you look at me like that, prince?” she asked suddenly, breaking
off her merry conversation and laughter with those about her. “I’m
afraid of you! You look as though you were just going to put out
your hand and touch my face to see if it’s real! Doesn’t he, Evgenie
Pavlovitch--doesn’t he look like that?”

The prince seemed surprised that he should have been addressed at all;
he reflected a moment, but did not seem to take in what had been said
to him; at all events, he did not answer. But observing that she and
the others had begun to laugh, he too opened his mouth and laughed with
them.

The laughter became general, and the young officer, who seemed a
particularly lively sort of person, simply shook with mirth.

Aglaya suddenly whispered angrily to herself the word--

“Idiot!”

“My goodness--surely she is not in love with such a--surely she isn’t
mad!” groaned Mrs. Epanchin, under her breath.

