Aglaya began to flush up.

“Oh yes!” cried the prince, starting. “Hippolyte’s suicide--”

“What? At your house?” she asked, but without much surprise. “He was
alive yesterday evening, wasn’t he? How could you sleep here after
that?” she cried, growing suddenly animated.

“Oh, but he didn’t kill himself; the pistol didn’t go off.” Aglaya
insisted on hearing the whole story. She hurried the prince along, but
interrupted him with all sorts of questions, nearly all of which were
irrelevant. Among other things, she seemed greatly interested in every
word that Evgenie Pavlovitch had said, and made the prince repeat that
part of the story over and over again.

“Well, that’ll do; we must be quick,” she concluded, after hearing all.
“We have only an hour here, till eight; I must be home by then without
fail, so that they may not find out that I came and sat here with you;
but I’ve come on business. I have a great deal to say to you. But you
have bowled me over considerably with your news. As to Hippolyte, I
think his pistol was bound not to go off; it was more consistent with
the whole affair. Are you sure he really wished to blow his brains out,
and that there was no humbug about the matter?”

“No humbug at all.”

“Very likely. So he wrote that you were to bring me a copy of his
confession, did he? Why didn’t you bring it?”

“Why, he didn’t die! I’ll ask him for it, if you like.”

“Bring it by all means; you needn’t ask him. He will be delighted, you
may be sure; for, in all probability, he shot at himself simply in order
that I might read his confession. Don’t laugh at what I say, please, Lef
Nicolaievitch, because it may very well be the case.”

“I’m not laughing. I am convinced, myself, that that may have been
partly the reason.”

“You are convinced? You don’t really mean to say you think that
honestly?” asked Aglaya, extremely surprised.

She put her questions very quickly and talked fast, every now and then
forgetting what she had begun to say, and not finishing her sentence.
She seemed to be impatient to warn the prince about something or other.
She was in a state of unusual excitement, and though she put on a brave
and even defiant air, she seemed to be rather alarmed. She was dressed
very simply, but this suited her well. She continually trembled and
blushed, and she sat on the very edge of the seat.

The fact that the prince confirmed her idea, about Hippolyte shooting
himself that she might read his confession, surprised her greatly.

“Of course,” added the prince, “he wished us all to applaud his
conduct--besides yourself.”

“How do you mean--applaud?”

“Well--how am I to explain? He was very anxious that we should all come
around him, and say we were so sorry for him, and that we loved him
very much, and all that; and that we hoped he wouldn’t kill himself, but
remain alive. Very likely he thought more of you than the rest of us,
because he mentioned you at such a moment, though perhaps he did not
know himself that he had you in his mind’s eye.”

“I don’t understand you. How could he have me in view, and not be aware
of it himself? And yet, I don’t know--perhaps I do. Do you know I
have intended to poison myself at least thirty times--ever since I was
thirteen or so--and to write to my parents before I did it? I used
to think how nice it would be to lie in my coffin, and have them all
weeping over me and saying it was all their fault for being so cruel,
and all that--what are you smiling at?” she added, knitting her brow.
“What do _you_ think of when you go mooning about alone? I suppose
you imagine yourself a field-marshal, and think you have conquered
Napoleon?”

“Well, I really have thought something of the sort now and then,
especially when just dozing off,” laughed the prince. “Only it is the
Austrians whom I conquer--not Napoleon.”

“I don’t wish to joke with you, Lef Nicolaievitch. I shall see Hippolyte
myself. Tell him so. As for you, I think you are behaving very badly,
because it is not right to judge a man’s soul as you are judging
Hippolyte’s. You have no gentleness, but only justice--so you are
unjust.”

The prince reflected.

“I think you are unfair towards me,” he said. “There is nothing wrong
in the thoughts I ascribe to Hippolyte; they are only natural. But of
course I don’t know for certain what he thought. Perhaps he thought
nothing, but simply longed to see human faces once more, and to hear
human praise and feel human affection. Who knows? Only it all came out
wrong, somehow. Some people have luck, and everything comes out right
with them; others have none, and never a thing turns out fortunately.”

“I suppose you have felt that in your own case,” said Aglaya.

“Yes, I have,” replied the prince, quite unsuspicious of any irony in
the remark.

“H’m--well, at all events, I shouldn’t have fallen asleep here, in your
place. It wasn’t nice of you, that. I suppose you fall asleep wherever
you sit down?”

“But I didn’t sleep a wink all night. I walked and walked about, and
went to where the music was--”

“What music?”

“Where they played last night. Then I found this bench and sat down, and
thought and thought--and at last I fell fast asleep.”

“Oh, is that it? That makes a difference, perhaps. What did you go to
the bandstand for?”

“I don’t know; I--”

“Very well--afterwards. You are always interrupting me. What woman was
it you were dreaming about?”

“It was--about--you saw her--”

“Quite so; I understand. I understand quite well. You are very--Well,
how did she appear to you? What did she look like? No, I don’t want to
know anything about her,” said Aglaya, angrily; “don’t interrupt me--”

She paused a moment as though getting breath, or trying to master her
feeling of annoyance.

“Look here; this is what I called you here for. I wish to make you a--to
ask you to be my friend. What do you stare at me like that for?” she
added, almost angrily.

The prince certainly had darted a rather piercing look at her, and now
observed that she had begun to blush violently. At such moments, the
more Aglaya blushed, the angrier she grew with herself; and this was
clearly expressed in her eyes, which flashed like fire. As a rule, she
vented her wrath on her unfortunate companion, be it who it might. She
was very conscious of her own shyness, and was not nearly so talkative
as her sisters for this reason--in fact, at times she was much too
quiet. When, therefore, she was bound to talk, especially at such
delicate moments as this, she invariably did so with an air of haughty
defiance. She always knew beforehand when she was going to blush, long
before the blush came.

“Perhaps you do not wish to accept my proposition?” she asked, gazing
haughtily at the prince.

“Oh yes, I do; but it is so unnecessary. I mean, I did not think you
