in Switzerland, he reproached himself with the grossest indelicacy in
having offered him the ten thousand roubles before everyone. “I ought
to have waited till to-morrow and offered him the money when we were
alone,” thought Muishkin. “Now it is too late, the mischief is done!
Yes, I am an idiot, an absolute idiot!” he said to himself, overcome
with shame and regret.

Till then Gavrila Ardalionovitch had sat apart in silence. When the
prince called upon him, he came and stood by his side, and in a calm,
clear voice began to render an account of the mission confided to him.
All conversation ceased instantly. Everyone, especially the Burdovsky
party, listened with the utmost curiosity.

IX.

“You will not deny, I am sure,” said Gavrila Ardalionovitch, turning
to Burdovsky, who sat looking at him with wide-open eyes, perplexed and
astonished. “You will not deny, seriously, that you were born just two
years after your mother’s legal marriage to Mr. Burdovsky, your father.
Nothing would be easier than to prove the date of your birth from
well-known facts; we can only look on Mr. Keller’s version as a work of
imagination, and one, moreover, extremely offensive both to you and your
mother. Of course he distorted the truth in order to strengthen your
claim, and to serve your interests. Mr. Keller said that he previously
consulted you about his article in the paper, but did not read it to you
as a whole. Certainly he could not have read that passage. ....”

“As a matter of fact, I did not read it,” interrupted the boxer, “but
its contents had been given me on unimpeachable authority, and I...”

“Excuse me, Mr. Keller,” interposed Gavrila Ardalionovitch. “Allow me to
speak. I assure you your article shall be mentioned in its proper place,
and you can then explain everything, but for the moment I would rather
not anticipate. Quite accidentally, with the help of my sister, Varvara
Ardalionovna Ptitsin, I obtained from one of her intimate friends,
Madame Zoubkoff, a letter written to her twenty-five years ago,
by Nicolai Andreevitch Pavlicheff, then abroad. After getting
into communication with this lady, I went by her advice to Timofei
Fedorovitch Viazovkin, a retired colonel, and one of Pavlicheff’s oldest
friends. He gave me two more letters written by the latter when he was
still in foreign parts. These three documents, their dates, and the
facts mentioned in them, prove in the most undeniable manner, that
eighteen months before your birth, Nicolai Andreevitch went abroad,
where he remained for three consecutive years. Your mother, as you are
well aware, has never been out of Russia.... It is too late to read the
letters now; I am content to state the fact. But if you desire it, come
to me tomorrow morning, bring witnesses and writing experts with you,
and I will prove the absolute truth of my story. From that moment the
question will be decided.”

These words caused a sensation among the listeners, and there was a
general movement of relief. Burdovsky got up abruptly.

“If that is true,” said he, “I have been deceived, grossly deceived, but
not by Tchebaroff: and for a long time past, a long time. I do not
wish for experts, not I, nor to go to see you. I believe you. I give it
up.... But I refuse the ten thousand roubles. Good-bye.”

“Wait five minutes more, Mr. Burdovsky,” said Gavrila Ardalionovitch
pleasantly. “I have more to say. Some rather curious and important facts
have come to light, and it is absolutely necessary, in my opinion, that
you should hear them. You will not regret, I fancy, to have the whole
matter thoroughly cleared up.”

Burdovsky silently resumed his seat, and bent his head as though in
profound thought. His friend, Lebedeff’s nephew, who had risen to
accompany him, also sat down again. He seemed much disappointed, though
as self-confident as ever. Hippolyte looked dejected and sulky, as well
as surprised. He had just been attacked by a violent fit of coughing,
so that his handkerchief was stained with blood. The boxer looked
thoroughly frightened.

“Oh, Antip!” cried he in a miserable voice, “I did say to you the
other day--the day before yesterday--that perhaps you were not really
Pavlicheff’s son!”

There were sounds of half-smothered laughter at this.

“Now, that is a valuable piece of information, Mr. Keller,” replied
Gania. “However that may be, I have private information which convinces
me that Mr. Burdovsky, though doubtless aware of the date of his birth,
knew nothing at all about Pavlicheff’s sojourn abroad. Indeed, he passed
the greater part of his life out of Russia, returning at intervals for
short visits. The journey in question is in itself too unimportant for
his friends to recollect it after more than twenty years; and of course
Mr. Burdovsky could have known nothing about it, for he was not born.
As the event has proved, it was not impossible to find evidence of his
absence, though I must confess that chance has helped me in a quest
which might very well have come to nothing. It was really almost
impossible for Burdovsky or Tchebaroff to discover these facts, even if
it had entered their heads to try. Naturally they never dreamt...”

Here the voice of Hippolyte suddenly intervened.

“Allow me, Mr. Ivolgin,” he said irritably. “What is the good of all
this rigmarole? Pardon me. All is now clear, and we acknowledge the
truth of your main point. Why go into these tedious details? You wish
perhaps to boast of the cleverness of your investigation, to cry up your
talents as detective? Or perhaps your intention is to excuse Burdovsky,
by proving that he took up the matter in ignorance? Well, I consider that
extremely impudent on your part! You ought to know that Burdovsky has
no need of being excused or justified by you or anyone else! It is an
insult! The affair is quite painful enough for him without that. Will
nothing make you understand?”

“Enough! enough! Mr. Terentieff,” interrupted Gania.

“Don’t excite yourself; you seem very ill, and I am sorry for that. I am
almost done, but there are a few facts to which I must briefly refer, as
I am convinced that they ought to be clearly explained once for all....”
 A movement of impatience was noticed in his audience as he resumed: “I
merely wish to state, for the information of all concerned, that the
reason for Mr. Pavlicheff’s interest in your mother, Mr. Burdovsky, was
simply that she was the sister of a serf-girl with whom he was deeply in
love in his youth, and whom most certainly he would have married but for
her sudden death. I have proofs that this circumstance is almost, if not
quite, forgotten. I may add that when your mother was about ten years
old, Pavlicheff took her under his care, gave her a good education, and
later, a considerable dowry. His relations were alarmed, and feared
he might go so far as to marry her, but she gave her hand to a young
land-surveyor named Burdovsky when she reached the age of twenty. I
can even say definitely that it was a marriage of affection. After his
wedding your father gave up his occupation as land-surveyor, and with
his wife’s dowry of fifteen thousand roubles went in for commercial
speculations. As he had had no experience, he was cheated on all sides,
and took to drink in order to forget his troubles. He shortened his life
by his excesses, and eight years after his marriage he died. Your mother
says herself that she was left in the direst poverty, and would have
died of starvation had it not been for Pavlicheff, who generously
allowed her a yearly pension of six hundred roubles. Many people recall
his extreme fondness for you as a little boy. Your mother confirms this,
and agrees with others in thinking that he loved you the more because
you were a sickly child, stammering in your speech, and almost
deformed--for it is known that all his life Nicolai Andreevitch had a
partiality for unfortunates of every kind, especially children. In my
opinion this is most important. I may add that I discovered yet another
fact, the last on which I employed my detective powers. Seeing how fond
Pavlicheff was of you,--it was thanks to him you went to school, and
also had the advantage of special teachers--his relations and servants
grew to believe that you were his son, and that your father had been
betrayed by his wife. I may point out that this idea was only accredited
generally during the last years of Pavlicheff’s life, when his
next-of-kin were trembling about the succession, when the earlier story
was quite forgotten, and when all opportunity for discovering the truth
had seemingly passed away. No doubt you, Mr. Burdovsky, heard this
conjecture, and did not hesitate to accept it as true. I have had the
honour of making your mother’s acquaintance, and I find that she knows
all about these reports. What she does not know is that you, her son,
should have listened to them so complaisantly. I found your respected
mother at Pskoff, ill and in deep poverty, as she has been ever since
