“Why, it would be a game to cry over--not to laugh at!” said the
actress.

“Did it succeed?” asked Nastasia Philipovna. “Come, let’s try it, let’s
try it; we really are not quite so jolly as we might be--let’s try it!
We may like it; it’s original, at all events!”

“Yes,” said Ferdishenko; “it’s a good idea--come along--the men begin.
Of course no one need tell a story if he prefers to be disobliging. We
must draw lots! Throw your slips of paper, gentlemen, into this hat, and
the prince shall draw for turns. It’s a very simple game; all you have
to do is to tell the story of the worst action of your life. It’s as
simple as anything. I’ll prompt anyone who forgets the rules!”

No one liked the idea much. Some smiled, some frowned; some objected,
but faintly, not wishing to oppose Nastasia’s wishes; for this new idea
seemed to be rather well received by her. She was still in an excited,
hysterical state, laughing convulsively at nothing and everything. Her
eyes were blazing, and her cheeks showed two bright red spots against
the white. The melancholy appearance of some of her guests seemed to add
to her sarcastic humour, and perhaps the very cynicism and cruelty of
the game proposed by Ferdishenko pleased her. At all events she was
attracted by the idea, and gradually her guests came round to her side;
the thing was original, at least, and might turn out to be amusing. “And
supposing it’s something that one--one can’t speak about before ladies?”
 asked the timid and silent young man.

“Why, then of course, you won’t say anything about it. As if there
are not plenty of sins to your score without the need of those!” said
Ferdishenko.

“But I really don’t know which of my actions is the worst,” said the
lively actress.

“Ladies are exempted if they like.”

“And how are you to know that one isn’t lying? And if one lies the whole
point of the game is lost,” said Gania.

“Oh, but think how delightful to hear how one’s friends lie! Besides
you needn’t be afraid, Gania; everybody knows what your worst action is
without the need of any lying on your part. Only think, gentlemen,”--and
Ferdishenko here grew quite enthusiastic, “only think with what eyes we
shall observe one another tomorrow, after our tales have been told!”

“But surely this is a joke, Nastasia Philipovna?” asked Totski. “You
don’t really mean us to play this game.”

“Whoever is afraid of wolves had better not go into the wood,” said
Nastasia, smiling.

“But, pardon me, Mr. Ferdishenko, is it possible to make a game out of
this kind of thing?” persisted Totski, growing more and more uneasy. “I
assure you it can’t be a success.”

“And why not? Why, the last time I simply told straight off about how I
stole three roubles.”

“Perhaps so; but it is hardly possible that you told it so that it
seemed like truth, or so that you were believed. And, as Gavrila
Ardalionovitch has said, the least suggestion of a falsehood takes all
point out of the game. It seems to me that sincerity, on the other hand,
is only possible if combined with a kind of bad taste that would be
utterly out of place here.”

“How subtle you are, Afanasy Ivanovitch! You astonish me,” cried
Ferdishenko. “You will remark, gentlemen, that in saying that I
could not recount the story of my theft so as to be believed, Afanasy
Ivanovitch has very ingeniously implied that I am not capable of
thieving--(it would have been bad taste to say so openly); and all the
time he is probably firmly convinced, in his own mind, that I am very
well capable of it! But now, gentlemen, to business! Put in your slips,
ladies and gentlemen--is yours in, Mr. Totski? So--then we are all
ready; now prince, draw, please.” The prince silently put his hand into
the hat, and drew the names. Ferdishenko was first, then Ptitsin, then
the general, Totski next, his own fifth, then Gania, and so on; the
ladies did not draw.

“Oh, dear! oh, dear!” cried Ferdishenko. “I did so hope the prince would
come out first, and then the general. Well, gentlemen, I suppose I
must set a good example! What vexes me much is that I am such an
insignificant creature that it matters nothing to anybody whether I have
done bad actions or not! Besides, which am I to choose? It’s an _embarras
de richesse_. Shall I tell how I became a thief on one occasion only, to
convince Afanasy Ivanovitch that it is possible to steal without being a
thief?”

“Do go on, Ferdishenko, and don’t make unnecessary preface, or you’ll
never finish,” said Nastasia Philipovna. All observed how irritable and
cross she had become since her last burst of laughter; but none the less
obstinately did she stick to her absurd whim about this new game. Totski
sat looking miserable enough. The general lingered over his champagne,
and seemed to be thinking of some story for the time when his turn
should come.

XIV.

“I have no wit, Nastasia Philipovna,” began Ferdishenko, “and therefore
I talk too much, perhaps. Were I as witty, now, as Mr. Totski or the
general, I should probably have sat silent all the evening, as they
have. Now, prince, what do you think?--are there not far more thieves
than honest men in this world? Don’t you think we may say there does
not exist a single person so honest that he has never stolen anything
whatever in his life?”

“What a silly idea,” said the actress. “Of course it is not the case. I
have never stolen anything, for one.”

“H’m! very well, Daria Alexeyevna; you have not stolen anything--agreed.
But how about the prince, now--look how he is blushing!”

“I think you are partially right, but you exaggerate,” said the prince,
who had certainly blushed up, of a sudden, for some reason or other.

“Ferdishenko--either tell us your story, or be quiet, and mind your own
business. You exhaust all patience,” cuttingly and irritably remarked
Nastasia Philipovna.

“Immediately, immediately! As for my story, gentlemen, it is too stupid
and absurd to tell you.

“I assure you I am not a thief, and yet I have stolen; I cannot explain
why. It was at Semeon Ivanovitch Ishenka’s country house, one Sunday. He
had a dinner party. After dinner the men stayed at the table over their
wine. It struck me to ask the daughter of the house to play something
on the piano; so I passed through the corner room to join the ladies. In
that room, on Maria Ivanovna’s writing-table, I observed a three-rouble
note. She must have taken it out for some purpose, and left it lying
there. There was no one about. I took up the note and put it in my
pocket; why, I can’t say. I don’t know what possessed me to do it, but
it was done, and I went quickly back to the dining-room and reseated
myself at the dinner-table. I sat and waited there in a great state of
excitement. I talked hard, and told lots of stories, and laughed like
mad; then I joined the ladies.

“In half an hour or so the loss was discovered, and the servants were
being put under examination. Daria, the housemaid was suspected. I
exhibited the greatest interest and sympathy, and I remember that
poor Daria quite lost her head, and that I began assuring her, before
everyone, that I would guarantee her forgiveness on the part of her
mistress, if she would confess her guilt. They all stared at the girl,
and I remember a wonderful attraction in the reflection that here was I
sermonizing away, with the money in my own pocket all the while. I went
and spent the three roubles that very evening at a restaurant. I went in
and asked for a bottle of Lafite, and drank it up; I wanted to be rid of
the money.

“I did not feel much remorse either then or afterwards; but I would not
repeat the performance--believe it or not as you please. There--that’s
all.”
