once came to the conclusion that this must be one of the most useful of
animals--strong, willing, patient, cheap; and, thanks to this donkey,
I began to like the whole country I was travelling through; and my
melancholy passed away.”

“All this is very strange and interesting,” said Mrs. Epanchin. “Now
let’s leave the donkey and go on to other matters. What are you laughing
at, Aglaya? and you too, Adelaida? The prince told us his experiences
very cleverly; he saw the donkey himself, and what have you ever seen?
_you_ have never been abroad.”

“I have seen a donkey though, mamma!” said Aglaya.

“And I’ve heard one!” said Adelaida. All three of the girls laughed out
loud, and the prince laughed with them.

“Well, it’s too bad of you,” said mamma. “You must forgive them, prince;
they are good girls. I am very fond of them, though I often have to be
scolding them; they are all as silly and mad as march hares.”

“Oh, why shouldn’t they laugh?” said the prince. “I shouldn’t have let
the chance go by in their place, I know. But I stick up for the donkey,
all the same; he’s a patient, good-natured fellow.”

“Are you a patient man, prince? I ask out of curiosity,” said Mrs.
Epanchin.

All laughed again.

“Oh, that wretched donkey again, I see!” cried the lady. “I assure you,
prince, I was not guilty of the least--”

“Insinuation? Oh! I assure you, I take your word for it.” And the prince
continued laughing merrily.

“I must say it’s very nice of you to laugh. I see you really are a
kind-hearted fellow,” said Mrs. Epanchin.

“I’m not always kind, though.”

“I am kind myself, and _always_ kind too, if you please!” she retorted,
unexpectedly; “and that is my chief fault, for one ought not to be
always kind. I am often angry with these girls and their father; but the
worst of it is, I am always kindest when I am cross. I was very angry
just before you came, and Aglaya there read me a lesson--thanks, Aglaya,
dear--come and kiss me--there--that’s enough” she added, as Aglaya came
forward and kissed her lips and then her hand. “Now then, go on, prince.
Perhaps you can think of something more exciting than about the donkey,
eh?”

“I must say, again, _I_ can’t understand how you can expect anyone to tell
you stories straight away, so,” said Adelaida. “I know I never could!”

“Yes, but the prince can, because he is clever--cleverer than you are
by ten or twenty times, if you like. There, that’s so, prince; and
seriously, let’s drop the donkey now--what else did you see abroad,
besides the donkey?”

“Yes, but the prince told us about the donkey very cleverly, all the
same,” said Alexandra. “I have always been most interested to hear how
people go mad and get well again, and that sort of thing. Especially
when it happens suddenly.”

“Quite so, quite so!” cried Mrs. Epanchin, delighted. “I see you _can_
be sensible now and then, Alexandra. You were speaking of Switzerland,
prince?”

“Yes. We came to Lucerne, and I was taken out in a boat. I felt how
lovely it was, but the loveliness weighed upon me somehow or other, and
made me feel melancholy.”

“Why?” asked Alexandra.

“I don’t know; I always feel like that when I look at the beauties of
nature for the first time; but then, I was ill at that time, of course!”

“Oh, but I should like to see it!” said Adelaida; “and I don’t know
_when_ we shall ever go abroad. I’ve been two years looking out for a good
subject for a picture. I’ve done all I know. ‘The North and South I know
by heart,’ as our poet observes. Do help me to a subject, prince.”

“Oh, but I know nothing about painting. It seems to me one only has to
look, and paint what one sees.”

“But I don’t know _how_ to see!”

“Nonsense, what rubbish you talk!” the mother struck in. “Not know how
to see! Open your eyes and look! If you can’t see here, you won’t see
abroad either. Tell us what you saw yourself, prince!”

“Yes, that’s better,” said Adelaida; “the prince _learned to see_ abroad.”

“Oh, I hardly know! You see, I only went to restore my health. I don’t
know whether I learned to see, exactly. I was very happy, however,
nearly all the time.”

“Happy! you can be happy?” cried Aglaya. “Then how can you say you did
not learn to see? I should think you could teach _us_ to see!”

“Oh! _do_ teach us,” laughed Adelaida.

“Oh! I can’t do that,” said the prince, laughing too. “I lived almost
all the while in one little Swiss village; what can I teach you? At
first I was only just not absolutely dull; then my health began to
improve--then every day became dearer and more precious to me, and the
longer I stayed, the dearer became the time to me; so much so that I
could not help observing it; but why this was so, it would be difficult
to say.”

“So that you didn’t care to go away anywhere else?”

“Well, at first I did; I was restless; I didn’t know however I should
manage to support life--you know there are such moments, especially in
solitude. There was a waterfall near us, such a lovely thin streak of
water, like a thread but white and moving. It fell from a great height,
but it looked quite low, and it was half a mile away, though it did not
seem fifty paces. I loved to listen to it at night, but it was then
that I became so restless. Sometimes I went and climbed the mountain and
stood there in the midst of the tall pines, all alone in the terrible
silence, with our little village in the distance, and the sky so blue,
and the sun so bright, and an old ruined castle on the mountain-side,
far away. I used to watch the line where earth and sky met, and longed
to go and seek there the key of all mysteries, thinking that I might
find there a new life, perhaps some great city where life should be
grander and richer--and then it struck me that life may be grand enough
even in a prison.”

“I read that last most praiseworthy thought in my manual, when I was
twelve years old,” said Aglaya.

“All this is pure philosophy,” said Adelaida. “You are a philosopher,
prince, and have come here to instruct us in your views.”

“Perhaps you are right,” said the prince, smiling. “I think I am a
philosopher, perhaps, and who knows, perhaps I do wish to teach my views
of things to those I meet with?”

“Your philosophy is rather like that of an old woman we know, who is
rich and yet does nothing but try how little she can spend. She talks of
nothing but money all day. Your great philosophical idea of a grand life
in a prison and your four happy years in that Swiss village are like
this, rather,” said Aglaya.

“As to life in a prison, of course there may be two opinions,” said the
prince. “I once heard the story of a man who lived twelve years in a
prison--I heard it from the man himself. He was one of the persons under
treatment with my professor; he had fits, and attacks of melancholy,
then he would weep, and once he tried to commit suicide. _His_ life in
prison was sad enough; his only acquaintances were spiders and a tree
that grew outside his grating--but I think I had better tell you of
