fiat of the Russian people. Enough, Davoust, it is mere phantasy on our
part. Come, let’s hear your other project.’”

“Yes, but that was a great idea,” said the prince, clearly interested.
“You ascribe it to Davoust, do you?”

“Well, at all events, they were consulting together at the time. Of
course it was the idea of an eagle, and must have originated with
Napoleon; but the other project was good too--it was the ‘Conseil du
lion!’ as Napoleon called it. This project consisted in a proposal
to occupy the Kremlin with the whole army; to arm and fortify it
scientifically, to kill as many horses as could be got, and salt their
flesh, and spend the winter there; and in spring to fight their way out.
Napoleon liked the idea--it attracted him. We rode round the Kremlin
walls every day, and Napoleon used to give orders where they were to be
patched, where built up, where pulled down and so on. All was decided at
last. They were alone together--those two and myself.

“Napoleon was walking up and down with folded arms. I could not take my
eyes off his face--my heart beat loudly and painfully.

“‘I’m off,’ said Davoust. ‘Where to?’ asked Napoleon.

“‘To salt horse-flesh,’ said Davoust. Napoleon shuddered--his fate was
being decided.

“‘Child,’ he addressed me suddenly, ‘what do you think of our plan?’ Of
course he only applied to me as a sort of toss-up, you know. I turned to
Davoust and addressed my reply to him. I said, as though inspired:

“‘Escape, general! Go home!--’

“The project was abandoned; Davoust shrugged his shoulders and went out,
whispering to himself--‘_Bah, il devient superstitieux!_’ Next morning the
order to retreat was given.”

“All this is most interesting,” said the prince, very softly, “if it
really was so--that is, I mean--” he hastened to correct himself.

“Oh, my dear prince,” cried the general, who was now so intoxicated with
his own narrative that he probably could not have pulled up at the
most patent indiscretion. “You say, ‘if it really was so!’ There was
more--_much_ more, I assure you! These are merely a few little political
acts. I tell you I was the eye-witness of the nightly sorrow and
groanings of the great man, and of _that_ no one can speak but myself.
Towards the end he wept no more, though he continued to emit an
occasional groan; but his face grew more overcast day by day, as
though Eternity were wrapping its gloomy mantle about him. Occasionally
we passed whole hours of silence together at night, Roustan snoring
in the next room--that fellow slept like a pig. ‘But he’s loyal to me
and my dynasty,’ said Napoleon of him.

“Sometimes it was very painful to me, and once he caught me with tears
in my eyes. He looked at me kindly. ‘You are sorry for me,’ he said,
‘you, my child, and perhaps one other child--my son, the King of
Rome--may grieve for me. All the rest hate me; and my brothers are the
first to betray me in misfortune.’ I sobbed and threw myself into his
arms. He could not resist me--he burst into tears, and our tears mingled
as we folded each other in a close embrace.

“‘Write, oh, write a letter to the Empress Josephine!’ I cried, sobbing.
Napoleon started, reflected, and said, ‘You remind me of a third heart
which loves me. Thank you, my friend;’ and then and there he sat down
and wrote that letter to Josephine, with which Constant was sent off
next day.”

“You did a good action,” said the prince, “for in the midst of his angry
feelings you insinuated a kind thought into his heart.”

“Just so, prince, just so. How well you bring out that fact! Because
your own heart is good!” cried the ecstatic old gentleman, and,
strangely enough, real tears glistened in his eyes. “Yes, prince, it was
a wonderful spectacle. And, do you know, I all but went off to Paris,
and should assuredly have shared his solitary exile with him; but, alas,
our destinies were otherwise ordered! We parted, he to his island,
where I am sure he thought of the weeping child who had embraced him
so affectionately at parting in Moscow; and I was sent off to the cadet
corps, where I found nothing but roughness and harsh discipline. Alas,
my happy days were done!”

“‘I do not wish to deprive your mother of you, and, therefore, I will
not ask you to go with me,’ he said, the morning of his departure, ‘but
I should like to do something for you.’ He was mounting his horse as
he spoke. ‘Write something in my sister’s album for me,’ I said rather
timidly, for he was in a state of great dejection at the moment. He
turned, called for a pen, took the album. ‘How old is your sister?’
he asked, holding the pen in his hand. ‘Three years old,’ I said. ‘Ah,
_petite fille alors!_’ and he wrote in the album:

  “‘Ne mentez jamais!
    NAPOLÉON (votre ami sincère).’

“Such advice, and at such a moment, you must allow, prince, was--”

“Yes, quite so; very remarkable.”

“This page of the album, framed in gold, hung on the wall of my sister’s
drawing-room all her life, in the most conspicuous place, till the day
of her death; where it is now, I really don’t know. Heavens! it’s two
o’clock! _How_ I have kept you, prince! It is really most unpardonable of
me.”

The general rose.

“Oh, not in the least,” said the prince. “On the contrary, I have been
so much interested, I’m really very much obliged to you.”

“Prince,” said the general, pressing his hand, and looking at him with
flashing eyes, and an expression as though he were under the influence
of a sudden thought which had come upon him with stunning force.
“Prince, you are so kind, so simple-minded, that sometimes I really
feel sorry for you! I gaze at you with a feeling of real affection. Oh,
Heaven bless you! May your life blossom and fructify in love. Mine is
over. Forgive me, forgive me!”

He left the room quickly, covering his face with his hands.

The prince could not doubt the sincerity of his agitation. He
understood, too, that the old man had left the room intoxicated with his
own success. The general belonged to that class of liars, who, in spite
of their transports of lying, invariably suspect that they are not
believed. On this occasion, when he recovered from his exaltation, he
would probably suspect Muishkin of pitying him, and feel insulted.

“Have I been acting rightly in allowing him to develop such vast
resources of imagination?” the prince asked himself. But his answer was
a fit of violent laughter which lasted ten whole minutes. He tried to
reproach himself for the laughing fit, but eventually concluded that he
needn’t do so, since in spite of it he was truly sorry for the old man.
The same evening he received a strange letter, short but decided. The
general informed him that they must part for ever; that he was grateful,
but that even from him he could not accept “signs of sympathy which were
humiliating to the dignity of a man already miserable enough.”

When the prince heard that the old man had gone to Nina Alexandrovna,
though, he felt almost easy on his account.

We have seen, however, that the general paid a visit to Lizabetha
Prokofievna and caused trouble there, the final upshot being that he
frightened Mrs. Epanchin, and angered her by bitter hints as to his son
Gania.

He had been turned out in disgrace, eventually, and this was the
cause of his bad night and quarrelsome day, which ended in his sudden
departure into the street in a condition approaching insanity, as
recorded before.

Colia did not understand the position. He tried severity with his
father, as they stood in the street after the latter had cursed the
household, hoping to bring him round that way.
