been quite enough to persuade them that they stand alone in the van of
enlightenment and that no one has such humanitarian feelings as they.
Others have but to read an idea of somebody else’s, and they can
immediately assimilate it and believe that it was a child of their own
brain. The “impudence of ignorance,” if I may use the expression, is
developed to a wonderful extent in such cases;--unlikely as it appears,
it is met with at every turn.

This confidence of a stupid man in his own talents has been wonderfully
depicted by Gogol in the amazing character of Pirogoff. Pirogoff has
not the slightest doubt of his own genius,--nay, of his _superiority_ of
genius,--so certain is he of it that he never questions it. How
many Pirogoffs have there not been among our writers--scholars,
propagandists? I say “have been,” but indeed there are plenty of them at
this very day.

Our friend, Gania, belonged to the other class--to the “much cleverer”
 persons, though he was from head to foot permeated and saturated with
the longing to be original. This class, as I have said above, is far
less happy. For the “clever commonplace” person, though he may possibly
imagine himself a man of genius and originality, none the less has
within his heart the deathless worm of suspicion and doubt; and this
doubt sometimes brings a clever man to despair. (As a rule, however,
nothing tragic happens;--his liver becomes a little damaged in the
course of time, nothing more serious. Such men do not give up their
aspirations after originality without a severe struggle,--and there have
been men who, though good fellows in themselves, and even benefactors
to humanity, have sunk to the level of base criminals for the sake of
originality).

Gania was a beginner, as it were, upon this road. A deep and
unchangeable consciousness of his own lack of talent, combined with a
vast longing to be able to persuade himself that he was original, had
rankled in his heart, even from childhood.

He seemed to have been born with overwrought nerves, and in his
passionate desire to excel, he was often led to the brink of some
rash step; and yet, having resolved upon such a step, when the moment
arrived, he invariably proved too sensible to take it. He was ready,
in the same way, to do a base action in order to obtain his wished-for
object; and yet, when the moment came to do it, he found that he was too
honest for any great baseness. (Not that he objected to acts of petty
meanness--he was always ready for _them_.) He looked with hate and
loathing on the poverty and downfall of his family, and treated his
mother with haughty contempt, although he knew that his whole future
depended on her character and reputation.

Aglaya had simply frightened him; yet he did not give up all thoughts of
her--though he never seriously hoped that she would condescend to him.
At the time of his “adventure” with Nastasia Philipovna he had come to
the conclusion that money was his only hope--money should do all for
him.

At the moment when he lost Aglaya, and after the scene with Nastasia, he
had felt so low in his own eyes that he actually brought the money back
to the prince. Of this returning of the money given to him by a madwoman
who had received it from a madman, he had often repented since--though
he never ceased to be proud of his action. During the short time that
Muishkin remained in Petersburg Gania had had time to come to hate him
for his sympathy, though the prince told him that it was “not everyone
who would have acted so nobly” as to return the money. He had long
pondered, too, over his relations with Aglaya, and had persuaded himself
that with such a strange, childish, innocent character as hers, things
might have ended very differently. Remorse then seized him; he threw up
his post, and buried himself in self-torment and reproach.

He lived at Ptitsin’s, and openly showed contempt for the latter, though
he always listened to his advice, and was sensible enough to ask for it
when he wanted it. Gavrila Ardalionovitch was angry with Ptitsin because
the latter did not care to become a Rothschild. “If you are to be a
Jew,” he said, “do it properly--squeeze people right and left, show some
character; be the King of the Jews while you are about it.”

Ptitsin was quiet and not easily offended--he only laughed. But on one
occasion he explained seriously to Gania that he was no Jew, that he
did nothing dishonest, that he could not help the market price of money,
that, thanks to his accurate habits, he had already a good footing and
was respected, and that his business was flourishing.

“I shan’t ever be a Rothschild, and there is no reason why I should,” he
added, smiling; “but I shall have a house in the Liteynaya, perhaps two,
and that will be enough for me.” “Who knows but what I may have three!”
 he concluded to himself; but this dream, cherished inwardly, he never
confided to a soul.

Nature loves and favours such people. Ptitsin will certainly have his
reward, not three houses, but four, precisely because from childhood up
he had realized that he would never be a Rothschild. That will be the
limit of Ptitsin’s fortune, and, come what may, he will never have more
than four houses.

Varvara Ardalionovna was not like her brother. She too, had passionate
desires, but they were persistent rather than impetuous. Her plans were
as wise as her methods of carrying them out. No doubt she also belonged
to the category of ordinary people who dream of being original, but she
soon discovered that she had not a grain of true originality, and she
did not let it trouble her too much. Perhaps a certain kind of pride
came to her help. She made her first concession to the demands of
practical life with great resolution when she consented to marry
Ptitsin. However, when she married she did not say to herself, “Never
mind a mean action if it leads to the end in view,” as her brother would
certainly have said in such a case; it is quite probable that he may
have said it when he expressed his elder-brotherly satisfaction at her
decision. Far from this; Varvara Ardalionovna did not marry until she
felt convinced that her future husband was unassuming, agreeable,
almost cultured, and that nothing on earth would tempt him to a really
dishonourable deed. As to small meannesses, such trifles did not trouble
her. Indeed, who is free from them? It is absurd to expect the ideal!
Besides, she knew that her marriage would provide a refuge for all her
family. Seeing Gania unhappy, she was anxious to help him, in spite of
their former disputes and misunderstandings. Ptitsin, in a friendly way,
would press his brother-in-law to enter the army. “You know,” he said
sometimes, jokingly, “you despise generals and generaldom, but you will
see that ‘they’ will all end by being generals in their turn. You will
see it if you live long enough!”

“But why should they suppose that I despise generals?” Gania thought
sarcastically to himself.

To serve her brother’s interests, Varvara Ardalionovna was constantly at
the Epanchins’ house, helped by the fact that in childhood she and Gania
had played with General Ivan Fedorovitch’s daughters. It would have been
inconsistent with her character if in these visits she had been pursuing
a chimera; her project was not chimerical at all; she was building on
a firm basis--on her knowledge of the character of the Epanchin family,
especially Aglaya, whom she studied closely. All Varvara’s efforts
were directed towards bringing Aglaya and Gania together. Perhaps she
achieved some result; perhaps, also, she made the mistake of depending
too much upon her brother, and expecting more from him than he would
ever be capable of giving. However this may be, her manoeuvres were
skilful enough. For weeks at a time she would never mention Gania. Her
attitude was modest but dignified, and she was always extremely truthful
and sincere. Examining the depths of her conscience, she found nothing
to reproach herself with, and this still further strengthened her in
her designs. But Varvara Ardalionovna sometimes remarked that she felt
spiteful; that there was a good deal of vanity in her, perhaps even of
wounded vanity. She noticed this at certain times more than at others,
and especially after her visits to the Epanchins.

Today, as I have said, she returned from their house with a heavy
feeling of dejection. There was a sensation of bitterness, a sort of
mocking contempt, mingled with it.

Arrived at her own house, Varia heard a considerable commotion going
on in the upper storey, and distinguished the voices of her father and
brother. On entering the salon she found Gania pacing up and down at
frantic speed, pale with rage and almost tearing his hair. She frowned,
and subsided on to the sofa with a tired air, and without taking the
trouble to remove her hat. She very well knew that if she kept quiet and
asked her brother nothing about his reason for tearing up and down the
