
“I thought he must have come for this purpose.

“In the morning we had parted not the best of friends; I remember he
looked at me with disagreeable sarcasm once or twice; and this same look
I observed in his eyes now--which was the cause of the annoyance I felt.

“I did not for a moment suspect that I was delirious and that this
Rogojin was but the result of fever and excitement. I had not the
slightest idea of such a theory at first.

“Meanwhile he continued to sit and stare jeeringly at me.

“I angrily turned round in bed and made up my mind that I would not say
a word unless he did; so I rested silently on my pillow determined to
remain dumb, if it were to last till morning. I felt resolved that he
should speak first. Probably twenty minutes or so passed in this way.
Suddenly the idea struck me--what if this is an apparition and not
Rogojin himself?

“Neither during my illness nor at any previous time had I ever seen an
apparition;--but I had always thought, both when I was a little boy, and
even now, that if I were to see one I should die on the spot--though I
don’t believe in ghosts. And yet _now_, when the idea struck me that this
was a ghost and not Rogojin at all, I was not in the least alarmed.
Nay--the thought actually irritated me. Strangely enough, the decision
of the question as to whether this were a ghost or Rogojin did not, for
some reason or other, interest me nearly so much as it ought to have
done;--I think I began to muse about something altogether different. For
instance, I began to wonder why Rogojin, who had been in dressing-gown
and slippers when I saw him at home, had now put on a dress-coat and
white waistcoat and tie? I also thought to myself, I remember--‘if
this is a ghost, and I am not afraid of it, why don’t I approach it and
verify my suspicions? Perhaps I am afraid--’ And no sooner did this last
idea enter my head than an icy blast blew over me; I felt a chill down
my backbone and my knees shook.

“At this very moment, as though divining my thoughts, Rogojin raised his
head from his arm and began to part his lips as though he were going to
laugh--but he continued to stare at me as persistently as before.

“I felt so furious with him at this moment that I longed to rush at
him; but as I had sworn that he should speak first, I continued to lie
still--and the more willingly, as I was still by no means satisfied as
to whether it really was Rogojin or not.

“I cannot remember how long this lasted; I cannot recollect, either,
whether consciousness forsook me at intervals, or not. But at last
Rogojin rose, staring at me as intently as ever, but not smiling any
longer,--and walking very softly, almost on tip-toes, to the door, he
opened it, went out, and shut it behind him.

“I did not rise from my bed, and I don’t know how long I lay with my
eyes open, thinking. I don’t know what I thought about, nor how I fell
asleep or became insensible; but I awoke next morning after nine o’clock
when they knocked at my door. My general orders are that if I don’t open
the door and call, by nine o’clock, Matreona is to come and bring my
tea. When I now opened the door to her, the thought suddenly struck
me--how could he have come in, since the door was locked? I made
inquiries and found that Rogojin himself could not possibly have come
in, because all our doors were locked for the night.

“Well, this strange circumstance--which I have described with so
much detail--was the ultimate cause which led me to taking my final
determination. So that no logic, or logical deductions, had anything to
do with my resolve;--it was simply a matter of disgust.

“It was impossible for me to go on living when life was full of such
detestable, strange, tormenting forms. This ghost had humiliated
me;--nor could I bear to be subordinate to that dark, horrible force
which was embodied in the form of the loathsome insect. It was only
towards evening, when I had quite made up my mind on this point, that I
began to feel easier.”

VII.

“I had a small pocket pistol. I had procured it while still a boy, at
that droll age when the stories of duels and highwaymen begin to delight
one, and when one imagines oneself nobly standing fire at some future
day, in a duel.

“There were a couple of old bullets in the bag which contained the
pistol, and powder enough in an old flask for two or three charges.

“The pistol was a wretched thing, very crooked and wouldn’t carry
farther than fifteen paces at the most. However, it would send your
skull flying well enough if you pressed the muzzle of it against your
temple.

“I determined to die at Pavlofsk at sunrise, in the park--so as to make
no commotion in the house.

“This ‘explanation’ will make the matter clear enough to the police.
Students of psychology, and anyone else who likes, may make what they
please of it. I should not like this paper, however, to be made public.
I request the prince to keep a copy himself, and to give a copy to
Aglaya Ivanovna Epanchin. This is my last will and testament. As for
my skeleton, I bequeath it to the Medical Academy for the benefit of
science.

“I recognize no jurisdiction over myself, and I know that I am now
beyond the power of laws and judges.

“A little while ago a very amusing idea struck me. What if I were now to
commit some terrible crime--murder ten fellow-creatures, for instance,
or anything else that is thought most shocking and dreadful in this
world--what a dilemma my judges would be in, with a criminal who only
has a fortnight to live in any case, now that the rack and other forms
of torture are abolished! Why, I should die comfortably in their own
hospital--in a warm, clean room, with an attentive doctor--probably much
more comfortably than I should at home.

“I don’t understand why people in my position do not oftener indulge in
such ideas--if only for a joke! Perhaps they do! Who knows! There are
plenty of merry souls among us!

“But though I do not recognize any jurisdiction over myself, still I
know that I shall be judged, when I am nothing but a voiceless lump
of clay; therefore I do not wish to go before I have left a word of
reply--the reply of a free man--not one forced to justify himself--oh
no! I have no need to ask forgiveness of anyone. I wish to say a word
merely because I happen to desire it of my own free will.

“Here, in the first place, comes a strange thought!

“Who, in the name of what Law, would think of disputing my full personal
right over the fortnight of life left to me? What jurisdiction can
be brought to bear upon the case? Who would wish me, not only to be
sentenced, but to endure the sentence to the end? Surely there exists
no man who would wish such a thing--why should anyone desire it? For
the sake of morality? Well, I can understand that if I were to make
an attempt upon my own life while in the enjoyment of full health and
vigour--my life which might have been ‘useful,’ etc., etc.--morality
might reproach me, according to the old routine, for disposing of my
life without permission--or whatever its tenet may be. But now, _now_,
when my sentence is out and my days numbered! How can morality have need
of my last breaths, and why should I die listening to the consolations
offered by the prince, who, without doubt, would not omit to demonstrate
that death is actually a benefactor to me? (Christians like him always
end up with that--it is their pet theory.) And what do they want with
their ridiculous ‘Pavlofsk trees’? To sweeten my last hours? Cannot they
understand that the more I forget myself, the more I let myself become
attached to these last illusions of life and love, by means of which
they try to hide from me Meyer’s wall, and all that is so plainly
written on it--the more unhappy they make me? What is the use of all
your nature to me--all your parks and trees, your sunsets and sunrises,
your blue skies and your self-satisfied faces--when all this wealth
of beauty and happiness begins with the fact that it accounts me--only
me--one too many! What is the good of all this beauty and glory to me,
when every second, every moment, I cannot but be aware that this little
