never have forgiven yourself for so doing afterwards; and yet, you
are absolutely blameless. It is impossible that your life should be
altogether ruined at your age. What matter that Rogojin came bargaining
here, and that Gavrila Ardalionovitch would have deceived you if he
could? Why do you continually remind us of these facts? I assure you
once more that very few could find it in them to act as you have acted
this day. As for your wish to go with Rogojin, that was simply the idea
of a delirious and suffering brain. You are still quite feverish; you
ought to be in bed, not here. You know quite well that if you had gone
with Rogojin, you would have become a washer-woman next day, rather than
stay with him. You are proud, Nastasia Philipovna, and perhaps you have
really suffered so much that you imagine yourself to be a desperately
guilty woman. You require a great deal of petting and looking after,
Nastasia Philipovna, and I will do this. I saw your portrait this
morning, and it seemed quite a familiar face to me; it seemed to me that
the portrait-face was calling to me for help. I--I shall respect you all
my life, Nastasia Philipovna,” concluded the prince, as though suddenly
recollecting himself, and blushing to think of the sort of company
before whom he had said all this.

Ptitsin bowed his head and looked at the ground, overcome by a mixture
of feelings. Totski muttered to himself: “He may be an idiot, but he
knows that flattery is the best road to success here.”

The prince observed Gania’s eyes flashing at him, as though they would
gladly annihilate him then and there.

“That’s a kind-hearted man, if you like,” said Daria Alexeyevna, whose
wrath was quickly evaporating.

“A refined man, but--lost,” murmured the general.

Totski took his hat and rose to go. He and the general exchanged
glances, making a private arrangement, thereby, to leave the house
together.

“Thank you, prince; no one has ever spoken to me like that before,”
 began Nastasia Philipovna. “Men have always bargained for me, before
this; and not a single respectable man has ever proposed to marry me. Do
you hear, Afanasy Ivanovitch? What do _you_ think of what the prince has
just been saying? It was almost immodest, wasn’t it? You, Rogojin, wait
a moment, don’t go yet! I see you don’t intend to move however. Perhaps
I may go with you yet. Where did you mean to take me to?”

“To Ekaterinhof,” replied Lebedeff. Rogojin simply stood staring, with
trembling lips, not daring to believe his ears. He was stunned, as
though from a blow on the head.

“What are you thinking of, my dear Nastasia?” said Daria Alexeyevna in
alarm. “What are you saying?” “You are not going mad, are you?”

Nastasia Philipovna burst out laughing and jumped up from the sofa.

“You thought I should accept this good child’s invitation to ruin
him, did you?” she cried. “That’s Totski’s way, not mine. He’s fond of
children. Come along, Rogojin, get your money ready! We won’t talk about
marrying just at this moment, but let’s see the money at all events.
Come! I may not marry you, either. I don’t know. I suppose you thought
you’d keep the money, if I did! Ha, ha, ha! nonsense! I have no sense of
shame left. I tell you I have been Totski’s concubine. Prince, you
must marry Aglaya Ivanovna, not Nastasia Philipovna, or this fellow
Ferdishenko will always be pointing the finger of scorn at you. You
aren’t afraid, I know; but I should always be afraid that I had ruined
you, and that you would reproach me for it. As for what you say about
my doing you honour by marrying you--well, Totski can tell you all about
that. You had your eye on Aglaya, Gania, you know you had; and you might
have married her if you had not come bargaining. You are all like
this. You should choose, once for all, between disreputable women, and
respectable ones, or you are sure to get mixed. Look at the general, how
he’s staring at me!”

“This is too horrible,” said the general, starting to his feet. All were
standing up now. Nastasia was absolutely beside herself.

“I am very proud, in spite of what I am,” she continued. “You called me
‘perfection’ just now, prince. A nice sort of perfection to throw up a
prince and a million and a half of roubles in order to be able to boast
of the fact afterwards! What sort of a wife should I make for you, after
all I have said? Afanasy Ivanovitch, do you observe I have really and
truly thrown away a million of roubles? And you thought that I should
consider your wretched seventy-five thousand, with Gania thrown in for a
husband, a paradise of bliss! Take your seventy-five thousand back, sir;
you did not reach the hundred thousand. Rogojin cut a better dash than
you did. I’ll console Gania myself; I have an idea about that. But now I
must be off! I’ve been in prison for ten years. I’m free at last! Well,
Rogojin, what are you waiting for? Let’s get ready and go.”

“Come along!” shouted Rogojin, beside himself with joy. “Hey! all of you
fellows! Wine! Round with it! Fill the glasses!”

“Get away!” he shouted frantically, observing that Daria Alexeyevna
was approaching to protest against Nastasia’s conduct. “Get away, she’s
mine, everything’s mine! She’s a queen, get away!”

He was panting with ecstasy. He walked round and round Nastasia
Philipovna and told everybody to “keep their distance.”

All the Rogojin company were now collected in the drawing-room; some
were drinking, some laughed and talked: all were in the highest and
wildest spirits. Ferdishenko was doing his best to unite himself to
them; the general and Totski again made an attempt to go. Gania, too
stood hat in hand ready to go; but seemed to be unable to tear his eyes
away from the scene before him.

“Get out, keep your distance!” shouted Rogojin.

“What are you shouting about there!” cried Nastasia “I’m not yours yet.
I may kick you out for all you know I haven’t taken your money yet;
there it all is on the table. Here, give me over that packet! Is there a
hundred thousand roubles in that one packet? Pfu! what abominable stuff
it looks! Oh! nonsense, Daria Alexeyevna; you surely did not expect me
to ruin _him?_” (indicating the prince). “Fancy him nursing me! Why, he
needs a nurse himself! The general, there, will be his nurse now, you’ll
see. Here, prince, look here! Your bride is accepting money. What a
disreputable woman she must be! And you wished to marry her! What are
you crying about? Is it a bitter dose? Never mind, you shall laugh yet.
Trust to time.” (In spite of these words there were two large tears
rolling down Nastasia’s own cheeks.) “It’s far better to think twice
of it now than afterwards. Oh! you mustn’t cry like that! There’s Katia
crying, too. What is it, Katia, dear? I shall leave you and Pasha a lot
of things, I’ve laid them out for you already; but good-bye, now. I made
an honest girl like you serve a low woman like myself. It’s better so,
prince, it is indeed. You’d begin to despise me afterwards--we should
never be happy. Oh! you needn’t swear, prince, I shan’t believe you, you
know. How foolish it would be, too! No, no; we’d better say good-bye and
part friends. I am a bit of a dreamer myself, and I used to dream of you
once. Very often during those five years down at his estate I used to
dream and think, and I always imagined just such a good, honest, foolish
fellow as you, one who should come and say to me: ‘You are an innocent
woman, Nastasia Philipovna, and I adore you.’ I dreamt of you often. I
used to think so much down there that I nearly went mad; and then this
fellow here would come down. He would stay a couple of months out of the
twelve, and disgrace and insult and deprave me, and then go; so that I
longed to drown myself in the pond a thousand times over; but I did not
dare do it. I hadn’t the heart, and now--well, are you ready, Rogojin?”

“Ready--keep your distance, all of you!”

“We’re all ready,” said several of his friends. “The troikas [Sledges
drawn by three horses abreast.] are at the door, bells and all.”

Nastasia Philipovna seized the packet of bank-notes.

“Gania, I have an idea. I wish to recompense you--why should you
lose all? Rogojin, would he crawl for three roubles as far as the
Vassiliostrof?”

“Oh, wouldn’t he just!”

“Well, look here, Gania. I wish to look into your heart once more, for
