“Not a bit of it; that’s just the strange part of it.”

“Does she know about father, do you think--or not?”

“That they do _not_ know about it in the house is quite certain, the rest
of them, I mean; but you have given me an idea. Aglaya perhaps knows.
She alone, though, if anyone; for the sisters were as astonished as I
was to hear her speak so seriously. If she knows, the prince must have
told her.”

“Oh! it’s not a great matter to guess who told her. A thief! A thief in
our family, and the head of the family, too!”

“Oh! nonsense!” cried Varia, angrily. “That was nothing but a drunkard’s
tale. Nonsense! Why, who invented the whole thing--Lebedeff and the
prince--a pretty pair! Both were probably drunk.”

“Father is a drunkard and a thief; I am a beggar, and the husband of my
sister is a usurer,” continued Gania, bitterly. “There was a pretty list
of advantages with which to enchant the heart of Aglaya.”

“That same husband of your sister, the usurer--”

“Feeds me? Go on. Don’t stand on ceremony, pray.”

“Don’t lose your temper. You are just like a schoolboy. You think that
all this sort of thing would harm you in Aglaya’s eyes, do you? You
little know her character. She is capable of refusing the most brilliant
party, and running away and starving in a garret with some wretched
student; that’s the sort of girl she is. You never could or did
understand how interesting you would have seen in her eyes if you had
come firmly and proudly through our misfortunes. The prince has simply
caught her with hook and line; firstly, because he never thought of
fishing for her, and secondly, because he is an idiot in the eyes of
most people. It’s quite enough for her that by accepting him she puts
her family out and annoys them all round--that’s what she likes. You
don’t understand these things.”

“We shall see whether I understand or no!” said Gania, enigmatically.
“But I shouldn’t like her to know all about father, all the same. I
thought the prince would manage to hold his tongue about this, at least.
He prevented Lebedeff spreading the news--he wouldn’t even tell me all
when I asked him--”

“Then you must see that he is not responsible. What does it matter to
you now, in any case? What are you hoping for still? If you _have_ a hope
left, it is that your suffering air may soften her heart towards you.”

“Oh, she would funk a scandal like anyone else. You are all tarred with
one brush!”

“What! _Aglaya_ would have funked? You are a chicken-hearted fellow,
Gania!” said Varia, looking at her brother with contempt. “Not one of
us is worth much. Aglaya may be a wild sort of a girl, but she is far
nobler than any of us, a thousand times nobler!”

“Well--come! there’s nothing to get cross about,” said Gania.

“All I’m afraid of is--mother. I’m afraid this scandal about father may
come to her ears; perhaps it has already. I am dreadfully afraid.”

“It undoubtedly has already!” observed Gania.

Varia had risen from her place and had started to go upstairs to her
mother; but at this observation of Gania’s she turned and gazed at him
attentively.

“Who could have told her?”

“Hippolyte, probably. He would think it the most delightful amusement in
the world to tell her of it the instant he moved over here; I haven’t a
doubt of it.”

“But how could he know anything of it? Tell me that. Lebedeff and the
prince determined to tell no one--even Colia knows nothing.”

“What, Hippolyte? He found it out himself, of course. Why, you have no
idea what a cunning little animal he is; dirty little gossip! He has
the most extraordinary nose for smelling out other people’s secrets, or
anything approaching to scandal. Believe it or not, but I’m pretty sure
he has got round Aglaya. If he hasn’t, he soon will. Rogojin is intimate
with him, too. How the prince doesn’t notice it, I can’t understand. The
little wretch considers me his enemy now and does his best to catch me
tripping. What on earth does it matter to him, when he’s dying? However,
you’ll see; I shall catch _him_ tripping yet, and not he me.”

“Why did you get him over here, if you hate him so? And is it really
worth your while to try to score off him?”

“Why, it was yourself who advised me to bring him over!”

“I thought he might be useful. You know he is in love with Aglaya
himself, now, and has written to her; he has even written to Lizabetha
Prokofievna!”

“Oh! he’s not dangerous there!” cried Gania, laughing angrily. “However,
I believe there is something of that sort in the air; he is very likely
to be in love, for he is a mere boy. But he won’t write anonymous
letters to the old lady; that would be too audacious a thing for him to
attempt; but I dare swear the very first thing he did was to show me up
to Aglaya as a base deceiver and intriguer. I confess I was fool enough
to attempt something through him at first. I thought he would throw
himself into my service out of revengeful feelings towards the prince,
the sly little beast! But I know him better now. As for the theft, he
may have heard of it from the widow in Petersburg, for if the old man
committed himself to such an act, he can have done it for no other
object but to give the money to her. Hippolyte said to me, without any
prelude, that the general had promised the widow four hundred roubles.
Of course I understood, and the little wretch looked at me with a nasty
sort of satisfaction. I know him; you may depend upon it he went and
told mother too, for the pleasure of wounding her. And why doesn’t he
die, I should like to know? He undertook to die within three weeks,
and here he is getting fatter. His cough is better, too. It was only
yesterday that he said that was the second day he hadn’t coughed blood.”

“Well, turn him out!”

“I don’t _hate_, I despise him,” said Gania, grandly. “Well, I do hate
him, if you like!” he added, with a sudden access of rage, “and I’ll
tell him so to his face, even when he’s dying! If you had but read his
confession--good Lord! what refinement of impudence! Oh, but I’d have
liked to whip him then and there, like a schoolboy, just to see how
surprised he would have been! Now he hates everybody because he--Oh, I
say, what on earth are they doing there! Listen to that noise! I really
can’t stand this any longer. Ptitsin!” he cried, as the latter entered
the room, “what in the name of goodness are we coming to? Listen to
that--”

But the noise came rapidly nearer, the door burst open, and old General
Ivolgin, raging, furious, purple-faced, and trembling with anger, rushed
in. He was followed by Nina Alexandrovna, Colia, and behind the rest,
Hippolyte.

II.

Hippolyte had now been five days at the Ptitsins’. His flitting from the
prince’s to these new quarters had been brought about quite naturally
and without many words. He did not quarrel with the prince--in fact,
they seemed to part as friends. Gania, who had been hostile enough on
that eventful evening, had himself come to see him a couple of days
later, probably in obedience to some sudden impulse. For some reason or
other, Rogojin too had begun to visit the sick boy. The prince thought
it might be better for him to move away from his (the prince’s) house.
Hippolyte informed him, as he took his leave, that Ptitsin “had been
kind enough to offer him a corner,” and did not say a word about Gania,
though Gania had procured his invitation, and himself came to fetch him
away. Gania noticed this at the time, and put it to Hippolyte’s debit on
account.

Gania was right when he told his sister that Hippolyte was getting
