anonymous letter? And why did I rush off to him just now like a lunatic,
and drag him back here? I do believe I’ve gone mad at last. What on
earth have I done now? To talk to a young man about my daughter’s
secrets--and secrets having to do with himself, too! Thank goodness,
he’s an idiot, and a friend of the house! Surely Aglaya hasn’t fallen in
love with such a gaby! What an idea! Pfu! we ought all to be put under
glass cases--myself first of all--and be shown off as curiosities, at
ten copecks a peep!”

“I shall never forgive you for all this, Ivan Fedorovitch--never! Look
at her now. Why doesn’t she make fun of him? She said she would, and she
doesn’t. Look there! She stares at him with all her eyes, and doesn’t
move; and yet she told him not to come. He looks pale enough; and that
abominable chatterbox, Evgenie Pavlovitch, monopolizes the whole of the
conversation. Nobody else can get a word in. I could soon find out all
about everything if I could only change the subject.”

The prince certainly was very pale. He sat at the table and seemed to be
feeling, by turns, sensations of alarm and rapture.

Oh, how frightened he was of looking to one side--one particular
corner--whence he knew very well that a pair of dark eyes were watching
him intently, and how happy he was to think that he was once more among
them, and occasionally hearing that well-known voice, although she had
written and forbidden him to come again!

“What on earth will she say to me, I wonder?” he thought to himself.

He had not said a word yet; he sat silent and listened to Evgenie
Pavlovitch’s eloquence. The latter had never appeared so happy and
excited as on this evening. The prince listened to him, but for a long
time did not take in a word he said.

Excepting Ivan Fedorovitch, who had not as yet returned from town, the
whole family was present. Prince S. was there; and they all intended to
go out to hear the band very soon.

Colia arrived presently and joined the circle. “So he is received as
usual, after all,” thought the prince.

The Epanchins’ country-house was a charming building, built after the
model of a Swiss chalet, and covered with creepers. It was surrounded on
all sides by a flower garden, and the family sat, as a rule, on the open
verandah as at the prince’s house.

The subject under discussion did not appear to be very popular with the
assembly, and some would have been delighted to change it; but Evgenie
would not stop holding forth, and the prince’s arrival seemed to spur
him on to still further oratorical efforts.

Lizabetha Prokofievna frowned, but had not as yet grasped the subject,
which seemed to have arisen out of a heated argument. Aglaya sat apart,
almost in the corner, listening in stubborn silence.

“Excuse me,” continued Evgenie Pavlovitch hotly, “I don’t say a word
against liberalism. Liberalism is not a sin, it is a necessary part of
a great whole, which whole would collapse and fall to pieces without
it. Liberalism has just as much right to exist as has the most moral
conservatism; but I am attacking _Russian_ liberalism; and I attack it for
the simple reason that a Russian liberal is not a Russian liberal, he is
a non-Russian liberal. Show me a real Russian liberal, and I’ll kiss him
before you all, with pleasure.”

“If he cared to kiss you, that is,” said Alexandra, whose cheeks were
red with irritation and excitement.

“Look at that, now,” thought the mother to herself, “she does nothing
but sleep and eat for a year at a time, and then suddenly flies out in
the most incomprehensible way!”

The prince observed that Alexandra appeared to be angry with Evgenie,
because he spoke on a serious subject in a frivolous manner, pretending
to be in earnest, but with an under-current of irony.

“I was saying just now, before you came in, prince, that there has
been nothing national up to now, about our liberalism, and nothing the
liberals do, or have done, is in the least degree national. They are
drawn from two classes only, the old landowning class, and clerical
families--”

“How, nothing that they have done is Russian?” asked Prince S.

“It may be Russian, but it is not national. Our liberals are not
Russian, nor are our conservatives, and you may be sure that the nation
does not recognize anything that has been done by the landed gentry, or
by the seminarists, or what is to be done either.”

“Come, that’s good! How can you maintain such a paradox? If you are
serious, that is. I cannot allow such a statement about the landed
proprietors to pass unchallenged. Why, you are a landed proprietor
yourself!” cried Prince S. hotly.

“I suppose you’ll say there is nothing national about our literature
either?” said Alexandra.

“Well, I am not a great authority on literary questions, but I
certainly do hold that Russian literature is not Russian, except perhaps
Lomonosoff, Pouschkin and Gogol.”

“In the first place, that is a considerable admission, and in the second
place, one of the above was a peasant, and the other two were both
landed proprietors!”

“Quite so, but don’t be in such a hurry! For since it has been the part
of these three men, and only these three, to say something absolutely
their own, not borrowed, so by this very fact these three men become
really national. If any Russian shall have done or said anything really
and absolutely original, he is to be called national from that moment,
though he may not be able to talk the Russian language; still he is a
national Russian. I consider that an axiom. But we were not speaking
of literature; we began by discussing the socialists. Very well then,
I insist that there does not exist one single Russian socialist. There
does not, and there has never existed such a one, because all socialists
are derived from the two classes--the landed proprietors, and the
seminarists. All our eminent socialists are merely old liberals of
the class of landed proprietors, men who were liberals in the days of
serfdom. Why do you laugh? Give me their books, give me their studies,
their memoirs, and though I am not a literary critic, yet I will prove
as clear as day that every chapter and every word of their writings has
been the work of a former landed proprietor of the old school. You’ll
find that all their raptures, all their generous transports are
proprietary, all their woes and their tears, proprietary; all
proprietary or seminarist! You are laughing again, and you, prince, are
smiling too. Don’t you agree with me?”

It was true enough that everybody was laughing, the prince among them.

“I cannot tell you on the instant whether I agree with you or not,”
 said the latter, suddenly stopping his laughter, and starting like a
schoolboy caught at mischief. “But, I assure you, I am listening to you
with extreme gratification.”

So saying, he almost panted with agitation, and a cold sweat stood upon
his forehead. These were his first words since he had entered the house;
he tried to lift his eyes, and look around, but dared not; Evgenie
Pavlovitch noticed his confusion, and smiled.

“I’ll just tell you one fact, ladies and gentlemen,” continued the
latter, with apparent seriousness and even exaltation of manner, but
with a suggestion of “chaff” behind every word, as though he were
laughing in his sleeve at his own nonsense--“a fact, the discovery
of which, I believe, I may claim to have made by myself alone. At all
events, no other has ever said or written a word about it; and in this
fact is expressed the whole essence of Russian liberalism of the sort
which I am now considering.

“In the first place, what is liberalism, speaking generally, but an
attack (whether mistaken or reasonable, is quite another question) upon
the existing order of things? Is this so? Yes. Very well. Then my ‘fact’
consists in this, that _Russian_ liberalism is not an attack upon the
