you think that Emperor was making during all those days on his knees?
Stop, I’ll read it to you!’ Then she read me a lot of verses, where it
said that the Emperor spent all the time vowing vengeance against the
Pope. ‘You don’t mean to say you don’t approve of the poem, Parfen
Semeonovitch,’ she says. ‘All you have read out is perfectly true,’ say
I. ‘Aha!’ says she, ‘you admit it’s true, do you? And you are making
vows to yourself that if I marry you, you will remind me of all this,
and take it out of me.’ ‘I don’t know,’ I say, ‘perhaps I was thinking
like that, and perhaps I was not. I’m not thinking of anything just
now.’ ‘What are your thoughts, then?’ ‘I’m thinking that when you rise
from your chair and go past me, I watch you, and follow you with my
eyes; if your dress does but rustle, my heart sinks; if you leave the
room, I remember every little word and action, and what your voice
sounded like, and what you said. I thought of nothing all last night,
but sat here listening to your sleeping breath, and heard you move a
little, twice.’ ‘And as for your attack upon me,’ she says, ‘I suppose
you never once thought of _that?_’ ‘Perhaps I did think of it, and perhaps
not,’ I say. ‘And what if I don’t either forgive you or marry, you?’
‘I tell you I shall go and drown myself.’ ‘H’m!’ she said, and then
relapsed into silence. Then she got angry, and went out. ‘I suppose
you’d murder me before you drowned yourself, though!’ she cried as she
left the room.

“An hour later, she came to me again, looking melancholy. ‘I will marry
you, Parfen Semeonovitch,’ she says, not because I’m frightened of you,
but because it’s all the same to me how I ruin myself. And how can I do
it better? Sit down; they’ll bring you some dinner directly. And if I
do marry you, I’ll be a faithful wife to you--you need not doubt that.’
Then she thought a bit, and said, ‘At all events, you are not a flunkey;
at first, I thought you were no better than a flunkey.’ And she arranged
the wedding and fixed the day straight away on the spot.

“Then, in another week, she had run away again, and came here to
Lebedeff’s; and when I found her here, she said to me, ‘I’m not going to
renounce you altogether, but I wish to put off the wedding a bit longer
yet--just as long as I like--for I am still my own mistress; so you may
wait, if you like.’ That’s how the matter stands between us now. What do
you think of all this, Lef Nicolaievitch?”

“‘What do you think of it yourself?” replied the prince, looking sadly
at Rogojin.

“As if I can think anything about it! I--” He was about to say more, but
stopped in despair.

The prince rose again, as if he would leave.

“At all events, I shall not interfere with you!” he murmured, as though
making answer to some secret thought of his own.

“I’ll tell you what!” cried Rogojin, and his eyes flashed fire. “I can’t
understand your yielding her to me like this; I don’t understand it.
Have you given up loving her altogether? At first you suffered badly--I
know it--I saw it. Besides, why did you come post-haste after us? Out of
pity, eh? He, he, he!” His mouth curved in a mocking smile.

“Do you think I am deceiving you?” asked the prince.

“No! I trust you--but I can’t understand. It seems to me that your pity
is greater than my love.” A hungry longing to speak his mind out seemed
to flash in the man’s eyes, combined with an intense anger.

“Your love is mingled with hatred, and therefore, when your love passes,
there will be the greater misery,” said the prince. “I tell you this,
Parfen--”

“What! that I’ll cut her throat, you mean?”

The prince shuddered.

“You’ll hate her afterwards for all your present love, and for all the
torment you are suffering on her account now. What seems to me the most
extraordinary thing is, that she can again consent to marry you, after
all that has passed between you. When I heard the news yesterday, I
could hardly bring myself to believe it. Why, she has run twice
from you, from the very altar rails, as it were. She must have some
presentiment of evil. What can she want with you now? Your money?
Nonsense! Besides, I should think you must have made a fairly large hole
in your fortune already. Surely it is not because she is so very anxious
to find a husband? She could find many a one besides yourself. Anyone
would be better than you, because you will murder her, and I feel sure
she must know that but too well by now. Is it because you love her so
passionately? Indeed, that may be it. I have heard that there are women
who want just that kind of love... but still...” The prince paused,
reflectively.

“What are you grinning at my father’s portrait again for?” asked
Rogojin, suddenly. He was carefully observing every change in the
expression of the prince’s face.

“I smiled because the idea came into my head that if it were not for
this unhappy passion of yours you might have, and would have, become
just such a man as your father, and that very quickly, too. You’d have
settled down in this house of yours with some silent and obedient wife.
You would have spoken rarely, trusted no one, heeded no one, and thought
of nothing but making money.”

“Laugh away! She said exactly the same, almost word for word, when she
saw my father’s portrait. It’s remarkable how entirely you and she are
at one now-a-days.”

“What, has she been here?” asked the prince with curiosity.

“Yes! She looked long at the portrait and asked all about my father.
‘You’d be just such another,’ she said at last, and laughed. ‘You have
such strong passions, Parfen,’ she said, ‘that they’d have taken you to
Siberia in no time if you had not, luckily, intelligence as well. For
you have a good deal of intelligence.’ (She said this--believe it or
not. The first time I ever heard anything of that sort from her.) ‘You’d
soon have thrown up all this rowdyism that you indulge in now, and you’d
have settled down to quiet, steady money-making, because you have little
education; and here you’d have stayed just like your father before you.
And you’d have loved your money so that you’d amass not two million,
like him, but ten million; and you’d have died of hunger on your money
bags to finish up with, for you carry everything to extremes.’ There,
that’s exactly word for word as she said it to me. She never talked to
me like that before. She always talks nonsense and laughs when she’s
with me. We went all over this old house together. ‘I shall change all
this,’ I said, ‘or else I’ll buy a new house for the wedding.’ ‘No, no!’
she said, ‘don’t touch anything; leave it all as it is; I shall live
with your mother when I marry you.’

“I took her to see my mother, and she was as respectful and kind as
though she were her own daughter. Mother has been almost demented ever
since father died--she’s an old woman. She sits and bows from her chair
to everyone she sees. If you left her alone and didn’t feed her for
three days, I don’t believe she would notice it. Well, I took her hand,
and I said, ‘Give your blessing to this lady, mother, she’s going to be
my wife.’ So Nastasia kissed mother’s hand with great feeling. ‘She must
have suffered terribly, hasn’t she?’ she said. She saw this book here
lying before me. ‘What! have you begun to read Russian history?’ she
asked. She told me once in Moscow, you know, that I had better get
Solovieff’s Russian History and read it, because I knew nothing. ‘That’s
good,’ she said, ‘you go on like that, reading books. I’ll make you
a list myself of the books you ought to read first--shall I?’ She had
never once spoken to me like this before; it was the first time I felt I
could breathe before her like a living creature.”

“I’m very, very glad to hear of this, Parfen,” said the prince, with
real feeling. “Who knows? Maybe God will yet bring you near to one
another.”

“Never, never!” cried Rogojin, excitedly.

“Look here, Parfen; if you love her so much, surely you must be anxious
to earn her respect? And if you do so wish, surely you may hope to? I
said just now that I considered it extraordinary that she could still be
ready to marry you. Well, though I cannot yet understand it, I feel sure
she must have some good reason, or she wouldn’t do it. She is sure
of your love; but besides that, she must attribute _something_ else to
