existing order of things, but an attack upon the very essence of things
themselves--indeed, on the things themselves; not an attack on the
Russian order of things, but on Russia itself. My Russian liberal
goes so far as to reject Russia; that is, he hates and strikes his own
mother. Every misfortune and mishap of the mother-country fills him with
mirth, and even with ecstasy. He hates the national customs, Russian
history, and everything. If he has a justification, it is that he does
not know what he is doing, and believes that his hatred of Russia is the
grandest and most profitable kind of liberalism. (You will often find
a liberal who is applauded and esteemed by his fellows, but who is in
reality the dreariest, blindest, dullest of conservatives, and is not
aware of the fact.) This hatred for Russia has been mistaken by some of
our ‘Russian liberals’ for sincere love of their country, and they
boast that they see better than their neighbours what real love of one’s
country should consist in. But of late they have grown, more candid and
are ashamed of the expression ‘love of country,’ and have annihilated
the very spirit of the words as something injurious and petty and
undignified. This is the truth, and I hold by it; but at the same time
it is a phenomenon which has not been repeated at any other time or
place; and therefore, though I hold to it as a fact, yet I recognize
that it is an accidental phenomenon, and may likely enough pass away.
There can be no such thing anywhere else as a liberal who really hates
his country; and how is this fact to be explained among _us?_ By
my original statement that a Russian liberal is _not_ a _Russian_
liberal--that’s the only explanation that I can see.”

“I take all that you have said as a joke,” said Prince S. seriously.

“I have not seen all kinds of liberals, and cannot, therefore, set
myself up as a judge,” said Alexandra, “but I have heard all you have
said with indignation. You have taken some accidental case and twisted
it into a universal law, which is unjust.”

“Accidental case!” said Evgenie Pavlovitch. “Do you consider it an
accidental case, prince?”

“I must also admit,” said the prince, “that I have not seen much, or
been very far into the question; but I cannot help thinking that you are
more or less right, and that Russian liberalism--that phase of it which
you are considering, at least--really is sometimes inclined to hate
Russia itself, and not only its existing order of things in general. Of
course this is only _partially_ the truth; you cannot lay down the law for
all...”

The prince blushed and broke off, without finishing what he meant to
say.

In spite of his shyness and agitation, he could not help being greatly
interested in the conversation. A special characteristic of his was
the naive candour with which he always listened to arguments which
interested him, and with which he answered any questions put to him on
the subject at issue. In the very expression of his face this naivete
was unmistakably evident, this disbelief in the insincerity of others,
and unsuspecting disregard of irony or humour in their words.

But though Evgenie Pavlovitch had put his questions to the prince with
no other purpose but to enjoy the joke of his simple-minded seriousness,
yet now, at his answer, he was surprised into some seriousness himself,
and looked gravely at Muishkin as though he had not expected that sort
of answer at all.

“Why, how strange!” he ejaculated. “You didn’t answer me seriously,
surely, did you?”

“Did not you ask me the question seriously” inquired the prince, in
amazement.

Everybody laughed.

“Oh, trust _him_ for that!” said Adelaida. “Evgenie Pavlovitch turns
everything and everybody he can lay hold of to ridicule. You should hear
the things he says sometimes, apparently in perfect seriousness.”

“In my opinion the conversation has been a painful one throughout, and
we ought never to have begun it,” said Alexandra. “We were all going for
a walk--”

“Come along then,” said Evgenie; “it’s a glorious evening. But, to prove
that this time I was speaking absolutely seriously, and especially
to prove this to the prince (for you, prince, have interested me
exceedingly, and I swear to you that I am not quite such an ass as
I like to appear sometimes, although I am rather an ass, I admit),
and--well, ladies and gentlemen, will you allow me to put just one more
question to the prince, out of pure curiosity? It shall be the last.
This question came into my mind a couple of hours since (you see,
prince, I do think seriously at times), and I made my own decision upon
it; now I wish to hear what the prince will say to it.”

“We have just used the expression ‘accidental case.’ This is a
significant phrase; we often hear it. Well, not long since everyone was
talking and reading about that terrible murder of six people on the part
of a--young fellow, and of the extraordinary speech of the counsel for
the defence, who observed that in the poverty-stricken condition of the
criminal it must have come _naturally_ into his head to kill these six
people. I do not quote his words, but that is the sense of them, or
something very like it. Now, in my opinion, the barrister who put
forward this extraordinary plea was probably absolutely convinced that
he was stating the most liberal, the most humane, the most enlightened
view of the case that could possibly be brought forward in these days.
Now, was this distortion, this capacity for a perverted way of viewing
things, a special or accidental case, or is such a general rule?”

Everyone laughed at this.

“A special case--accidental, of course!” cried Alexandra and Adelaida.

“Let me remind you once more, Evgenie,” said Prince S., “that your joke
is getting a little threadbare.”

“What do you think about it, prince?” asked Evgenie, taking no notice
of the last remark, and observing Muishkin’s serious eyes fixed upon his
face. “What do you think--was it a special or a usual case--the rule, or
an exception? I confess I put the question especially for you.”

“No, I don’t think it was a special case,” said the prince, quietly, but
firmly.

“My dear fellow!” cried Prince S., with some annoyance, “don’t you see
that he is chaffing you? He is simply laughing at you, and wants to make
game of you.”

“I thought Evgenie Pavlovitch was talking seriously,” said the prince,
blushing and dropping his eyes.

“My dear prince,” continued Prince S. “remember what you and I were
saying two or three months ago. We spoke of the fact that in our newly
opened Law Courts one could already lay one’s finger upon so many
talented and remarkable young barristers. How pleased you were with
the state of things as we found it, and how glad I was to observe your
delight! We both said it was a matter to be proud of; but this clumsy
defence that Evgenie mentions, this strange argument _can_, of course,
only be an accidental case--one in a thousand!”

The prince reflected a little, but very soon he replied, with absolute
conviction in his tone, though he still spoke somewhat shyly and
timidly:

“I only wished to say that this ‘distortion,’ as Evgenie Pavlovitch
expressed it, is met with very often, and is far more the general rule
than the exception, unfortunately for Russia. So much so, that if this
distortion were not the general rule, perhaps these dreadful crimes
would be less frequent.”

“Dreadful crimes? But I can assure you that crimes just as dreadful,
and probably more horrible, have occurred before our times, and at all
times, and not only here in Russia, but everywhere else as well. And in
my opinion it is not at all likely that such murders will cease to occur
for a very long time to come. The only difference is that in former
times there was less publicity, while now everyone talks and writes
freely about such things--which fact gives the impression that such
