not long in discovering that among the children of the latter there now
dwelt a most lovely little girl of twelve, sweet and intelligent, and
bright, and promising to develop beauty of most unusual quality--as to
which last Totski was an undoubted authority.

He only stayed at his country seat a few days on this occasion, but
he had time to make his arrangements. Great changes took place in
the child’s education; a good governess was engaged, a Swiss lady of
experience and culture. For four years this lady resided in the house
with little Nastia, and then the education was considered complete.
The governess took her departure, and another lady came down to fetch
Nastia, by Totski’s instructions. The child was now transported to
another of Totski’s estates in a distant part of the country. Here
she found a delightful little house, just built, and prepared for her
reception with great care and taste; and here she took up her abode
together with the lady who had accompanied her from her old home. In
the house there were two experienced maids, musical instruments of
all sorts, a charming “young lady’s library,” pictures, paint-boxes,
a lap-dog, and everything to make life agreeable. Within a fortnight
Totski himself arrived, and from that time he appeared to have taken a
great fancy to this part of the world and came down each summer, staying
two and three months at a time. So passed four years peacefully and
happily, in charming surroundings.

At the end of that time, and about four months after Totski’s last
visit (he had stayed but a fortnight on this occasion), a report reached
Nastasia Philipovna that he was about to be married in St. Petersburg,
to a rich, eminent, and lovely woman. The report was only partially
true, the marriage project being only in an embryo condition; but a
great change now came over Nastasia Philipovna. She suddenly displayed
unusual decision of character; and without wasting time in thought,
she left her country home and came up to St. Petersburg, straight to
Totski’s house, all alone.

The latter, amazed at her conduct, began to express his displeasure;
but he very soon became aware that he must change his voice, style, and
everything else, with this young lady; the good old times were gone. An
entirely new and different woman sat before him, between whom and
the girl he had left in the country last July there seemed nothing in
common.

In the first place, this new woman understood a good deal more than was
usual for young people of her age; so much indeed, that Totski could not
help wondering where she had picked up her knowledge. Surely not from
her “young lady’s library”? It even embraced legal matters, and the
“world” in general, to a considerable extent.

Her character was absolutely changed. No more of the girlish
alternations of timidity and petulance, the adorable naivete, the
reveries, the tears, the playfulness... It was an entirely new and
hitherto unknown being who now sat and laughed at him, and informed him
to his face that she had never had the faintest feeling for him of any
kind, except loathing and contempt--contempt which had followed closely
upon her sensations of surprise and bewilderment after her first
acquaintance with him.

This new woman gave him further to understand that though it was
absolutely the same to her whom he married, yet she had decided to
prevent this marriage--for no particular reason, but that she _chose_ to
do so, and because she wished to amuse herself at his expense for that
it was “quite her turn to laugh a little now!”

Such were her words--very likely she did not give her real reason for
this eccentric conduct; but, at all events, that was all the explanation
she deigned to offer.

Meanwhile, Totski thought the matter over as well as his scattered ideas
would permit. His meditations lasted a fortnight, however, and at the
end of that time his resolution was taken. The fact was, Totski was
at that time a man of fifty years of age; his position was solid and
respectable; his place in society had long been firmly fixed upon safe
foundations; he loved himself, his personal comforts, and his position
better than all the world, as every respectable gentleman should!

At the same time his grasp of things in general soon showed Totski that
he now had to deal with a being who was outside the pale of the ordinary
rules of traditional behaviour, and who would not only threaten mischief
but would undoubtedly carry it out, and stop for no one.

There was evidently, he concluded, something at work here; some storm of
the mind, some paroxysm of romantic anger, goodness knows against whom
or what, some insatiable contempt--in a word, something altogether
absurd and impossible, but at the same time most dangerous to be met
with by any respectable person with a position in society to keep up.

For a man of Totski’s wealth and standing, it would, of course, have
been the simplest possible matter to take steps which would rid him at
once from all annoyance; while it was obviously impossible for Nastasia
Philipovna to harm him in any way, either legally or by stirring up a
scandal, for, in case of the latter danger, he could so easily remove
her to a sphere of safety. However, these arguments would only hold good
in case of Nastasia acting as others might in such an emergency. She was
much more likely to overstep the bounds of reasonable conduct by some
extraordinary eccentricity.

Here the sound judgment of Totski stood him in good stead. He realized
that Nastasia Philipovna must be well aware that she could do nothing
by legal means to injure him, and that her flashing eyes betrayed some
entirely different intention.

Nastasia Philipovna was quite capable of ruining herself, and even of
perpetrating something which would send her to Siberia, for the mere
pleasure of injuring a man for whom she had developed so inhuman a sense
of loathing and contempt. He had sufficient insight to understand that
she valued nothing in the world--herself least of all--and he made no
attempt to conceal the fact that he was a coward in some respects. For
instance, if he had been told that he would be stabbed at the altar, or
publicly insulted, he would undoubtedly have been frightened; but not so
much at the idea of being murdered, or wounded, or insulted, as at the
thought that if such things were to happen he would be made to look
ridiculous in the eyes of society.

He knew well that Nastasia thoroughly understood him and where to wound
him and how, and therefore, as the marriage was still only in embryo,
Totski decided to conciliate her by giving it up. His decision was
strengthened by the fact that Nastasia Philipovna had curiously altered
of late. It would be difficult to conceive how different she was
physically, at the present time, to the girl of a few years ago. She was
pretty then... but now!... Totski laughed angrily when he thought how
short-sighted he had been. In days gone by he remembered how he had
looked at her beautiful eyes, how even then he had marvelled at their
dark mysterious depths, and at their wondering gaze which seemed to seek
an answer to some unknown riddle. Her complexion also had altered. She
was now exceedingly pale, but, curiously, this change only made her more
beautiful. Like most men of the world, Totski had rather despised such
a cheaply-bought conquest, but of late years he had begun to think
differently about it. It had struck him as long ago as last spring that
he ought to be finding a good match for Nastasia; for instance, some
respectable and reasonable young fellow serving in a government office
in another part of the country. How maliciously Nastasia laughed at the
idea of such a thing, now!

However, it appeared to Totski that he might make use of her in another
way; and he determined to establish her in St. Petersburg, surrounding
her with all the comforts and luxuries that his wealth could command. In
this way he might gain glory in certain circles.

Five years of this Petersburg life went by, and, of course, during that
time a great deal happened. Totski’s position was very uncomfortable;
having “funked” once, he could not totally regain his ease. He was
afraid, he did not know why, but he was simply _afraid_ of Nastasia
Philipovna. For the first two years or so he had suspected that she
wished to marry him herself, and that only her vanity prevented her
telling him so. He thought that she wanted him to approach her with a
humble proposal from his own side. But to his great, and not entirely
pleasurable amazement, he discovered that this was by no means the case,
and that were he to offer himself he would be refused. He could not
understand such a state of things, and was obliged to conclude that it
was pride, the pride of an injured and imaginative woman, which had
gone to such lengths that it preferred to sit and nurse its contempt and
