off for Moscow.’ Thence she would go to Orel, she said. When she went to
bed, she was still talking about going to Orel.”

“Wait! What do you intend to do now, Parfen?”

“Well, I’m afraid of you. You shudder and tremble so. We’ll pass the
night here together. There are no other beds besides that one; but I’ve
thought how we’ll manage. I’ll take the cushions off all the sofas, and
lay them down on the floor, up against the curtain here--for you and
me--so that we shall be together. For if they come in and look about
now, you know, they’ll find her, and carry her away, and they’ll be
asking me questions, and I shall say I did it, and then they’ll take me
away, too, don’t you see? So let her lie close to us--close to you and
me.

“Yes, yes,” agreed the prince, warmly.

“So we will not say anything about it, or let them take her away?”

“Not for anything!” cried the other; “no, no, no!”

“So I had decided, my friend; not to give her up to anyone,” continued
Rogojin. “We’ll be very quiet. I have only been out of the house one
hour all day, all the rest of the time I have been with her. I dare say
the air is very bad here. It is so hot. Do you find it bad?”

“I don’t know--perhaps--by morning it will be.”

“I’ve covered her with oilcloth--best American oilcloth, and put
the sheet over that, and four jars of disinfectant, on account of the
smell--as they did at Moscow--you remember? And she’s lying so still;
you shall see, in the morning, when it’s light. What! can’t you get up?”
 asked Rogojin, seeing the other was trembling so that he could not rise
from his seat.

“My legs won’t move,” said the prince; “it’s fear, I know. When my fear
is over, I’ll get up--”

“Wait a bit--I’ll make the bed, and you can lie down. I’ll lie down,
too, and we’ll listen and watch, for I don’t know yet what I shall do...
I tell you beforehand, so that you may be ready in case I--”

Muttering these disconnected words, Rogojin began to make up the beds.
It was clear that he had devised these beds long before; last night he
slept on the sofa. But there was no room for two on the sofa, and he
seemed anxious that he and the prince should be close to one another;
therefore, he now dragged cushions of all sizes and shapes from the
sofas, and made a sort of bed of them close by the curtain. He then
approached the prince, and gently helped him to rise, and led him
towards the bed. But the prince could now walk by himself, so that his
fear must have passed; for all that, however, he continued to shudder.

“It’s hot weather, you see,” continued Rogojin, as he lay down on the
cushions beside Muishkin, “and, naturally, there will be a smell. I
daren’t open the window. My mother has some beautiful flowers in pots;
they have a delicious scent; I thought of fetching them in, but that old
servant will find out, she’s very inquisitive.”

“Yes, she is inquisitive,” assented the prince.

“I thought of buying flowers, and putting them all round her; but I was
afraid it would make us sad to see her with flowers round her.”

“Look here,” said the prince; he was bewildered, and his brain wandered.
He seemed to be continually groping for the questions he wished to ask,
and then losing them. “Listen--tell me--how did you--with a knife?--That
same one?”

“Yes, that same one.”

“Wait a minute, I want to ask you something else, Parfen; all sorts of
things; but tell me first, did you intend to kill her before my wedding,
at the church door, with your knife?”

“I don’t know whether I did or not,” said Rogojin, drily, seeming to be
a little astonished at the question, and not quite taking it in.

“Did you never take your knife to Pavlofsk with you?” “No. As to the
knife,” he added, “this is all I can tell you about it.” He was silent
for a moment, and then said, “I took it out of the locked drawer this
morning about three, for it was in the early morning all this--happened.
It has been inside the book ever since--and--and--this is what is such
a marvel to me, the knife only went in a couple of inches at most, just
under her left breast, and there wasn’t more than half a tablespoonful
of blood altogether, not more.”

“Yes--yes--yes--” The prince jumped up in extraordinary agitation.
“I know, I know, I’ve read of that sort of thing--it’s internal
haemorrhage, you know. Sometimes there isn’t a drop--if the blow goes
straight to the heart--”

“Wait--listen!” cried Rogojin, suddenly, starting up. “Somebody’s
walking about, do you hear? In the hall.” Both sat up to listen.

“I hear,” said the prince in a whisper, his eyes fixed on Rogojin.

“Footsteps?”

“Yes.”

“Shall we shut the door, and lock it, or not?”

“Yes, lock it.”

They locked the door, and both lay down again. There was a long silence.

“Yes, by-the-by,” whispered the prince, hurriedly and excitedly as
before, as though he had just seized hold of an idea and was afraid of
losing it again. “I--I wanted those cards! They say you played cards
with her?”

“Yes, I played with her,” said Rogojin, after a short silence.

“Where are the cards?”

“Here they are,” said Rogojin, after a still longer pause.

He pulled out a pack of cards, wrapped in a bit of paper, from his
pocket, and handed them to the prince. The latter took them, with a sort
of perplexity. A new, sad, helpless feeling weighed on his heart; he had
suddenly realized that not only at this moment, but for a long while,
he had not been saying what he wanted to say, had not been acting as he
wanted to act; and that these cards which he held in his hand, and which
he had been so delighted to have at first, were now of no use--no use...
He rose, and wrung his hands. Rogojin lay motionless, and seemed neither
to hear nor see his movements; but his eyes blazed in the darkness, and
were fixed in a wild stare.

The prince sat down on a chair, and watched him in alarm. Half an hour
went by.

Suddenly Rogojin burst into a loud abrupt laugh, as though he had quite
forgotten that they must speak in whispers.

“That officer, eh!--that young officer--don’t you remember that fellow
at the band? Eh? Ha, ha, ha! Didn’t she whip him smartly, eh?”

The prince jumped up from his seat in renewed terror. When Rogojin
quieted down (which he did at once) the prince bent over him, sat down
beside him, and with painfully beating heart and still more painful
breath, watched his face intently. Rogojin never turned his head, and
seemed to have forgotten all about him. The prince watched and waited.
Time went on--it began to grow light.

Rogojin began to wander--muttering disconnectedly; then he took to
shouting and laughing. The prince stretched out a trembling hand and
gently stroked his hair and his cheeks--he could do nothing more. His
legs trembled again and he seemed to have lost the use of them. A
new sensation came over him, filling his heart and soul with infinite
anguish.
