“Lef Nicolaievitch,” said Rogojin, after a pause, during which the two
walked along a little further, “I have long wished to ask you, do you
believe in God?”

“How strangely you speak, and how odd you look!” said the other,
involuntarily.

“I like looking at that picture,” muttered Rogojin, not noticing,
apparently, that the prince had not answered his question.

“That picture! That picture!” cried Muishkin, struck by a sudden idea.
“Why, a man’s faith might be ruined by looking at that picture!”

“So it is!” said Rogojin, unexpectedly. They had now reached the front
door.

The prince stopped.

“How?” he said. “What do you mean? I was half joking, and you took me up
quite seriously! Why do you ask me whether I believe in God?”

“Oh, no particular reason. I meant to ask you before--many people are
unbelievers nowadays, especially Russians, I have been told. You ought
to know--you’ve lived abroad.”

Rogojin laughed bitterly as he said these words, and opening the door,
held it for the prince to pass out. Muishkin looked surprised, but went
out. The other followed him as far as the landing of the outer stairs,
and shut the door behind him. They both now stood facing one another, as
though oblivious of where they were, or what they had to do next.

“Well, good-bye!” said the prince, holding out his hand.

“Good-bye,” said Rogojin, pressing it hard, but quite mechanically.

The prince made one step forward, and then turned round.

“As to faith,” he said, smiling, and evidently unwilling to leave
Rogojin in this state--“as to faith, I had four curious conversations
in two days, a week or so ago. One morning I met a man in the train, and
made acquaintance with him at once. I had often heard of him as a very
learned man, but an atheist; and I was very glad of the opportunity of
conversing with so eminent and clever a person. He doesn’t believe in
God, and he talked a good deal about it, but all the while it appeared
to me that he was speaking _outside the subject_. And it has always struck
me, both in speaking to such men and in reading their books, that they
do not seem really to be touching on that at all, though on the surface
they may appear to do so. I told him this, but I dare say I did not
clearly express what I meant, for he could not understand me.

“That same evening I stopped at a small provincial hotel, and it so
happened that a dreadful murder had been committed there the night
before, and everybody was talking about it. Two peasants--elderly men
and old friends--had had tea together there the night before, and were
to occupy the same bedroom. They were not drunk but one of them had
noticed for the first time that his friend possessed a silver watch
which he was wearing on a chain. He was by no means a thief, and was, as
peasants go, a rich man; but this watch so fascinated him that he could
not restrain himself. He took a knife, and when his friend turned his
back, he came up softly behind, raised his eyes to heaven, crossed
himself, and saying earnestly--‘God forgive me, for Christ’s sake!’ he
cut his friend’s throat like a sheep, and took the watch.”

Rogojin roared with laughter. He laughed as though he were in a sort of
fit. It was strange to see him laughing so after the sombre mood he had
been in just before.

“Oh, I like that! That beats anything!” he cried convulsively, panting
for breath. “One is an absolute unbeliever; the other is such a
thorough-going believer that he murders his friend to the tune of a
prayer! Oh, prince, prince, that’s too good for anything! You can’t have
invented it. It’s the best thing I’ve heard!”

“Next morning I went out for a stroll through the town,” continued the
prince, so soon as Rogojin was a little quieter, though his laughter
still burst out at intervals, “and soon observed a drunken-looking
soldier staggering about the pavement. He came up to me and said,
‘Buy my silver cross, sir! You shall have it for fourpence--it’s real
silver.’ I looked, and there he held a cross, just taken off his own
neck, evidently, a large tin one, made after the Byzantine pattern. I
fished out fourpence, and put his cross on my own neck, and I could see
by his face that he was as pleased as he could be at the thought that he
had succeeded in cheating a foolish gentleman, and away he went to
drink the value of his cross. At that time everything that I saw made
a tremendous impression upon me. I had understood nothing about Russia
before, and had only vague and fantastic memories of it. So I thought,
‘I will wait awhile before I condemn this Judas. Only God knows what may
be hidden in the hearts of drunkards.’

“Well, I went homewards, and near the hotel I came across a poor woman,
carrying a child--a baby of some six weeks old. The mother was quite a
girl herself. The baby was smiling up at her, for the first time in its
life, just at that moment; and while I watched the woman she suddenly
crossed herself, oh, so devoutly! ‘What is it, my good woman?’ I asked
her. (I was never but asking questions then!) ‘Exactly as is a mother’s
joy when her baby smiles for the first time into her eyes, so is God’s
joy when one of His children turns and prays to Him for the first time,
with all his heart!’ This is what that poor woman said to me, almost
word for word; and such a deep, refined, truly religious thought it
was--a thought in which the whole essence of Christianity was expressed
in one flash--that is, the recognition of God as our Father, and of
God’s joy in men as His own children, which is the chief idea of Christ.
She was a simple country-woman--a mother, it’s true--and perhaps, who
knows, she may have been the wife of the drunken soldier!

“Listen, Parfen; you put a question to me just now. This is my reply.
The essence of religious feeling has nothing to do with reason, or
atheism, or crime, or acts of any kind--it has nothing to do with these
things--and never had. There is something besides all this, something
which the arguments of the atheists can never touch. But the principal
thing, and the conclusion of my argument, is that this is most clearly
seen in the heart of a Russian. This is a conviction which I have gained
while I have been in this Russia of ours. Yes, Parfen! there is work to
be done; there is work to be done in this Russian world! Remember what
talks we used to have in Moscow! And I never wished to come here at
all; and I never thought to meet you like this, Parfen! Well,
well--good-bye--good-bye! God be with you!”

He turned and went downstairs.

“Lef Nicolaievitch!” cried Parfen, before he had reached the next
landing. “Have you got that cross you bought from the soldier with you?”

“Yes, I have,” and the prince stopped again.

“Show it me, will you?”

A new fancy! The prince reflected, and then mounted the stairs once
more. He pulled out the cross without taking it off his neck.

“Give it to me,” said Parfen.

“Why? do you--”

The prince would rather have kept this particular cross.

“I’ll wear it; and you shall have mine. I’ll take it off at once.”

“You wish to exchange crosses? Very well, Parfen, if that’s the case,
I’m glad enough--that makes us brothers, you know.”

The prince took off his tin cross, Parfen his gold one, and the exchange
was made.

Parfen was silent. With sad surprise the prince observed that the look
of distrust, the bitter, ironical smile, had still not altogether left
his newly-adopted brother’s face. At moments, at all events, it showed
itself but too plainly,

At last Rogojin took the prince’s hand, and stood so for some moments,
