
“Well, it was a little drawn out, perhaps; but--”

“Come, speak out! Don’t lie, for once in your life--speak out!”
 continued Hippolyte, quivering with agitation.

“Oh, my good sir, I assure you it’s entirely the same to me. Please
leave me in peace,” said Evgenie, angrily, turning his back on him.

“Good-night, prince,” said Ptitsin, approaching his host.

“What are you thinking of? Don’t go, he’ll blow his brains out in a
minute!” cried Vera Lebedeff, rushing up to Hippolyte and catching hold
of his hands in a torment of alarm. “What are you thinking of? He said
he would blow his brains out at sunrise.”

“Oh, he won’t shoot himself!” cried several voices, sarcastically.

“Gentlemen, you’d better look out,” cried Colia, also seizing Hippolyte
by the hand. “Just look at him! Prince, what are you thinking of?” Vera
and Colia, and Keller, and Burdovsky were all crowding round Hippolyte
now and holding him down.

“He has the right--the right--” murmured Burdovsky. “Excuse me, prince,
but what are your arrangements?” asked Lebedeff, tipsy and exasperated,
going up to Muishkin.

“What do you mean by ‘arrangements’?”

“No, no, excuse me! I’m master of this house, though I do not wish to
lack respect towards you. You are master of the house too, in a way; but
I can’t allow this sort of thing--”

“He won’t shoot himself; the boy is only playing the fool,” said General
Ivolgin, suddenly and unexpectedly, with indignation.

“I know he won’t, I know he won’t, general; but I--I’m master here!”

“Listen, Mr. Terentieff,” said Ptitsin, who had bidden the prince
good-night, and was now holding out his hand to Hippolyte; “I think you
remark in that manuscript of yours, that you bequeath your skeleton to
the Academy. Are you referring to your own skeleton--I mean, your very
bones?”

“Yes, my bones, I--”

“Quite so, I see; because, you know, little mistakes have occurred now
and then. There was a case--”

“Why do you tease him?” cried the prince, suddenly.

“You’ve moved him to tears,” added Ferdishenko. But Hippolyte was by no
means weeping. He was about to move from his place, when his four guards
rushed at him and seized him once more. There was a laugh at this.

“He led up to this on purpose. He took the trouble of writing all that
so that people should come and grab him by the arm,” observed Rogojin.
“Good-night, prince. What a time we’ve sat here, my very bones ache!”

“If you really intended to shoot yourself, Terentieff,” said Evgenie
Pavlovitch, laughing, “if I were you, after all these compliments, I
should just not shoot myself in order to vex them all.”

“They are very anxious to see me blow my brains out,” said Hippolyte,
bitterly.

“Yes, they’ll be awfully annoyed if they don’t see it.”

“Then you think they won’t see it?”

“I am not trying to egg you on. On the contrary, I think it very likely
that you may shoot yourself; but the principal thing is to keep cool,”
 said Evgenie with a drawl, and with great condescension.

“I only now perceive what a terrible mistake I made in reading this
article to them,” said Hippolyte, suddenly, addressing Evgenie, and
looking at him with an expression of trust and confidence, as though he
were applying to a friend for counsel.

“Yes, it’s a droll situation; I really don’t know what advice to give
you,” replied Evgenie, laughing. Hippolyte gazed steadfastly at him,
but said nothing. To look at him one might have supposed that he was
unconscious at intervals.

“Excuse me,” said Lebedeff, “but did you observe the young gentleman’s
style? ‘I’ll go and blow my brains out in the park,’ says he, ‘so as not
to disturb anyone.’ He thinks he won’t disturb anybody if he goes three
yards away, into the park, and blows his brains out there.”

“Gentlemen--” began the prince.

“No, no, excuse me, most revered prince,” Lebedeff interrupted,
excitedly. “Since you must have observed yourself that this is no joke,
and since at least half your guests must also have concluded that after
all that has been said this youth _must_ blow his brains out for honour’s
sake--I--as master of this house, and before these witnesses, now call
upon you to take steps.”

“Yes, but what am I to do, Lebedeff? What steps am I to take? I am
ready.”

“I’ll tell you. In the first place he must immediately deliver up the
pistol which he boasted of, with all its appurtenances. If he does
this I shall consent to his being allowed to spend the night in
this house--considering his feeble state of health, and of course
conditionally upon his being under proper supervision. But tomorrow he
must go elsewhere. Excuse me, prince! Should he refuse to deliver up his
weapon, then I shall instantly seize one of his arms and General Ivolgin
the other, and we shall hold him until the police arrive and take the
matter into their own hands. Mr. Ferdishenko will kindly fetch them.”

At this there was a dreadful noise; Lebedeff danced about in his
excitement; Ferdishenko prepared to go for the police; Gania frantically
insisted that it was all nonsense, “for nobody was going to shoot
themselves.” Evgenie Pavlovitch said nothing.

“Prince,” whispered Hippolyte, suddenly, his eyes all ablaze, “you don’t
suppose that I did not foresee all this hatred?” He looked at the prince
as though he expected him to reply, for a moment. “Enough!” he added at
length, and addressing the whole company, he cried: “It’s all my fault,
gentlemen! Lebedeff, here’s the key,” (he took out a small bunch of
keys); “this one, the last but one--Colia will show you--Colia, where’s
Colia?” he cried, looking straight at Colia and not seeing him. “Yes,
he’ll show you; he packed the bag with me this morning. Take him up,
Colia; my bag is upstairs in the prince’s study, under the table. Here’s
the key, and in the little case you’ll find my pistol and the powder,
and all. Colia packed it himself, Mr. Lebedeff; he’ll show you; but it’s
on condition that tomorrow morning, when I leave for Petersburg, you
will give me back my pistol, do you hear? I do this for the prince’s
sake, not yours.”

“Capital, that’s much better!” cried Lebedeff, and seizing the key he
made off in haste.

Colia stopped a moment as though he wished to say something; but
Lebedeff dragged him away.

Hippolyte looked around at the laughing guests. The prince observed that
his teeth were chattering as though in a violent attack of ague.

“What brutes they all are!” he whispered to the prince. Whenever he
addressed him he lowered his voice.

“Let them alone, you’re too weak now--”

“Yes, directly; I’ll go away directly. I’ll--”

Suddenly he embraced Muishkin.

“Perhaps you think I am mad, eh?” he asked him, laughing very strangely.
