influence of wine, were discussing abstract subjects far beyond her
comprehension. In the next room her younger sister lay on a wooden
chest, sound asleep, with her mouth wide open; but the boy, Lebedeff’s
son, had taken up his position close beside Colia and Hippolyte, his
face lit up with interest in the conversation of his father and the
rest, to which he would willingly have listened for ten hours at a
stretch.

“I have waited for you on purpose, and am very glad to see you arrive so
happy,” said Hippolyte, when the prince came forward to press his hand,
immediately after greeting Vera.

“And how do you know that I am ‘so happy’?”

“I can see it by your face! Say ‘how do you do’ to the others, and
come and sit down here, quick--I’ve been waiting for you!” he added,
accentuating the fact that he had waited. On the prince’s asking, “Will
it not be injurious to you to sit out so late?” he replied that he could
not believe that he had thought himself dying three days or so ago, for
he never had felt better than this evening.

Burdovsky next jumped up and explained that he had come in by accident,
having escorted Hippolyte from town. He murmured that he was glad he
had “written nonsense” in his letter, and then pressed the prince’s hand
warmly and sat down again.

The prince approached Evgenie Pavlovitch last of all. The latter
immediately took his arm.

“I have a couple of words to say to you,” he began, “and those on a very
important matter; let’s go aside for a minute or two.”

“Just a couple of words!” whispered another voice in the prince’s other
ear, and another hand took his other arm. Muishkin turned, and to his
great surprise observed a red, flushed face and a droll-looking figure
which he recognized at once as that of Ferdishenko. Goodness knows where
he had turned up from!

“Do you remember Ferdishenko?” he asked.

“Where have you dropped from?” cried the prince.

“He is sorry for his sins now, prince,” cried Keller. “He did not
want to let you know he was here; he was hidden over there in the
corner,--but he repents now, he feels his guilt.”

“Why, what has he done?”

“I met him outside and brought him in--he’s a gentleman who doesn’t
often allow his friends to see him, of late--but he’s sorry now.”

“Delighted, I’m sure!--I’ll come back directly, gentlemen,--sit down
there with the others, please,--excuse me one moment,” said the host,
getting away with difficulty in order to follow Evgenie.

“You are very gay here,” began the latter, “and I have had quite
a pleasant half-hour while I waited for you. Now then, my dear Lef
Nicolaievitch, this is what’s the matter. I’ve arranged it all with
Moloftsoff, and have just come in to relieve your mind on that score.
You need be under no apprehensions. He was very sensible, as he should
be, of course, for I think he was entirely to blame himself.”

“What Moloftsoff?”

“The young fellow whose arms you held, don’t you know? He was so wild
with you that he was going to send a friend to you tomorrow morning.”

“What nonsense!”

“Of course it is nonsense, and in nonsense it would have ended,
doubtless; but you know these fellows, they--”

“Excuse me, but I think you must have something else that you wished to
speak about, Evgenie Pavlovitch?”

“Of course, I have!” said the other, laughing. “You see, my dear fellow,
tomorrow, very early in the morning, I must be off to town about this
unfortunate business (my uncle, you know!). Just imagine, my dear sir, it
is all true--word for word--and, of course, everybody knew it excepting
myself. All this has been such a blow to me that I have not managed to
call in at the Epanchins’. Tomorrow I shall not see them either, because
I shall be in town. I may not be here for three days or more; in a word,
my affairs are a little out of gear. But though my town business is,
of course, most pressing, still I determined not to go away until I had
seen you, and had a clear understanding with you upon certain points;
and that without loss of time. I will wait now, if you will allow me,
until the company departs; I may just as well, for I have nowhere else
to go to, and I shall certainly not do any sleeping tonight; I’m far too
excited. And finally, I must confess that, though I know it is bad form
to pursue a man in this way, I have come to beg your friendship, my
dear prince. You are an unusual sort of a person; you don’t lie at every
step, as some men do; in fact, you don’t lie at all, and there is a
matter in which I need a true and sincere friend, for I really may claim
to be among the number of bona fide unfortunates just now.”

He laughed again.

“But the trouble is,” said the prince, after a slight pause for
reflection, “that goodness only knows when this party will break up.
Hadn’t we better stroll into the park? I’ll excuse myself, there’s no
danger of their going away.”

“No, no! I have my reasons for wishing them not to suspect us of being
engaged in any specially important conversation. There are gentry
present who are a little too much interested in us. You are not aware of
that perhaps, prince? It will be a great deal better if they see that
we are friendly just in an ordinary way. They’ll all go in a couple of
hours, and then I’ll ask you to give me twenty minutes--half an hour at
most.”

“By all means! I assure you I am delighted--you need not have entered
into all these explanations. As for your remarks about friendship with
me--thanks, very much indeed. You must excuse my being a little absent
this evening. Do you know, I cannot somehow be attentive to anything
just now?”

“I see, I see,” said Evgenie, smiling gently. His mirth seemed very near
the surface this evening.

“What do you see?” said the prince, startled.

“I don’t want you to suspect that I have simply come here to deceive
you and pump information out of you!” said Evgenie, still smiling, and
without making any direct reply to the question.

“Oh, but I haven’t the slightest doubt that you did come to pump me,”
 said the prince, laughing himself, at last; “and I dare say you are
quite prepared to deceive me too, so far as that goes. But what of that?
I’m not afraid of you; besides, you’ll hardly believe it, I feel
as though I really didn’t care a scrap one way or the other, just
now!--And--and--and as you are a capital fellow, I am convinced of that, I
dare say we really shall end by being good friends. I like you very much
Evgenie Pavlovitch; I consider you a very good fellow indeed.”

“Well, in any case, you are a most delightful man to have to deal with,
be the business what it may,” concluded Evgenie. “Come along now, I’ll
drink a glass to your health. I’m charmed to have entered into alliance
with you. By-the-by,” he added suddenly, “has this young Hippolyte come
down to stay with you?”

“Yes.”

“He’s not going to die at once, I should think, is he?”

“Why?”

“Oh, I don’t know. I’ve been half an hour here with him, and he--”

Hippolyte had been waiting for the prince all this time, and had never
ceased looking at him and Evgenie Pavlovitch as they conversed in the
