
“Observe,” he gasped, through his coughing, “what a fellow Gania is!
He talks about Nastasia’s ‘leavings,’ but what does he want to take
himself?”

The prince sat silent for a long while. His mind was filled with dread
and horror.

“You spoke of a meeting with Nastasia Philipovna,” he said at last, in a
low voice.

“Oh--come! Surely you must know that there is to be a meeting today
between Nastasia and Aglaya Ivanovna, and that Nastasia has been sent
for on purpose, through Rogojin, from St. Petersburg? It has been
brought about by invitation of Aglaya Ivanovna and my own efforts, and
Nastasia is at this moment with Rogojin, not far from here--at Dana
Alexeyevna’s--that curious friend of hers; and to this questionable
house Aglaya Ivanovna is to proceed for a friendly chat with Nastasia
Philipovna, and for the settlement of several problems. They are going
to play at arithmetic--didn’t you know about it? Word of honour?”

“It’s a most improbable story.”

“Oh, very well! if it’s improbable--it is--that’s all! And yet--where
should you have heard it? Though I must say, if a fly crosses the room
it’s known all over the place here. However, I’ve warned you, and you
may be grateful to me. Well--_au revoir_--probably in the next world! One
more thing--don’t think that I am telling you all this for your sake.
Oh, dear, no! Do you know that I dedicated my confession to Aglaya
Ivanovna? I did though, and how she took it, ha, ha! Oh, no! I am not
acting from any high, exalted motives. But though I may have behaved
like a cad to you, I have not done _her_ any harm. I don’t apologize for
my words about ‘leavings’ and all that. I am atoning for that, you
see, by telling you the place and time of the meeting. Goodbye! You
had better take your measures, if you are worthy the name of a man! The
meeting is fixed for this evening--that’s certain.”

Hippolyte walked towards the door, but the prince called him back and he
stopped.

“Then you think Aglaya Ivanovna herself intends to go to Nastasia
Philipovna’s tonight?” he asked, and bright hectic spots came out on his
cheeks and forehead.

“I don’t know absolutely for certain; but in all probability it is so,”
 replied Hippolyte, looking round. “Nastasia would hardly go to her; and
they can’t meet at Gania’s, with a man nearly dead in the house.”

“It’s impossible, for that very reason,” said the prince. “How would she
get out if she wished to? You don’t know the habits of that house--she
_could_ not get away alone to Nastasia Philipovna’s! It’s all nonsense!”

“Look here, my dear prince, no one jumps out of the window if they can
help it; but when there’s a fire, the dandiest gentleman or the finest
lady in the world will skip out! When the moment comes, and
there’s nothing else to be done--our young lady will go to Nastasia
Philipovna’s! Don’t they let the young ladies out of the house alone,
then?”

“I didn’t mean that exactly.”

“If you didn’t mean that, then she has only to go down the steps and
walk off, and she need never come back unless she chooses: Ships are
burned behind one sometimes, and one doesn’t care to return whence one
came. Life need not consist only of lunches, and dinners, and Prince
S’s. It strikes me you take Aglaya Ivanovna for some conventional
boarding-school girl. I said so to her, and she quite agreed with me.
Wait till seven or eight o’clock. In your place I would send someone
there to keep watch, so as to seize the exact moment when she steps out
of the house. Send Colia. He’ll play the spy with pleasure--for you at
least. Ha, ha, ha!”

Hippolyte went out.

There was no reason for the prince to set anyone to watch, even if he
had been capable of such a thing. Aglaya’s command that he should stay
at home all day seemed almost explained now. Perhaps she meant to call
for him, herself, or it might be, of course, that she was anxious to
make sure of his not coming there, and therefore bade him remain at
home. His head whirled; the whole room seemed to be turning round. He
lay down on the sofa, and closed his eyes.

One way or the other the question was to be decided at last--finally.

Oh, no, he did not think of Aglaya as a boarding-school miss, or a young
lady of the conventional type! He had long since feared that she might
take some such step as this. But why did she wish to see Nastasia?

He shivered all over as he lay; he was in high fever again.

No! he did not account her a child. Certain of her looks, certain of her
words, of late, had filled him with apprehension. At times it had struck
him that she was putting too great a restraint upon herself, and he
remembered that he had been alarmed to observe this. He had tried, all
these days, to drive away the heavy thoughts that oppressed him;
but what was the hidden mystery of that soul? The question had long
tormented him, although he implicitly trusted that soul. And now it was
all to be cleared up. It was a dreadful thought. And “that woman” again!
Why did he always feel as though “that woman” were fated to appear at
each critical moment of his life, and tear the thread of his destiny
like a bit of rotten string? That he always _had_ felt this he was ready
to swear, although he was half delirious at the moment. If he had tried
to forget her, all this time, it was simply because he was afraid of
her. Did he love the woman or hate her? This question he did not once
ask himself today; his heart was quite pure. He knew whom he loved. He
was not so much afraid of this meeting, nor of its strangeness, nor of
any reasons there might be for it, unknown to himself; he was afraid
of the woman herself, Nastasia Philipovna. He remembered, some days
afterwards, how during all those fevered hours he had seen but _her_ eyes,
_her_ look, had heard _her_ voice, strange words of hers; he remembered
that this was so, although he could not recollect the details of his
thoughts.

He could remember that Vera brought him some dinner, and that he took
it; but whether he slept after dinner, or no, he could not recollect.

He only knew that he began to distinguish things clearly from the moment
when Aglaya suddenly appeared, and he jumped up from the sofa and went
to meet her. It was just a quarter past seven then.

Aglaya was quite alone, and dressed, apparently hastily, in a light
mantle. Her face was pale, as it had been in the morning, and her
eyes were ablaze with bright but subdued fire. He had never seen that
expression in her eyes before.

She gazed attentively at him.

“You are quite ready, I observe,” she said, with absolute composure,
“dressed, and your hat in your hand. I see somebody has thought fit to
warn you, and I know who. Hippolyte?”

“Yes, he told me,” said the prince, feeling only half alive.

“Come then. You know, I suppose, that you must escort me there? You are
well enough to go out, aren’t you?”

“I am well enough; but is it really possible?--”

He broke off abruptly, and could not add another word. This was his one
attempt to stop the mad child, and, after he had made it, he followed
her as though he had no will of his own. Confused as his thoughts were,
he was, nevertheless, capable of realizing the fact that if he did
not go with her, she would go alone, and so he must go with her at all
hazards. He guessed the strength of her determination; it was beyond him
to check it.

They walked silently, and said scarcely a word all the way. He only
noticed that she seemed to know the road very well; and once, when he
thought it better to go by a certain lane, and remarked to her that it
would be quieter and less public, she only said, “it’s all the same,”
