the hands of Labour paralyzed, etc.; there is no end to this, gentlemen,
so let us come to the point. A strange thing has happened to a scion
of our defunct aristocracy. (_De profundis!_) The grandfathers of these
scions ruined themselves at the gaming-tables; their fathers were forced
to serve as officers or subalterns; some have died just as they were
about to be tried for innocent thoughtlessness in the handling of public
funds. Their children are sometimes congenital idiots, like the hero of
our story; sometimes they are found in the dock at the Assizes, where
they are generally acquitted by the jury for edifying motives; sometimes
they distinguish themselves by one of those burning scandals that amaze
the public and add another blot to the stained record of our age. Six
months ago--that is, last winter--this particular scion returned to
Russia, wearing gaiters like a foreigner, and shivering with cold in
an old scantily-lined cloak. He had come from Switzerland, where he
had just undergone a successful course of treatment for idiocy (_sic!_).
Certainly Fortune favoured him, for, apart from the interesting malady
of which he was cured in Switzerland (can there be a cure for idiocy?)
his story proves the truth of the Russian proverb that ‘happiness is
the right of certain classes!’ Judge for yourselves. Our subject was an
infant in arms when he lost his father, an officer who died just as
he was about to be court-martialled for gambling away the funds of his
company, and perhaps also for flogging a subordinate to excess (remember
the good old days, gentlemen). The orphan was brought up by the charity
of a very rich Russian landowner. In the good old days, this man,
whom we will call P----, owned four thousand souls as serfs (souls as
serfs!--can you understand such an expression, gentlemen? I cannot; it
must be looked up in a dictionary before one can understand it; these
things of a bygone day are already unintelligible to us). He appears
to have been one of those Russian parasites who lead an idle existence
abroad, spending the summer at some spa, and the winter in Paris, to the
greater profit of the organizers of public balls. It may safely be said
that the manager of the Chateau des Fleurs (lucky man!) pocketed at
least a third of the money paid by Russian peasants to their lords in
the days of serfdom. However this may be, the gay P---- brought up the
orphan like a prince, provided him with tutors and governesses (pretty,
of course!) whom he chose himself in Paris. But the little aristocrat,
the last of his noble race, was an idiot. The governesses, recruited at
the Chateau des Fleurs, laboured in vain; at twenty years of age their
pupil could not speak in any language, not even Russian. But ignorance
of the latter was still excusable. At last P---- was seized with a
strange notion; he imagined that in Switzerland they could change an
idiot into a man of sense. After all, the idea was quite logical;
a parasite and landowner naturally supposed that intelligence was a
marketable commodity like everything else, and that in Switzerland
especially it could be bought for money. The case was entrusted to a
celebrated Swiss professor, and cost thousands of roubles; the
treatment lasted five years. Needless to say, the idiot did not become
intelligent, but it is alleged that he grew into something more or less
resembling a man. At this stage P---- died suddenly, and, as usual,
he had made no will and left his affairs in disorder. A crowd of eager
claimants arose, who cared nothing about any last scion of a noble race
undergoing treatment in Switzerland, at the expense of the deceased, as
a congenital idiot. Idiot though he was, the noble scion tried to cheat
his professor, and they say he succeeded in getting him to continue
the treatment gratis for two years, by concealing the death of his
benefactor. But the professor himself was a charlatan. Getting anxious
at last when no money was forthcoming, and alarmed above all by his
patient’s appetite, he presented him with a pair of old gaiters and a
shabby cloak and packed him off to Russia, third class. It would seem
that Fortune had turned her back upon our hero. Not at all; Fortune,
who lets whole populations die of hunger, showered all her gifts at once
upon the little aristocrat, like Kryloff’s Cloud which passes over an
arid plain and empties itself into the sea. He had scarcely arrived in
St. Petersburg, when a relation of his mother’s (who was of bourgeois
origin, of course), died at Moscow. He was a merchant, an Old Believer,
and he had no children. He left a fortune of several millions in good
current coin, and everything came to our noble scion, our gaitered
baron, formerly treated for idiocy in a Swiss lunatic asylum. Instantly
the scene changed, crowds of friends gathered round our baron, who
meanwhile had lost his head over a celebrated demi-mondaine; he even
discovered some relations; moreover a number of young girls of high
birth burned to be united to him in lawful matrimony. Could anyone
possibly imagine a better match? Aristocrat, millionaire, and idiot, he
has every advantage! One might hunt in vain for his equal, even with the
lantern of Diogenes; his like is not to be had even by getting it made
to order!”

“Oh, I don’t know what this means” cried Ivan Fedorovitch, transported
with indignation.

“Leave off, Colia,” begged the prince. Exclamations arose on all sides.

“Let him go on reading at all costs!” ordered Lizabetha Prokofievna,
evidently preserving her composure by a desperate effort. “Prince, if
the reading is stopped, you and I will quarrel.”

Colia had no choice but to obey. With crimson cheeks he read on
unsteadily:

“But while our young millionaire dwelt as it were in the Empyrean,
something new occurred. One fine morning a man called upon him, calm and
severe of aspect, distinguished, but plainly dressed. Politely, but in
dignified terms, as befitted his errand, he briefly explained the motive
for his visit. He was a lawyer of enlightened views; his client was a
young man who had consulted him in confidence. This young man was no
other than the son of P----, though he bears another name. In his youth
P----, the sensualist, had seduced a young girl, poor but respectable. She
was a serf, but had received a European education. Finding that a child
was expected, he hastened her marriage with a man of noble character who
had loved her for a long time. He helped the young couple for a time,
but he was soon obliged to give up, for the high-minded husband refused
to accept anything from him. Soon the careless nobleman forgot all about
his former mistress and the child she had borne him; then, as we know,
he died intestate. P----’s son, born after his mother’s marriage, found
a true father in the generous man whose name he bore. But when he also
died, the orphan was left to provide for himself, his mother now being
an invalid who had lost the use of her limbs. Leaving her in a distant
province, he came to the capital in search of pupils. By dint of daily
toil he earned enough to enable him to follow the college courses, and
at last to enter the university. But what can one earn by teaching the
children of Russian merchants at ten copecks a lesson, especially with
an invalid mother to keep? Even her death did not much diminish the
hardships of the young man’s struggle for existence. Now this is the
question: how, in the name of justice, should our scion have argued the
case? Our readers will think, no doubt, that he would say to himself:
‘P---- showered benefits upon me all my life; he spent tens of thousands
of roubles to educate me, to provide me with governesses, and to keep me
under treatment in Switzerland. Now I am a millionaire, and P----’s son,
a noble young man who is not responsible for the faults of his careless
and forgetful father, is wearing himself out giving ill-paid lessons.
According to justice, all that was done for me ought to have been done
for him. The enormous sums spent upon me were not really mine; they
came to me by an error of blind Fortune, when they ought to have gone to
P----’s son. They should have gone to benefit him, not me, in whom P----
interested himself by a mere caprice, instead of doing his duty as a
father. If I wished to behave nobly, justly, and with delicacy, I ought
to bestow half my fortune upon the son of my benefactor; but as economy
is my favourite virtue, and I know this is not a case in which the law
can intervene, I will not give up half my millions. But it would be too
openly vile, too flagrantly infamous, if I did not at least restore to
P----’s son the tens of thousands of roubles spent in curing my idiocy.
This is simply a case of conscience and of strict justice. Whatever
would have become of me if P---- had not looked after my education, and
had taken care of his own son instead of me?’

“No, gentlemen, our scions of the nobility do not reason thus. The
lawyer, who had taken up the matter purely out of friendship to the
young man, and almost against his will, invoked every consideration
of justice, delicacy, honour, and even plain figures; in vain, the
ex-patient of the Swiss lunatic asylum was inflexible. All this might
pass, but the sequel is absolutely unpardonable, and not to be excused
by any interesting malady. This millionaire, having but just discarded
the old gaiters of his professor, could not even understand that
the noble young man slaving away at his lessons was not asking for
charitable help, but for his rightful due, though the debt was not a
legal one; that, correctly speaking, he was not asking for anything, but
it was merely his friends who had thought fit to bestir themselves on
his behalf. With the cool insolence of a bloated capitalist, secure in
his millions, he majestically drew a banknote for fifty roubles from his
pocket-book and sent it to the noble young man as a humiliating piece of
