a moment ‘till I thank the prince! Thank you, prince, for the
entertainment you have given us! It was most amusing to hear these young
men... It is vile, vile! A chaos, a scandal, worse than a nightmare!
Is it possible that there can be many such people on earth? Be quiet,
Aglaya! Be quiet, Alexandra! It is none of your business! Don’t fuss
round me like that, Evgenie Pavlovitch; you exasperate me! So, my dear,”
 she cried, addressing the prince, “you go so far as to beg their
pardon! He says, ‘Forgive me for offering you a fortune.’ And you, you
mountebank, what are you laughing at?” she cried, turning suddenly on
Lebedeff’s nephew. “‘We refuse ten thousand roubles; we do not beseech,
we demand!’ As if he did not know that this idiot will call on them
tomorrow to renew his offers of money and friendship. You will, won’t
you? You will? Come, will you, or won’t you?”

“I shall,” said the prince, with gentle humility.

“You hear him! You count upon it, too,” she continued, turning upon
Doktorenko. “You are as sure of him now as if you had the money in your
pocket. And there you are playing the swaggerer to throw dust in our
eyes! No, my dear sir, you may take other people in! I can see through
all your airs and graces, I see your game!”

“Lizabetha Prokofievna!” exclaimed the prince.

“Come, Lizabetha Prokofievna, it is quite time for us to be going,
we will take the prince with us,” said Prince S. with a smile, in the
coolest possible way.

The girls stood apart, almost frightened; their father was positively
horrified. Mrs. Epanchin’s language astonished everybody. Some who stood
a little way off smiled furtively, and talked in whispers. Lebedeff wore
an expression of utmost ecstasy.

“Chaos and scandal are to be found everywhere, madame,” remarked
Doktorenko, who was considerably put out of countenance.

“Not like this! Nothing like the spectacle you have just given us, sir,”
 answered Lizabetha Prokofievna, with a sort of hysterical rage. “Leave
me alone, will you?” she cried violently to those around her, who were
trying to keep her quiet. “No, Evgenie Pavlovitch, if, as you said
yourself just now, a lawyer said in open court that he found it quite
natural that a man should murder six people because he was in misery,
the world must be coming to an end. I had not heard of it before. Now
I understand everything. And this stutterer, won’t he turn out a
murderer?” she cried, pointing to Burdovsky, who was staring at her with
stupefaction. “I bet he will! He will have none of your money, possibly,
he will refuse it because his conscience will not allow him to accept
it, but he will go murdering you by night and walking off with your
cashbox, with a clear conscience! He does not call it a dishonest action
but ‘the impulse of a noble despair’; ‘a negation’; or the devil knows
what! Bah! everything is upside down, everyone walks head downwards. A
young girl, brought up at home, suddenly jumps into a cab in the
middle of the street, saying: ‘Good-bye, mother, I married Karlitch, or
Ivanitch, the other day!’ And you think it quite right? You call such
conduct estimable and natural? The ‘woman question’? Look here,” she
continued, pointing to Colia, “the other day that whippersnapper told
me that this was the whole meaning of the ‘woman question.’ But even
supposing that your mother is a fool, you are none the less, bound to
treat her with humanity. Why did you come here tonight so insolently?
‘Give us our rights, but don’t dare to speak in our presence. Show us
every mark of deepest respect, while we treat you like the scum of
the earth.’ The miscreants have written a tissue of calumny in their
article, and these are the men who seek for truth, and do battle for the
right! ‘We do not beseech, we demand, you will get no thanks from
us, because you will be acting to satisfy your own conscience!’
What morality! But, good heavens! if you declare that the prince’s
generosity will, excite no gratitude in you, he might answer that he is
not, bound to be grateful to Pavlicheff, who also was only satisfying
his own conscience. But you counted on the prince’s, gratitude towards
Pavlicheff; you never lent him any money; he owes you nothing; then what
were you counting upon if not on his gratitude? And if you appeal to
that sentiment in others, why should you expect to be exempted from
it? They are mad! They say society is savage and inhuman because it
despises a young girl who has been seduced. But if you call society
inhuman you imply that the young girl is made to suffer by its censure.
How then, can you hold her up to the scorn of society in the newspapers
without realizing that you are making her suffering, still greater?
Madmen! Vain fools! They don’t believe in God, they don’t believe in
Christ! But you are so eaten up by pride and vanity, that you will end
by devouring each other--that is my prophecy! Is not this absurd? Is it
not monstrous chaos? And after all this, that shameless creature will
go and beg their pardon! Are there many people like you? What are
you smiling at? Because I am not ashamed to disgrace myself before
you?--Yes, I am disgraced--it can’t be helped now! But don’t you jeer at
me, you scum!” (this was aimed at Hippolyte). “He is almost at his last
gasp, yet he corrupts others. You have got hold of this lad--” (she
pointed to Colia); “you, have turned his head, you have taught him to
be an atheist, you don’t believe in God, and you are not too old to be
whipped, sir! A plague upon you! And so, Prince Lef Nicolaievitch,
you will call on them tomorrow, will you?” she asked the prince
breathlessly, for the second time.

“Yes.”

“Then I will never speak to you again.” She made a sudden movement to
go, and then turned quickly back. “And you will call on that atheist?”
 she continued, pointing to Hippolyte. “How dare you grin at me like
that?” she shouted furiously, rushing at the invalid, whose mocking
smile drove her to distraction.

Exclamations arose on all sides.

“Lizabetha Prokofievna! Lizabetha Prokofievna! Lizabetha Prokofievna!”

“Mother, this is disgraceful!” cried Aglaya.

Mrs. Epanchin had approached Hippolyte and seized him firmly by the arm,
while her eyes, blazing with fury, were fixed upon his face.

“Do not distress yourself, Aglaya Ivanovitch,” he answered calmly; “your
mother knows that one cannot strike a dying man. I am ready to explain
why I was laughing. I shall be delighted if you will let me--”

A violent fit of coughing, which lasted a full minute, prevented him
from finishing his sentence.

“He is dying, yet he will not stop holding forth!” cried Lizabetha
Prokofievna. She loosed her hold on his arm, almost terrified, as she
saw him wiping the blood from his lips. “Why do you talk? You ought to
go home to bed.”

“So I will,” he whispered hoarsely. “As soon as I get home I will go to
bed at once; and I know I shall be dead in a fortnight; Botkine told me
so himself last week. That is why I should like to say a few farewell
words, if you will let me.”

“But you must be mad! It is ridiculous! You should take care of
yourself; what is the use of holding a conversation now? Go home to bed,
do!” cried Mrs. Epanchin in horror.

“When I do go to bed I shall never get up again,” said Hippolyte, with a
smile. “I meant to take to my bed yesterday and stay there till I died,
but as my legs can still carry me, I put it off for two days, so as to
come here with them to-day--but I am very tired.”

“Oh, sit down, sit down, why are you standing?”

Lizabetha Prokofievna placed a chair for him with her own hands.

“Thank you,” he said gently. “Sit opposite to me, and let us talk. We
must have a talk now, Lizabetha Prokofievna; I am very anxious for it.”
 He smiled at her once more. “Remember that today, for the last time, I
am out in the air, and in the company of my fellow-men, and that in a
fortnight I shall certainly be no longer in this world. So, in a way,
this is my farewell to nature and to men. I am not very sentimental,
but do you know, I am quite glad that all this has happened at Pavlofsk,
where at least one can see a green tree.”

“But why talk now?” replied Lizabetha Prokofievna, more and more
alarmed; “You are quite feverish. Just now you would not stop shouting, and
