
“Well, where are we to go to now, father?” he asked. “You don’t want
to go to the prince’s; you have quarrelled with Lebedeff; you have no
money; I never have any; and here we are in the middle of the road, in a
nice sort of mess.”

“Better to be of a mess than in a mess! I remember making a joke
something like that at the mess in eighteen hundred and forty--forty--I
forget. ‘Where is my youth, where is my golden youth?’ Who was it said
that, Colia?”

“It was Gogol, in Dead Souls, father,” cried Colia, glancing at him in
some alarm.

“‘Dead Souls,’ yes, of course, dead. When I die, Colia, you must engrave
on my tomb:

  “‘Here lies a Dead Soul,
    Shame pursues me.’

“Who said that, Colia?”

“I don’t know, father.”

“There was no Eropegoff? Eroshka Eropegoff?” he cried, suddenly,
stopping in the road in a frenzy. “No Eropegoff! And my own son to say
it! Eropegoff was in the place of a brother to me for eleven months. I
fought a duel for him. He was married afterwards, and then killed on the
field of battle. The bullet struck the cross on my breast and glanced
off straight into his temple. ‘I’ll never forget you,’ he cried, and
expired. I served my country well and honestly, Colia, but shame, shame
has pursued me! You and Nina will come to my grave, Colia; poor Nina,
I always used to call her Nina in the old days, and how she loved....
Nina, Nina, oh, Nina. What have I ever done to deserve your forgiveness
and long-suffering? Oh, Colia, your mother has an angelic spirit, an
angelic spirit, Colia!”

“I know that, father. Look here, dear old father, come back home! Let’s
go back to mother. Look, she ran after us when we came out. What have
you stopped her for, just as though you didn’t take in what I said? Why
are you crying, father?”

Poor Colia cried himself, and kissed the old man’s hands

“You kiss my hands, _mine?_”

“Yes, yes, yours, yours! What is there to surprise anyone in that? Come,
come, you mustn’t go on like this, crying in the middle of the road; and
you a general too, a military man! Come, let’s go back.”

“God bless you, dear boy, for being respectful to a disgraced man. Yes,
to a poor disgraced old fellow, your father. You shall have such a son
yourself; le roi de Rome. Oh, curses on this house!”

“Come, come, what does all this mean?” cried Colia beside himself at
last. “What is it? What has happened to you? Why don’t you wish to come
back home? Why have you gone out of your mind, like this?”

“I’ll explain it, I’ll explain all to you. Don’t shout! You shall hear.
Le roi de Rome. Oh, I am sad, I am melancholy!

“‘Nurse, where is your tomb?’

“Who said that, Colia?”

“I don’t know, I don’t know who said it. Come home at once; come on!
I’ll punch Gania’s head myself, if you like--only come. Oh, where _are_
you off to again?” The general was dragging him away towards the door of
a house nearby. He sat down on the step, still holding Colia by the hand.

“Bend down--bend down your ear. I’ll tell you all--disgrace--bend down,
I’ll tell you in your ear.”

“What are you dreaming of?” said poor, frightened Colia, stooping down
towards the old man, all the same.

“Le roi de Rome,” whispered the general, trembling all over.

“What? What _do_ you mean? What roi de Rome?”

“I--I,” the general continued to whisper, clinging more and more
tightly to the boy’s shoulder. “I--wish--to tell you--all--Maria--Maria
Petrovna--Su--Su--Su.......”

Colia broke loose, seized his father by the shoulders, and stared into
his eyes with frenzied gaze. The old man had grown livid--his lips were
shaking, convulsions were passing over his features. Suddenly he leant
over and began to sink slowly into Colia’s arms.

“He’s got a stroke!” cried Colia, loudly, realizing what was the matter
at last.

V.

In point of fact, Varia had rather exaggerated the certainty of her
news as to the prince’s betrothal to Aglaya. Very likely, with the
perspicacity of her sex, she gave out as an accomplished fact what she
felt was pretty sure to become a fact in a few days. Perhaps she could
not resist the satisfaction of pouring one last drop of bitterness into
her brother Gania’s cup, in spite of her love for him. At all events,
she had been unable to obtain any definite news from the Epanchin
girls--the most she could get out of them being hints and surmises, and
so on. Perhaps Aglaya’s sisters had merely been pumping Varia for news
while pretending to impart information; or perhaps, again, they had been
unable to resist the feminine gratification of teasing a friend--for,
after all this time, they could scarcely have helped divining the aim of
her frequent visits.

On the other hand, the prince, although he had told Lebedeff,--as we
know, that nothing had happened, and that he had nothing to impart,--the
prince may have been in error. Something strange seemed to have
happened, without anything definite having actually happened. Varia had
guessed that with her true feminine instinct.

How or why it came about that everyone at the Epanchins’ became imbued
with one conviction--that something very important had happened to
Aglaya, and that her fate was in process of settlement--it would be very
difficult to explain. But no sooner had this idea taken root, than all
at once declared that they had seen and observed it long ago; that they
had remarked it at the time of the “poor knight” joke, and even before,
though they had been unwilling to believe in such nonsense.

So said the sisters. Of course, Lizabetha Prokofievna had foreseen it
long before the rest; her “heart had been sore” for a long while,
she declared, and it was now so sore that she appeared to be quite
overwhelmed, and the very thought of the prince became distasteful to
her.

There was a question to be decided--most important, but most difficult;
so much so, that Mrs. Epanchin did not even see how to put it into
words. Would the prince do or not? Was all this good or bad? If good
(which might be the case, of course), _why_ good? If bad (which was
hardly doubtful), _wherein_, especially, bad? Even the general, the
paterfamilias, though astonished at first, suddenly declared that, “upon
his honour, he really believed he had fancied something of the kind,
after all. At first, it seemed a new idea, and then, somehow, it looked
as familiar as possible.” His wife frowned him down there. This was
in the morning; but in the evening, alone with his wife, he had given
tongue again.

“Well, really, you know”--(silence)--“of course, you know all this is
very strange, if true, which I cannot deny; but”--(silence).--“But,
on the other hand, if one looks things in the face, you know--upon my
honour, the prince is a rare good fellow--and--and--and--well, his name,
you know--your family name--all this looks well, and perpetuates the
name and title and all that--which at this moment is not standing so
high as it might--from one point of view--don’t you know? The world,
the world is the world, of course--and people will talk--and--and--the
prince has property, you know--if it is not very large--and then
he--he--” (Continued silence, and collapse of the general.)
