and was to be carried off by her to Paris, and then to Brittany.

“Oh, well,” thought the general, “he’s lost to us for good, now.”

So the Epanchins prepared to depart for the summer.

But now another circumstance occurred, which changed all the plans once
more, and again the intended journey was put off, much to the delight of
the general and his spouse.

A certain Prince S---- arrived in St. Petersburg from Moscow, an eminent
and honourable young man. He was one of those active persons who always
find some good work with which to employ themselves. Without forcing
himself upon the public notice, modest and unobtrusive, this young
prince was concerned with much that happened in the world in general.

He had served, at first, in one of the civil departments, had then
attended to matters connected with the local government of provincial
towns, and had of late been a corresponding member of several important
scientific societies. He was a man of excellent family and solid means,
about thirty-five years of age.

Prince S---- made the acquaintance of the general’s family, and
Adelaida, the second girl, made a great impression upon him. Towards
the spring he proposed to her, and she accepted him. The general and his
wife were delighted. The journey abroad was put off, and the wedding was
fixed for a day not very distant.

The trip abroad might have been enjoyed later on by Mrs. Epanchin and
her two remaining daughters, but for another circumstance.

It so happened that Prince S---- introduced a distant relation of his
own into the Epanchin family--one Evgenie Pavlovitch, a young officer
of about twenty-eight years of age, whose conquests among the ladies in
Moscow had been proverbial. This young gentleman no sooner set eyes on
Aglaya than he became a frequent visitor at the house. He was witty,
well-educated, and extremely wealthy, as the general very soon
discovered. His past reputation was the only thing against him.

Nothing was said; there were not even any hints dropped; but still, it
seemed better to the parents to say nothing more about going abroad
this season, at all events. Aglaya herself perhaps was of a different
opinion.

All this happened just before the second appearance of our hero upon the
scene.

By this time, to judge from appearances, poor Prince Muishkin had been
quite forgotten in St. Petersburg. If he had appeared suddenly among his
acquaintances, he would have been received as one from the skies; but we
must just glance at one more fact before we conclude this preface.

Colia Ivolgin, for some time after the prince’s departure, continued his
old life. That is, he went to school, looked after his father, helped
Varia in the house, and ran her errands, and went frequently to see his
friend, Hippolyte.

The lodgers had disappeared very quickly--Ferdishenko soon after the
events at Nastasia Philipovna’s, while the prince went to Moscow, as
we know. Gania and his mother went to live with Varia and Ptitsin
immediately after the latter’s wedding, while the general was housed
in a debtor’s prison by reason of certain IOU’s given to the captain’s
widow under the impression that they would never be formally
used against him. This unkind action much surprised poor Ardalion
Alexandrovitch, the victim, as he called himself, of an “unbounded trust
in the nobility of the human heart.”

When he signed those notes of hand he never dreamt that they would be a
source of future trouble. The event showed that he was mistaken. “Trust
in anyone after this! Have the least confidence in man or woman!” he
cried in bitter tones, as he sat with his new friends in prison, and
recounted to them his favourite stories of the siege of Kars, and the
resuscitated soldier. On the whole, he accommodated himself very well
to his new position. Ptitsin and Varia declared that he was in the right
place, and Gania was of the same opinion. The only person who deplored
his fate was poor Nina Alexandrovna, who wept bitter tears over him,
to the great surprise of her household, and, though always in feeble
health, made a point of going to see him as often as possible.

Since the general’s “mishap,” as Colia called it, and the marriage of
his sister, the boy had quietly possessed himself of far more freedom.
His relations saw little of him, for he rarely slept at home. He made
many new friends; and was moreover, a frequent visitor at the debtor’s
prison, to which he invariably accompanied his mother. Varia, who used
to be always correcting him, never spoke to him now on the subject of
his frequent absences, and the whole household was surprised to see
Gania, in spite of his depression, on quite friendly terms with his
brother. This was something new, for Gania had been wont to look upon
Colia as a kind of errand-boy, treating him with contempt, threatening
to “pull his ears,” and in general driving him almost wild with
irritation. It seemed now that Gania really needed his brother, and the
latter, for his part, felt as if he could forgive Gania much since he
had returned the hundred thousand roubles offered to him by Nastasia
Philipovna. Three months after the departure of the prince, the Ivolgin
family discovered that Colia had made acquaintance with the Epanchins,
and was on very friendly terms with the daughters. Varia heard of it
first, though Colia had not asked her to introduce him. Little by little
the family grew quite fond of him. Madame Epanchin at first looked on
him with disdain, and received him coldly, but in a short time he
grew to please her, because, as she said, he “was candid and no
flatterer”--a very true description. From the first he put himself
on an equality with his new friends, and though he sometimes read
newspapers and books to the mistress of the house, it was simply because
he liked to be useful.

One day, however, he and Lizabetha Prokofievna quarrelled seriously
about the “woman question,” in the course of a lively discussion on that
burning subject. He told her that she was a tyrant, and that he would
never set foot in her house again. It may seem incredible, but a day
or two after, Madame Epanchin sent a servant with a note begging him to
return, and Colia, without standing on his dignity, did so at once.

Aglaya was the only one of the family whose good graces he could not
gain, and who always spoke to him haughtily, but it so happened that the
boy one day succeeded in giving the proud maiden a surprise.

It was about Easter, when, taking advantage of a momentary tête-à-tête
Colia handed Aglaya a letter, remarking that he “had orders to deliver
it to her privately.” She stared at him in amazement, but he did not
wait to hear what she had to say, and went out. Aglaya broke the seal,
and read as follows:

“Once you did me the honour of giving me your confidence. Perhaps you
have quite forgotten me now! How is it that I am writing to you? I do
not know; but I am conscious of an irresistible desire to remind you of
my existence, especially you. How many times I have needed all three of
you; but only you have dwelt always in my mind’s eye. I need you--I need
you very much. I will not write about myself. I have nothing to tell
you. But I long for you to be happy. _Are_ you happy? That is all I wished
to say to you--Your brother,

“PR. L. MUISHKIN.”

On reading this short and disconnected note, Aglaya suddenly blushed all
over, and became very thoughtful.

It would be difficult to describe her thoughts at that moment. One of
them was, “Shall I show it to anyone?” But she was ashamed to show it.
So she ended by hiding it in her table drawer, with a very strange,
ironical smile upon her lips.

Next day, she took it out, and put it into a large book, as she usually
did with papers which she wanted to be able to find easily. She laughed
when, about a week later, she happened to notice the name of the book,
and saw that it was Don Quixote, but it would be difficult to say
exactly why.

I cannot say, either, whether she showed the letter to her sisters.

But when she had read it herself once more, it suddenly struck her
