Having come to this determination, he turned and went home, his walk
having lasted less than a quarter of an hour. At that moment he was
thoroughly unhappy.

Lebedeff had not returned, so towards evening Keller managed to
penetrate into the prince’s apartments. He was not drunk, but in a
confidential and talkative mood. He announced that he had come to tell
the story of his life to Muishkin, and had only remained at Pavlofsk for
that purpose. There was no means of turning him out; nothing short of an
earthquake would have removed him.

In the manner of one with long hours before him, he began his history;
but after a few incoherent words he jumped to the conclusion, which
was that “having ceased to believe in God Almighty, he had lost every
vestige of morality, and had gone so far as to commit a theft.” “Could
you imagine such a thing?” said he.

“Listen to me, Keller,” returned the prince. “If I were in your place, I
should not acknowledge that unless it were absolutely necessary for some
reason. But perhaps you are making yourself out to be worse than you
are, purposely?”

“I should tell it to no one but yourself, prince, and I only name it now
as a help to my soul’s evolution. When I die, that secret will die with
me! But, excellency, if you knew, if you only had the least idea, how
difficult it is to get money nowadays! Where to find it is the question.
Ask for a loan, the answer is always the same: ‘Give us gold, jewels, or
diamonds, and it will be quite easy.’ Exactly what one has not got! Can
you picture that to yourself? I got angry at last, and said, ‘I
suppose you would accept emeralds?’ ‘Certainly, we accept emeralds with
pleasure. Yes!’ ‘Well, that’s all right,’ said I. ‘Go to the devil, you
den of thieves!’ And with that I seized my hat, and walked out.”

“Had you any emeralds?” asked the prince.

“What? I have emeralds? Oh, prince! with what simplicity, with what
almost pastoral simplicity, you look upon life!”

Could not something be made of this man under good influences? asked the
prince of himself, for he began to feel a kind of pity for his visitor.
He thought little of the value of his own personal influence, not from
a sense of humility, but from his peculiar way of looking at things
in general. Imperceptibly the conversation grew more animated and more
interesting, so that neither of the two felt anxious to bring it to a
close. Keller confessed, with apparent sincerity, to having been guilty
of many acts of such a nature that it astonished the prince that he
could mention them, even to him. At every fresh avowal he professed the
deepest repentance, and described himself as being “bathed in tears”;
but this did not prevent him from putting on a boastful air at times,
and some of his stories were so absurdly comical that both he and the
prince laughed like madmen.

“One point in your favour is that you seem to have a child-like mind,
and extreme truthfulness,” said the prince at last. “Do you know that
that atones for much?”

“I am assuredly noble-minded, and chivalrous to a degree!” said Keller,
much softened. “But, do you know, this nobility of mind exists in a
dream, if one may put it so? It never appears in practice or deed. Now,
why is that? I can never understand.”

“Do not despair. I think we may say without fear of deceiving ourselves,
that you have now given a fairly exact account of your life. I, at
least, think it would be impossible to add much to what you have just
told me.”

“Impossible?” cried Keller, almost pityingly. “Oh prince, how little you
really seem to understand human nature!”

“Is there really much more to be added?” asked the prince, with mild
surprise. “Well, what is it you really want of me? Speak out; tell me
why you came to make your confession to me?”

“What did I want? Well, to begin with, it is good to meet a man like
you. It is a pleasure to talk over my faults with you. I know you for
one of the best of men... and then... then...”

He hesitated, and appeared so much embarrassed that the prince helped
him out.

“Then you wanted me to lend you money?”

The words were spoken in a grave tone, and even somewhat shyly.

Keller started, gave an astonished look at the speaker, and thumped the
table with his fist.

“Well, prince, that’s enough to knock me down! It astounds me! Here you
are, as simple and innocent as a knight of the golden age, and yet...
yet... you read a man’s soul like a psychologist! Now, do explain it to
me, prince, because I... I really do not understand!... Of course, my
aim was to borrow money all along, and you... you asked the question
as if there was nothing blameable in it--as if you thought it quite
natural.”

“Yes... from you it is quite natural.”

“And you are not offended?”

“Why should I be offended?”

“Well, just listen, prince. I remained here last evening, partly because
I have a great admiration for the French archbishop Bourdaloue. I
enjoyed a discussion over him till three o’clock in the morning, with
Lebedeff; and then... then--I swear by all I hold sacred that I am
telling you the truth--then I wished to develop my soul in this frank
and heartfelt confession to you. This was my thought as I was sobbing
myself to sleep at dawn. Just as I was losing consciousness, tears in
my soul, tears on my face (I remember how I lay there sobbing), an idea
from hell struck me. ‘Why not, after confessing, borrow money from him?’
You see, this confession was a kind of masterstroke; I intended to use
it as a means to your good grace and favour--and then--then I meant to
walk off with a hundred and fifty roubles. Now, do you not call that
base?”

“It is hardly an exact statement of the case,” said the prince in reply.
“You have confused your motives and ideas, as I need scarcely say too
often happens to myself. I can assure you, Keller, I reproach myself
bitterly for it sometimes. When you were talking just now I seemed to be
listening to something about myself. At times I have imagined that all
men were the same,” he continued earnestly, for he appeared to be much
interested in the conversation, “and that consoled me in a certain
degree, for a _double_ motive is a thing most difficult to fight against.
I have tried, and I know. God knows whence they arise, these ideas that
you speak of as base. I fear these double motives more than ever just
now, but I am not your judge, and in my opinion it is going too far to
give the name of baseness to it--what do you think? You were going
to employ your tears as a ruse in order to borrow money, but you also
say--in fact, you have sworn to the fact--that independently of this
your confession was made with an honourable motive. As for the money,
you want it for drink, do you not? After your confession, that is
weakness, of course; but, after all, how can anyone give up a bad habit
at a moment’s notice? It is impossible. What can we do? It is best, I
think, to leave the matter to your own conscience. How does it seem to
you?” As he concluded the prince looked curiously at Keller; evidently
this problem of double motives had often been considered by him before.

“Well, how anybody can call you an idiot after that, is more than I can
understand!” cried the boxer.

The prince reddened slightly.

“Bourdaloue, the archbishop, would not have spared a man like me,”
 Keller continued, “but you, you have judged me with humanity. To show
how grateful I am, and as a punishment, I will not accept a hundred and
fifty roubles. Give me twenty-five--that will be enough; it is all I
really need, for a fortnight at least. I will not ask you for more for
a fortnight. I should like to have given Agatha a present, but she does
not really deserve it. Oh, my dear prince, God bless you!”

