
“Come, come! This is intolerable! You had better stop, you little
mischief-making wretch!” cried Varia. Gania had grown very pale; he
trembled, but said nothing.

Hippolyte paused, and looked at him intently and with great
gratification. He then turned his gaze upon Varia, bowed, and went out,
without adding another word.

Gania might justly complain of the hardness with which fate treated him.
Varia dared not speak to him for a long while, as he strode past her,
backwards and forwards. At last he went and stood at the window, looking
out, with his back turned towards her. There was a fearful row going on
upstairs again.

“Are you off?” said Gania, suddenly, remarking that she had risen and
was about to leave the room. “Wait a moment--look at this.”

He approached the table and laid a small sheet of paper before her. It
looked like a little note.

“Good heavens!” cried Varia, raising her hands.

This was the note:

“GAVRILA ARDOLIONOVITCH,--persuaded of your kindness of heart, I have
determined to ask your advice on a matter of great importance to myself.
I should like to meet you tomorrow morning at seven o’clock by the green
bench in the park. It is not far from our house. Varvara Ardalionovna,
who must accompany you, knows the place well.

“A. E.”

“What on earth is one to make of a girl like that?” said Varia.

Gania, little as he felt inclined for swagger at this moment, could
not avoid showing his triumph, especially just after such humiliating
remarks as those of Hippolyte. A smile of self-satisfaction beamed on
his face, and Varia too was brimming over with delight.

“And this is the very day that they were to announce the engagement!
What will she do next?”

“What do you suppose she wants to talk about tomorrow?” asked Gania.

“Oh, _that’s_ all the same! The chief thing is that she wants to see you
after six months’ absence. Look here, Gania, this is a _serious_ business.
Don’t swagger again and lose the game--play carefully, but don’t funk,
do you understand? As if she could possibly avoid seeing what I have
been working for all this last six months! And just imagine, I was there
this morning and not a word of this! I was there, you know, on the sly.
The old lady did not know, or she would have kicked me out. I ran some
risk for you, you see. I did so want to find out, at all hazards.”

Here there was a frantic noise upstairs once more; several people seemed
to be rushing downstairs at once.

“Now, Gania,” cried Varia, frightened, “we can’t let him go out! We
can’t afford to have a breath of scandal about the town at this moment.
Run after him and beg his pardon--quick.”

But the father of the family was out in the road already. Colia was
carrying his bag for him; Nina Alexandrovna stood and cried on the
doorstep; she wanted to run after the general, but Ptitsin kept her
back.

“You will only excite him more,” he said. “He has nowhere else to go
to--he’ll be back here in half an hour. I’ve talked it all over with
Colia; let him play the fool a bit, it will do him good.”

“What are you up to? Where are you off to? You’ve nowhere to go to, you
know,” cried Gania, out of the window.

“Come back, father; the neighbours will hear!” cried Varia.

The general stopped, turned round, raised his hands and remarked: “My
curse be upon this house!”

“Which observation should always be made in as theatrical a tone as
possible,” muttered Gania, shutting the window with a bang.

The neighbours undoubtedly did hear. Varia rushed out of the room.

No sooner had his sister left him alone, than Gania took the note out of
his pocket, kissed it, and pirouetted around.

III.

As a general rule, old General Ivolgin’s paroxysms ended in smoke. He
had before this experienced fits of sudden fury, but not very often,
because he was really a man of peaceful and kindly disposition. He had
tried hundreds of times to overcome the dissolute habits which he had
contracted of late years. He would suddenly remember that he was “a
father,” would be reconciled with his wife, and shed genuine tears.
His feeling for Nina Alexandrovna amounted almost to adoration; she had
pardoned so much in silence, and loved him still in spite of the state
of degradation into which he had fallen. But the general’s struggles
with his own weakness never lasted very long. He was, in his way, an
impetuous man, and a quiet life of repentance in the bosom of his family
soon became insupportable to him. In the end he rebelled, and flew into
rages which he regretted, perhaps, even as he gave way to them, but
which were beyond his control. He picked quarrels with everyone,
began to hold forth eloquently, exacted unlimited respect, and at last
disappeared from the house, and sometimes did not return for a long
time. He had given up interfering in the affairs of his family for
two years now, and knew nothing about them but what he gathered from
hearsay.

But on this occasion there was something more serious than usual.
Everyone seemed to know something, but to be afraid to talk about it.

The general had turned up in the bosom of his family two or three days
before, but not, as usual, with the olive branch of peace in his hand,
not in the garb of penitence--in which he was usually clad on such
occasions--but, on the contrary, in an uncommonly bad temper. He had
arrived in a quarrelsome mood, pitching into everyone he came across,
and talking about all sorts and kinds of subjects in the most unexpected
manner, so that it was impossible to discover what it was that was
really putting him out. At moments he would be apparently quite bright
and happy; but as a rule he would sit moody and thoughtful. He would
abruptly commence to hold forth about the Epanchins, about Lebedeff, or
the prince, and equally abruptly would stop short and refuse to speak
another word, answering all further questions with a stupid smile,
unconscious that he was smiling, or that he had been asked a question.
The whole of the previous night he had spent tossing about and groaning,
and poor Nina Alexandrovna had been busy making cold compresses and warm
fomentations and so on, without being very clear how to apply them. He
had fallen asleep after a while, but not for long, and had awaked in
a state of violent hypochondria which had ended in his quarrel with
Hippolyte, and the solemn cursing of Ptitsin’s establishment generally.
It was also observed during those two or three days that he was in a
state of morbid self-esteem, and was specially touchy on all points of
honour. Colia insisted, in discussing the matter with his mother, that
all this was but the outcome of abstinence from drink, or perhaps of
pining after Lebedeff, with whom up to this time the general had been
upon terms of the greatest friendship; but with whom, for some reason
or other, he had quarrelled a few days since, parting from him in great
wrath. There had also been a scene with the prince. Colia had asked an
explanation of the latter, but had been forced to conclude that he was
not told the whole truth.

If Hippolyte and Nina Alexandrovna had, as Gania suspected, had some
special conversation about the general’s actions, it was strange that
the malicious youth, whom Gania had called a scandal-monger to his face,
had not allowed himself a similar satisfaction with Colia.

The fact is that probably Hippolyte was not quite so black as Gania
painted him; and it was hardly likely that he had informed Nina
Alexandrovna of certain events, of which we know, for the mere pleasure
of giving her pain. We must never forget that human motives are
