had returned, and Aglaya was particularly amiable to him, and asked a
great deal after Evgenie Pavlovitch. (Muishkin had not come in as yet.)

Suddenly Prince S. hinted something about “a new and approaching
change in the family.” He was led to this remark by a communication
inadvertently made to him by Lizabetha Prokofievna, that Adelaida’s
marriage must be postponed a little longer, in order that the two
weddings might come off together.

It is impossible to describe Aglaya’s irritation. She flared up, and
said some indignant words about “all these silly insinuations.”
 She added that “she had no intentions as yet of replacing anybody’s
mistress.”

These words painfully impressed the whole party; but especially her
parents. Lizabetha Prokofievna summoned a secret council of two, and
insisted upon the general’s demanding from the prince a full explanation
of his relations with Nastasia Philipovna. The general argued that it
was only a whim of Aglaya’s; and that, had not Prince S. unfortunately
made that remark, which had confused the child and made her blush, she
never would have said what she did; and that he was sure Aglaya knew
well that anything she might have heard of the prince and Nastasia
Philipovna was merely the fabrication of malicious tongues, and that
the woman was going to marry Rogojin. He insisted that the prince had
nothing whatever to do with Nastasia Philipovna, so far as any liaison
was concerned; and, if the truth were to be told about it, he added,
never had had.

Meanwhile nothing put the prince out, and he continued to be in the
seventh heaven of bliss. Of course he could not fail to observe some
impatience and ill-temper in Aglaya now and then; but he believed in
something else, and nothing could now shake his conviction. Besides,
Aglaya’s frowns never lasted long; they disappeared of themselves.

Perhaps he was too easy in his mind. So thought Hippolyte, at all
events, who met him in the park one day.

“Didn’t I tell you the truth now, when I said you were in love?” he
said, coming up to Muishkin of his own accord, and stopping him.

The prince gave him his hand and congratulated him upon “looking so
well.”

Hippolyte himself seemed to be hopeful about his state of health, as is
often the case with consumptives.

He had approached the prince with the intention of talking sarcastically
about his happy expression of face, but very soon forgot his intention
and began to talk about himself. He began complaining about everything,
disconnectedly and endlessly, as was his wont.

“You wouldn’t believe,” he concluded, “how irritating they all are
there. They are such wretchedly small, vain, egotistical, _commonplace_
people! Would you believe it, they invited me there under the express
condition that I should die quickly, and they are all as wild as
possible with me for not having died yet, and for being, on the
contrary, a good deal better! Isn’t it a comedy? I don’t mind betting
that you don’t believe me!”

The prince said nothing.

“I sometimes think of coming over to you again,” said Hippolyte,
carelessly. “So you _don’t_ think them capable of inviting a man on
the condition that he is to look sharp and die?”

“I certainly thought they invited you with quite other views.”

“Ho, ho! you are not nearly so simple as they try to make you out! This
is not the time for it, or I would tell you a thing or two about that
beauty, Gania, and his hopes. You are being undermined, pitilessly
undermined, and--and it is really melancholy to see you so calm about
it. But alas! it’s your nature--you can’t help it!”

“My word! what a thing to be melancholy about! Why, do you think I
should be any happier if I were to feel disturbed about the excavations
you tell me of?”

“It is better to be unhappy and know the worst, than to be happy in a
fool’s paradise! I suppose you don’t believe that you have a rival in
that quarter?”

“Your insinuations as to rivalry are rather cynical, Hippolyte. I’m
sorry to say I have no right to answer you! As for Gania, I put it to
you, _can_ any man have a happy mind after passing through what he has had
to suffer? I think that is the best way to look at it. He will
change yet, he has lots of time before him, and life is rich;
besides--besides...” the prince hesitated. “As to being undermined, I
don’t know what in the world you are driving at, Hippolyte. I think we
had better drop the subject!”

“Very well, we’ll drop it for a while. You can’t look at anything but
in your exalted, generous way. You must put out your finger and touch a
thing before you’ll believe it, eh? Ha! ha! ha! I suppose you despise me
dreadfully, prince, eh? What do you think?”

“Why? Because you have suffered more than we have?”

“No; because I am unworthy of my sufferings, if you like!”

“Whoever _can_ suffer is worthy to suffer, I should think. Aglaya Ivanovna
wished to see you, after she had read your confession, but--”

“She postponed the pleasure--I see--I quite understand!” said Hippolyte,
hurriedly, as though he wished to banish the subject. “I hear--they
tell me--that you read her all that nonsense aloud? Stupid bosh it
was--written in delirium. And I can’t understand how anyone can be so--I
won’t say _cruel_, because the word would be humiliating to myself, but
we’ll say childishly vain and revengeful, as to _reproach_ me with this
confession, and use it as a weapon against me. Don’t be afraid, I’m not
referring to yourself.”

“Oh, but I’m sorry you repudiate the confession, Hippolyte--it is
sincere; and, do you know, even the absurd parts of it--and these are
many” (here Hippolyte frowned savagely) “are, as it were, redeemed by
suffering--for it must have cost you something to admit what you there
say--great torture, perhaps, for all I know. Your motive must have
been a very noble one all through. Whatever may have appeared to the
contrary, I give you my word, I see this more plainly every day. I do
not judge you; I merely say this to have it off my mind, and I am only
sorry that I did not say it all _then_--”

Hippolyte flushed hotly. He had thought at first that the prince
was “humbugging” him; but on looking at his face he saw that he was
absolutely serious, and had no thought of any deception. Hippolyte
beamed with gratification.

“And yet I must die,” he said, and almost added: “a man like me!

“And imagine how that Gania annoys me! He has developed the idea--or
pretends to believe--that in all probability three or four others who
heard my confession will die before I do. There’s an idea for you--and
all this by way of _consoling_ me! Ha! ha! ha! In the first place they
haven’t died yet; and in the second, if they _did_ die--all of them--what
would be the satisfaction to me in that? He judges me by himself. But he
goes further, he actually pitches into me because, as he declares, ‘any
decent fellow’ would die quietly, and that ‘all this’ is mere egotism
on my part. He doesn’t see what refinement of egotism it is on his own
part--and at the same time, what ox-like coarseness! Have you ever read
of the death of one Stepan Gleboff, in the eighteenth century? I read of
it yesterday by chance.”

“Who was he?”

“He was impaled on a stake in the time of Peter.”

“I know, I know! He lay there fifteen hours in the hard frost, and died
with the most extraordinary fortitude--I know--what of him?”

“Only that God gives that sort of dying to some, and not to others.
Perhaps you think, though, that I could not die like Gleboff?”
