you know that a woman is capable of driving a man crazy almost, with
her cruelties and mockeries, and feels not one single pang of regret,
because she looks at him and says to herself, ‘There! I’ll torment this
man nearly into his grave, and then, oh! how I’ll compensate him for it
all with my love!’”

Rogojin listened to the end, and then burst out laughing:

“Why, prince, I declare you must have had a taste of this sort of thing
yourself--haven’t you? I have heard tell of something of the kind, you
know; is it true?”

“What? What can you have heard?” said the prince, stammering.

Rogojin continued to laugh loudly. He had listened to the prince’s
speech with curiosity and some satisfaction. The speaker’s impulsive
warmth had surprised and even comforted him.

“Why, I’ve not only heard of it; I see it for myself,” he said. “When
have you ever spoken like that before? It wasn’t like yourself, prince.
Why, if I hadn’t heard this report about you, I should never have come
all this way into the park--at midnight, too!”

“I don’t understand you in the least, Parfen.”

“Oh, _she_ told me all about it long ago, and tonight I saw for myself.
I saw you at the music, you know, and whom you were sitting with. She
swore to me yesterday, and again today, that you are madly in love with
Aglaya Ivanovna. But that’s all the same to me, prince, and it’s not my
affair at all; for if you have ceased to love _her_, _she_ has not ceased
to love _you_. You know, of course, that she wants to marry you to that
girl? She’s sworn to it! Ha, ha! She says to me, ‘Until then I won’t marry
you. When they go to church, we’ll go too--and not before.’ What on earth
does she mean by it? I don’t know, and I never did. Either she loves you
without limits or--yet, if she loves you, why does she wish to marry
you to another girl? She says, ‘I want to see him happy,’ which is to
say--she loves you.”

“I wrote, and I say to you once more, that she is not in her right
mind,” said the prince, who had listened with anguish to what Rogojin
said.

“Goodness knows--you may be wrong there! At all events, she named the
day this evening, as we left the gardens. ‘In three weeks,’ says she,
‘and perhaps sooner, we shall be married.’ She swore to it, took off her
cross and kissed it. So it all depends upon you now, prince, You see!
Ha, ha!”

“That’s all madness. What you say about me, Parfen, never can and never
will be. Tomorrow, I shall come and see you--”

“How can she be mad,” Rogojin interrupted, “when she is sane enough for
other people and only mad for you? How can she write letters to _her_, if
she’s mad? If she were insane they would observe it in her letters.”

“What letters?” said the prince, alarmed.

“She writes to _her_--and the girl reads the letters. Haven’t you
heard?--You are sure to hear; she’s sure to show you the letters
herself.”

“I won’t believe this!” cried the prince.

“Why, prince, you’ve only gone a few steps along this road, I perceive.
You are evidently a mere beginner. Wait a bit! Before long, you’ll have
your own detectives, you’ll watch day and night, and you’ll know every
little thing that goes on there--that is, if--”

“Drop that subject, Rogojin, and never mention it again. And listen:
as I have sat here, and talked, and listened, it has suddenly struck me
that tomorrow is my birthday. It must be about twelve o’clock, now; come
home with me--do, and we’ll see the day in! We’ll have some wine, and
you shall wish me--I don’t know what--but you, especially you, must
wish me a good wish, and I shall wish you full happiness in return.
Otherwise, hand me my cross back again. You didn’t return it to me next
day. Haven’t you got it on now?”

“Yes, I have,” said Rogojin.

“Come along, then. I don’t wish to meet my new year without you--my new
life, I should say, for a new life is beginning for me. Did you know,
Parfen, that a new life had begun for me?”

“I see for myself that it is so--and I shall tell _her_. But you are not
quite yourself, Lef Nicolaievitch.”

IV.

The prince observed with great surprise, as he approached his villa,
accompanied by Rogojin, that a large number of people were assembled on
his verandah, which was brilliantly lighted up. The company seemed merry
and were noisily laughing and talking--even quarrelling, to judge from
the sounds. At all events they were clearly enjoying themselves, and
the prince observed further on closer investigation--that all had been
drinking champagne. To judge from the lively condition of some of the
party, it was to be supposed that a considerable quantity of champagne
had been consumed already.

All the guests were known to the prince; but the curious part of the
matter was that they had all arrived on the same evening, as though with
one accord, although he had only himself recollected the fact that it
was his birthday a few moments since.

“You must have told somebody you were going to trot out the champagne,
and that’s why they are all come!” muttered Rogojin, as the two entered
the verandah. “We know all about that! You’ve only to whistle and they
come up in shoals!” he continued, almost angrily. He was doubtless
thinking of his own late experiences with his boon companions.

All surrounded the prince with exclamations of welcome, and, on hearing
that it was his birthday, with cries of congratulation and delight; many
of them were very noisy.

The presence of certain of those in the room surprised the prince
vastly, but the guest whose advent filled him with the greatest
wonder--almost amounting to alarm--was Evgenie Pavlovitch. The prince
could not believe his eyes when he beheld the latter, and could not help
thinking that something was wrong.

Lebedeff ran up promptly to explain the arrival of all these gentlemen.
He was himself somewhat intoxicated, but the prince gathered from his
long-winded periods that the party had assembled quite naturally, and
accidentally.

First of all Hippolyte had arrived, early in the evening, and feeling
decidedly better, had determined to await the prince on the verandah.
There Lebedeff had joined him, and his household had followed--that is,
his daughters and General Ivolgin. Burdovsky had brought Hippolyte, and
stayed on with him. Gania and Ptitsin had dropped in accidentally later
on; then came Keller, and he and Colia insisted on having champagne.
Evgenie Pavlovitch had only dropped in half an hour or so ago. Lebedeff
had served the champagne readily.

“My own though, prince, my own, mind,” he said, “and there’ll be some
supper later on; my daughter is getting it ready now. Come and sit down,
prince, we are all waiting for you, we want you with us. Fancy what we
have been discussing! You know the question, ‘to be or not to be,’--out
of Hamlet! A contemporary theme! Quite up-to-date! Mr. Hippolyte has
been eloquent to a degree. He won’t go to bed, but he has only drunk a
little champagne, and that can’t do him any harm. Come along, prince,
and settle the question. Everyone is waiting for you, sighing for the
light of your luminous intelligence...”

The prince noticed the sweet, welcoming look on Vera Lebedeff’s face, as
she made her way towards him through the crowd. He held out his hand to
her. She took it, blushing with delight, and wished him “a happy life
from that day forward.” Then she ran off to the kitchen, where her
presence was necessary to help in the preparations for supper. Before
the prince’s arrival she had spent some time on the terrace, listening
eagerly to the conversation, though the visitors, mostly under the
