slightest reason for the change.

Another guest was an elderly, important-looking gentleman, a distant
relative of Lizabetha Prokofievna’s. This gentleman was rich, held a
good position, was a great talker, and had the reputation of being “one
of the dissatisfied,” though not belonging to the dangerous sections
of that class. He had the manners, to some extent, of the English
aristocracy, and some of their tastes (especially in the matter of
under-done roast beef, harness, men-servants, etc.). He was a great
friend of the dignitary’s, and Lizabetha Prokofievna, for some reason or
other, had got hold of the idea that this worthy intended at no distant
date to offer the advantages of his hand and heart to Alexandra.

Besides the elevated and more solid individuals enumerated, there were
present a few younger though not less elegant guests. Besides Prince S.
and Evgenie Pavlovitch, we must name the eminent and fascinating Prince
N.--once the vanquisher of female hearts all over Europe. This gentleman
was no longer in the first bloom of youth--he was forty-five, but still
very handsome. He was well off, and lived, as a rule, abroad, and was
noted as a good teller of stories. Then came a few guests belonging to
a lower stratum of society--people who, like the Epanchins themselves,
moved only occasionally in this exalted sphere. The Epanchins liked to
draft among their more elevated guests a few picked representatives of
this lower stratum, and Lizabetha Prokofievna received much praise for
this practice, which proved, her friends said, that she was a woman of
tact. The Epanchins prided themselves upon the good opinion people held
of them.

One of the representatives of the middle-class present today was a
colonel of engineers, a very serious man and a great friend of Prince
S., who had introduced him to the Epanchins. He was extremely silent in
society, and displayed on the forefinger of his right hand a large ring,
probably bestowed upon him for services of some sort. There was also
a poet, German by name, but a Russian poet; very presentable, and even
handsome--the sort of man one could bring into society with impunity.
This gentleman belonged to a German family of decidedly bourgeois
origin, but he had a knack of acquiring the patronage of “big-wigs,” and
of retaining their favour. He had translated some great German poem into
Russian verse, and claimed to have been a friend of a famous Russian
poet, since dead. (It is strange how great a multitude of literary
people there are who have had the advantages of friendship with some
great man of their own profession who is, unfortunately, dead.) The
dignitary’s wife had introduced this worthy to the Epanchins. This
lady posed as the patroness of literary people, and she certainly
had succeeded in obtaining pensions for a few of them, thanks to her
influence with those in authority on such matters. She was a lady of
weight in her own way. Her age was about forty-five, so that she was a
very young wife for such an elderly husband as the dignitary. She had
been a beauty in her day and still loved, as many ladies of forty-five
do love, to dress a little too smartly. Her intellect was nothing to
boast of, and her literary knowledge very doubtful. Literary patronage
was, however, with her as much a mania as was the love of gorgeous
clothes. Many books and translations were dedicated to her by her
proteges, and a few of these talented individuals had published some of
their own letters to her, upon very weighty subjects.

This, then, was the society that the prince accepted at once as true
coin, as pure gold without alloy.

It so happened, however, that on this particular evening all these good
people were in excellent humour and highly pleased with themselves.
Every one of them felt that they were doing the Epanchins the greatest
possible honour by their presence. But alas! the prince never suspected
any such subtleties! For instance, he had no suspicion of the fact that
the Epanchins, having in their mind so important a step as the marriage
of their daughter, would never think of presuming to take it without
having previously “shown off” the proposed husband to the dignitary--the
recognized patron of the family. The latter, too, though he would
probably have received news of a great disaster to the Epanchin family
with perfect composure, would nevertheless have considered it a personal
offence if they had dared to marry their daughter without his advice, or
we might almost say, his leave.

The amiable and undoubtedly witty Prince N. could not but feel that
he was as a sun, risen for one night only to shine upon the Epanchin
drawing-room. He accounted them immeasurably his inferiors, and it was
this feeling which caused his special amiability and delightful ease and
grace towards them. He knew very well that he must tell some story this
evening for the edification of the company, and led up to it with the
inspiration of anticipatory triumph.

The prince, when he heard the story afterwards, felt that he had never
yet come across so wonderful a humorist, or such remarkable brilliancy
as was shown by this man; and yet if he had only known it, this story
was the oldest, stalest, and most worn-out yarn, and every drawing-room
in town was sick to death of it. It was only in the innocent Epanchin
household that it passed for a new and brilliant tale--as a sudden and
striking reminiscence of a splendid and talented man.

Even the German poet, though as amiable as possible, felt that he was
doing the house the greatest of honours by his presence in it.

But the prince only looked at the bright side; he did not turn the coat
and see the shabby lining.

Aglaya had not foreseen that particular calamity. She herself looked
wonderfully beautiful this evening. All three sisters were dressed very
tastefully, and their hair was done with special care.

Aglaya sat next to Evgenie Pavlovitch, and laughed and talked to him
with an unusual display of friendliness. Evgenie himself behaved rather
more sedately than usual, probably out of respect to the dignitary.
Evgenie had been known in society for a long while. He had appeared at
the Epanchins’ today with crape on his hat, and Princess Bielokonski had
commended this action on his part. Not every society man would have worn
crape for “such an uncle.” Lizabetha Prokofievna had liked it also, but
was too preoccupied to take much notice. The prince remarked that Aglaya
looked attentively at him two or three times, and seemed to be satisfied
with his behaviour.

Little by little he became very happy indeed. All his late anxieties and
apprehensions (after his conversation with Lebedeff) now appeared like
so many bad dreams--impossible, and even laughable.

He did not speak much, only answering such questions as were put to him,
and gradually settled down into unbroken silence, listening to what went
on, and steeped in perfect satisfaction and contentment.

Little by little a sort of inspiration, however, began to stir within
him, ready to spring into life at the right moment. When he did begin
to speak, it was accidentally, in response to a question, and apparently
without any special object.

VII.

While he feasted his eyes upon Aglaya, as she talked merrily with
Evgenie and Prince N., suddenly the old anglomaniac, who was talking to
the dignitary in another corner of the room, apparently telling him a
story about something or other--suddenly this gentleman pronounced
the name of “Nicolai Andreevitch Pavlicheff” aloud. The prince quickly
turned towards him, and listened.

The conversation had been on the subject of land, and the present
disorders, and there must have been something amusing said, for the old
man had begun to laugh at his companion’s heated expressions.

The latter was describing in eloquent words how, in consequence of
recent legislation, he was obliged to sell a beautiful estate in the N.
province, not because he wanted ready money--in fact, he was obliged
to sell it at half its value. “To avoid another lawsuit about the
Pavlicheff estate, I ran away,” he said. “With a few more inheritances
of that kind I should soon be ruined!”

At this point General Epanchin, noticing how interested Muishkin had
become in the conversation, said to him, in a low tone:

“That gentleman--Ivan Petrovitch--is a relation of your late friend, Mr.
Pavlicheff. You wanted to find some of his relations, did you not?”

The general, who had been talking to his chief up to this moment, had
