“Just a couple of words, prince, if you’ll excuse me. Don’t blab over
_there_ about what you may see here, or in this house as to all that about
Aglaya and me, you know. Things are not altogether pleasant in this
establishment--devil take it all! You’ll see. At all events keep your
tongue to yourself for _today_.”

“I assure you I ‘blabbed’ a great deal less than you seem to suppose,”
 said the prince, with some annoyance. Clearly the relations between
Gania and himself were by no means improving.

“Oh well; I caught it quite hot enough today, thanks to you. However,
I forgive you.”

“I think you might fairly remember that I was not in any way bound, I
had no reason to be silent about that portrait. You never asked me not
to mention it.”

“Pfu! what a wretched room this is--dark, and the window looking
into the yard. Your coming to our house is, in no respect, opportune.
However, it’s not _my_ affair. I don’t keep the lodgings.”

Ptitsin here looked in and beckoned to Gania, who hastily left the room,
in spite of the fact that he had evidently wished to say something more
and had only made the remark about the room to gain time. The prince had
hardly had time to wash and tidy himself a little when the door opened
once more, and another figure appeared.

This was a gentleman of about thirty, tall, broad-shouldered, and
red-haired; his face was red, too, and he possessed a pair of thick
lips, a wide nose, small eyes, rather bloodshot, and with an ironical
expression in them; as though he were perpetually winking at someone.
His whole appearance gave one the idea of impudence; his dress was
shabby.

He opened the door just enough to let his head in. His head remained so
placed for a few seconds while he quietly scrutinized the room; the door
then opened enough to admit his body; but still he did not enter. He
stood on the threshold and examined the prince carefully. At last he
gave the door a final shove, entered, approached the prince, took his
hand and seated himself and the owner of the room on two chairs side by
side.

“Ferdishenko,” he said, gazing intently and inquiringly into the
prince’s eyes.

“Very well, what next?” said the latter, almost laughing in his face.

“A lodger here,” continued the other, staring as before.

“Do you wish to make acquaintance?” asked the prince.

“Ah!” said the visitor, passing his fingers through his hair and
sighing. He then looked over to the other side of the room and around
it. “Got any money?” he asked, suddenly.

“Not much.”

“How much?”

“Twenty-five roubles.”

“Let’s see it.”

The prince took his banknote out and showed it to Ferdishenko. The
latter unfolded it and looked at it; then he turned it round and
examined the other side; then he held it up to the light.

“How strange that it should have browned so,” he said, reflectively.
“These twenty-five rouble notes brown in a most extraordinary way, while
other notes often grow paler. Take it.”

The prince took his note. Ferdishenko rose.

“I came here to warn you,” he said. “In the first place, don’t lend me
any money, for I shall certainly ask you to.”

“Very well.”

“Shall you pay here?”

“Yes, I intend to.”

“Oh! I _don’t_ intend to. Thanks. I live here, next door to you; you
noticed a room, did you? Don’t come to me very often; I shall see you
here quite often enough. Have you seen the general?”

“No.”

“Nor heard him?”

“No; of course not.”

“Well, you’ll both hear and see him soon; he even tries to borrow money
from me. _Avis au lecteur._ Good-bye; do you think a man can possibly
live with a name like Ferdishenko?”

“Why not?”

“Good-bye.”

And so he departed. The prince found out afterwards that this gentleman
made it his business to amaze people with his originality and wit, but
that it did not as a rule “come off.” He even produced a bad impression
on some people, which grieved him sorely; but he did not change his ways
for all that.

As he went out of the prince’s room, he collided with yet another
visitor coming in. Ferdishenko took the opportunity of making several
warning gestures to the prince from behind the new arrival’s back, and
left the room in conscious pride.

This next arrival was a tall red-faced man of about fifty-five, with
greyish hair and whiskers, and large eyes which stood out of their
sockets. His appearance would have been distinguished had it not been
that he gave the idea of being rather dirty. He was dressed in an old
coat, and he smelled of vodka when he came near. His walk was effective,
and he clearly did his best to appear dignified, and to impress people
by his manner.

This gentleman now approached the prince slowly, and with a most
courteous smile; silently took his hand and held it in his own, as he
examined the prince’s features as though searching for familiar traits
therein.

“‘Tis he, ‘tis he!” he said at last, quietly, but with much solemnity.
“As though he were alive once more. I heard the familiar name--the
dear familiar name--and, oh! how it reminded me of the irrevocable
past--Prince Muishkin, I believe?”

“Exactly so.”

“General Ivolgin--retired and unfortunate. May I ask your Christian and
generic names?”

“Lef Nicolaievitch.”

“So, so--the son of my old, I may say my childhood’s friend, Nicolai
Petrovitch.”

“My father’s name was Nicolai Lvovitch.”

“Lvovitch,” repeated the general without the slightest haste, and with
perfect confidence, just as though he had not committed himself the
least in the world, but merely made a little slip of the tongue. He sat
down, and taking the prince’s hand, drew him to a seat next to himself.

“I carried you in my arms as a baby,” he observed.

“Really?” asked the prince. “Why, it’s twenty years since my father
died.”
