merely growled occasionally like a bear, and glared contemptuously
upon the “beggar,” who, being somewhat of a man of the world, and a
diplomatist, tried to insinuate himself into the bear’s good graces.
He was a much smaller man than the athlete, and doubtless was conscious
that he must tread warily. Gently and without argument he alluded to
the advantages of the English style in boxing, and showed himself a
firm believer in Western institutions. The athlete’s lips curled
disdainfully, and without honouring his adversary with a formal denial,
he exhibited, as if by accident, that peculiarly Russian object--an
enormous fist, clenched, muscular, and covered with red hairs! The sight
of this pre-eminently national attribute was enough to convince anybody,
without words, that it was a serious matter for those who should happen
to come into contact with it.

None of the band were very drunk, for the leader had kept his intended
visit to Nastasia in view all day, and had done his best to prevent
his followers from drinking too much. He was sober himself, but the
excitement of this chaotic day--the strangest day of his life--had
affected him so that he was in a dazed, wild condition, which almost
resembled drunkenness.

He had kept but one idea before him all day, and for that he had worked
in an agony of anxiety and a fever of suspense. His lieutenants had
worked so hard from five o’clock until eleven, that they actually had
collected a hundred thousand roubles for him, but at such terrific
expense, that the rate of interest was only mentioned among them in
whispers and with bated breath.

As before, Rogojin walked in advance of his troop, who followed him with
mingled self-assertion and timidity. They were specially frightened of
Nastasia Philipovna herself, for some reason.

Many of them expected to be thrown downstairs at once, without further
ceremony, the elegant and irresistible Zaleshoff among them. But
the party led by the athlete, without openly showing their hostile
intentions, silently nursed contempt and even hatred for Nastasia
Philipovna, and marched into her house as they would have marched into
an enemy’s fortress. Arrived there, the luxury of the rooms seemed to
inspire them with a kind of respect, not unmixed with alarm. So many
things were entirely new to their experience--the choice furniture, the
pictures, the great statue of Venus. They followed their chief into the
salon, however, with a kind of impudent curiosity. There, the sight of
General Epanchin among the guests, caused many of them to beat a hasty
retreat into the adjoining room, the “boxer” and “beggar” being among
the first to go. A few only, of whom Lebedeff made one, stood their
ground; he had contrived to walk side by side with Rogojin, for he quite
understood the importance of a man who had a fortune of a million odd
roubles, and who at this moment carried a hundred thousand in his hand.
It may be added that the whole company, not excepting Lebedeff, had the
vaguest idea of the extent of their powers, and of how far they could
safely go. At some moments Lebedeff was sure that right was on their
side; at others he tried uneasily to remember various cheering and
reassuring articles of the Civil Code.

Rogojin, when he stepped into the room, and his eyes fell upon Nastasia,
stopped short, grew white as a sheet, and stood staring; it was clear
that his heart was beating painfully. So he stood, gazing intently, but
timidly, for a few seconds. Suddenly, as though bereft of his senses, he
moved forward, staggering helplessly, towards the table. On his way he
collided against Ptitsin’s chair, and put his dirty foot on the lace
skirt of the silent lady’s dress; but he neither apologized for this,
nor even noticed it.

On reaching the table, he placed upon it a strange-looking object, which
he had carried with him into the drawing-room. This was a paper packet,
some six or seven inches thick, and eight or nine in length, wrapped in
an old newspaper, and tied round three or four times with string.

Having placed this before her, he stood with drooped arms and head, as
though awaiting his sentence.

His costume was the same as it had been in the morning, except for a new
silk handkerchief round his neck, bright green and red, fastened with a
huge diamond pin, and an enormous diamond ring on his dirty forefinger.

Lebedeff stood two or three paces behind his chief; and the rest of the
band waited about near the door.

The two maid-servants were both peeping in, frightened and amazed at
this unusual and disorderly scene.

“What is that?” asked Nastasia Philipovna, gazing intently at Rogojin,
and indicating the paper packet.

“A hundred thousand,” replied the latter, almost in a whisper.

“Oh! so he kept his word--there’s a man for you! Well, sit down,
please--take that chair. I shall have something to say to you presently.
Who are all these with you? The same party? Let them come in and sit
down. There’s room on that sofa, there are some chairs and there’s
another sofa! Well, why don’t they sit down?”

Sure enough, some of the brave fellows entirely lost their heads at this
point, and retreated into the next room. Others, however, took the hint
and sat down, as far as they could from the table, however; feeling
braver in proportion to their distance from Nastasia.

Rogojin took the chair offered him, but he did not sit long; he soon
stood up again, and did not reseat himself. Little by little he began
to look around him and discern the other guests. Seeing Gania, he smiled
venomously and muttered to himself, “Look at that!”

He gazed at Totski and the general with no apparent confusion, and with
very little curiosity. But when he observed that the prince was seated
beside Nastasia Philipovna, he could not take his eyes off him for
a long while, and was clearly amazed. He could not account for the
prince’s presence there. It was not in the least surprising that Rogojin
should be, at this time, in a more or less delirious condition; for not
to speak of the excitements of the day, he had spent the night before in
the train, and had not slept more than a wink for forty-eight hours.

“This, gentlemen, is a hundred thousand roubles,” said Nastasia
Philipovna, addressing the company in general, “here, in this dirty
parcel. This afternoon Rogojin yelled, like a madman, that he would
bring me a hundred thousand in the evening, and I have been waiting for
him all the while. He was bargaining for me, you know; first he offered
me eighteen thousand; then he rose to forty, and then to a hundred
thousand. And he has kept his word, see! My goodness, how white he is!
All this happened this afternoon, at Gania’s. I had gone to pay his
mother a visit--my future family, you know! And his sister said to my
very face, surely somebody will turn this shameless creature out. After
which she spat in her brother Gania’s face--a girl of character, that!”

“Nastasia Philipovna!” began the general, reproachfully. He was
beginning to put his own interpretation on the affair.

“Well, what, general? Not quite good form, eh? Oh, nonsense! Here have
I been sitting in my box at the French theatre for the last five years
like a statue of inaccessible virtue, and kept out of the way of all
admirers, like a silly little idiot! Now, there’s this man, who comes
and pays down his hundred thousand on the table, before you all, in
spite of my five years of innocence and proud virtue, and I dare be
sworn he has his sledge outside waiting to carry me off. He values me
at a hundred thousand! I see you are still angry with me, Gania!
Why, surely you never really wished to take _me_ into your family? _me_,
Rogojin’s mistress! What did the prince say just now?”

“I never said you were Rogojin’s mistress--you are _not!_” said the
prince, in trembling accents.

“Nastasia Philipovna, dear soul!” cried the actress, impatiently, “do
be calm, dear! If it annoys you so--all this--do go away and rest! Of
course you would never go with this wretched fellow, in spite of his
hundred thousand roubles! Take his money and kick him out of the house;
that’s the way to treat him and the likes of him! Upon my word, if it
were my business, I’d soon clear them all out!”

The actress was a kind-hearted woman, and highly impressionable. She was
very angry now.

