understand what is being said to him. It was strange--one moment he
seemed to be so observant, the next so absent; his behaviour struck
all the family as most remarkable. At length he rose from his seat, and
begged to be shown Nastasia’s rooms. The ladies reported afterwards how
he had examined everything in the apartments. He observed an open book
on the table, Madam Bovary, and requested the leave of the lady of the
house to take it with him. He had turned down the leaf at the open page,
and pocketed it before they could explain that it was a library book. He
had then seated himself by the open window, and seeing a card-table, he
asked who played cards.

He was informed that Nastasia used to play with Rogojin every evening,
either at “preference” or “little fool,” or “whist”; that this had been
their practice since her last return from Pavlofsk; that she had taken
to this amusement because she did not like to see Rogojin sitting silent
and dull for whole evenings at a time; that the day after Nastasia had
made a remark to this effect, Rogojin had whipped a pack of cards out
of his pocket. Nastasia had laughed, but soon they began playing. The
prince asked where were the cards, but was told that Rogojin used to
bring a new pack every day, and always carried it away in his pocket.

The good ladies recommended the prince to try knocking at Rogojin’s once
more--not at once, but in the evening. Meanwhile, the mother would go to
Pavlofsk to inquire at Dana Alexeyevna’s whether anything had been heard
of Nastasia there. The prince was to come back at ten o’clock and meet
her, to hear her news and arrange plans for the morrow.

In spite of the kindly-meant consolations of his new friends, the prince
walked to his hotel in inexpressible anguish of spirit, through the hot,
dusty streets, aimlessly staring at the faces of those who passed him.
Arrived at his destination, he determined to rest awhile in his room
before he started for Rogojin’s once more. He sat down, rested his
elbows on the table and his head on his hands, and fell to thinking.

Heaven knows how long and upon what subjects he thought. He thought
of many things--of Vera Lebedeff, and of her father; of Hippolyte; of
Rogojin himself, first at the funeral, then as he had met him in the
park, then, suddenly, as they had met in this very passage, outside,
when Rogojin had watched in the darkness and awaited him with uplifted
knife. The prince remembered his enemy’s eyes as they had glared at him
in the darkness. He shuddered, as a sudden idea struck him.

This idea was, that if Rogojin were in Petersburg, though he might hide
for a time, yet he was quite sure to come to him--the prince--before
long, with either good or evil intentions, but probably with the same
intention as on that other occasion. At all events, if Rogojin were to
come at all he would be sure to seek the prince here--he had no other
town address--perhaps in this same corridor; he might well seek him here
if he needed him. And perhaps he did need him. This idea seemed quite
natural to the prince, though he could not have explained why he should
so suddenly have become necessary to Rogojin. Rogojin would not come if
all were well with him, that was part of the thought; he would come if
all were not well; and certainly, undoubtedly, all would not be well
with him. The prince could not bear this new idea; he took his hat and
rushed out towards the street. It was almost dark in the passage.

“What if he were to come out of that corner as I go by and--and stop
me?” thought the prince, as he approached the familiar spot. But no one
came out.

He passed under the gateway and into the street. The crowds of people
walking about--as is always the case at sunset in Petersburg, during the
summer--surprised him, but he walked on in the direction of Rogojin’s
house.

About fifty yards from the hotel, at the first cross-road, as he passed
through the crowd of foot-passengers sauntering along, someone touched
his shoulder, and said in a whisper into his ear:

“Lef Nicolaievitch, my friend, come along with me.” It was Rogojin.

The prince immediately began to tell him, eagerly and joyfully, how he
had but the moment before expected to see him in the dark passage of the
hotel.

“I was there,” said Rogojin, unexpectedly. “Come along.” The prince was
surprised at this answer; but his astonishment increased a couple of
minutes afterwards, when he began to consider it. Having thought it
over, he glanced at Rogojin in alarm. The latter was striding along a
yard or so ahead, looking straight in front of him, and mechanically
making way for anyone he met.

“Why did you not ask for me at my room if you were in the hotel?” asked
the prince, suddenly.

Rogojin stopped and looked at him; then reflected, and replied as though
he had not heard the question:

“Look here, Lef Nicolaievitch, you go straight on to the house; I shall
walk on the other side. See that we keep together.”

So saying, Rogojin crossed the road.

Arrived on the opposite pavement, he looked back to see whether the
prince were moving, waved his hand in the direction of the Gorohovaya,
and strode on, looking across every moment to see whether Muishkin
understood his instructions. The prince supposed that Rogojin desired to
look out for someone whom he was afraid to miss; but if so, why had he
not told _him_ whom to look out for? So the two proceeded for half a mile
or so. Suddenly the prince began to tremble from some unknown cause. He
could not bear it, and signalled to Rogojin across the road.

The latter came at once.

“Is Nastasia Philipovna at your house?”

“Yes.”

“And was it you looked out of the window under the blind this morning?”

“Yes.”

“Then why did--”

But the prince could not finish his question; he did not know what to
say. Besides this, his heart was beating so that he found it difficult
to speak at all. Rogojin was silent also and looked at him as before,
with an expression of deep thoughtfulness.

“Well, I’m going,” he said, at last, preparing to recross the road. “You
go along here as before; we will keep to different sides of the road;
it’s better so, you’ll see.”

When they reached the Gorohovaya, and came near the house, the prince’s
legs were trembling so that he could hardly walk. It was about ten
o’clock. The old lady’s windows were open, as before; Rogojin’s were
all shut, and in the darkness the white blinds showed whiter than ever.
Rogojin and the prince each approached the house on his respective side
of the road; Rogojin, who was on the near side, beckoned the prince
across. He went over to the doorway.

“Even the porter does not know that I have come home now. I told him,
and told them at my mother’s too, that I was off to Pavlofsk,” said
Rogojin, with a cunning and almost satisfied smile. “We’ll go in quietly
and nobody will hear us.”

He had the key in his hand. Mounting the staircase he turned and
signalled to the prince to go more softly; he opened the door very
quietly, let the prince in, followed him, locked the door behind him,
and put the key in his pocket.

“Come along,” he whispered.

He had spoken in a whisper all the way. In spite of his apparent outward
composure, he was evidently in a state of great mental agitation.
Arrived in a large salon, next to the study, he went to the window and
cautiously beckoned the prince up to him.

“When you rang the bell this morning I thought it must be you. I went to
the door on tip-toe and heard you talking to the servant opposite. I had
