politely. “I did not even know that you were to be married.”

“You heard me talking about it, the general and me. You heard me say
that everything was to be settled today at Nastasia Philipovna’s, and
you went and blurted it out here. You lie if you deny it. Who else
could have told them? Devil take it, sir, who could have told them except
yourself? Didn’t the old woman as good as hint as much to me?”

“If she hinted to you who told her you must know best, of course; but I
never said a word about it.”

“Did you give my note? Is there an answer?” interrupted Gania,
impatiently.

But at this moment Aglaya came back, and the prince had no time to
reply.

“There, prince,” said she, “there’s my album. Now choose a page and
write me something, will you? There’s a pen, a new one; do you mind a
steel one? I have heard that you caligraphists don’t like steel pens.”

Conversing with the prince, Aglaya did not even seem to notice that
Gania was in the room. But while the prince was getting his pen ready,
finding a page, and making his preparations to write, Gania came up to
the fireplace where Aglaya was standing, to the right of the prince, and
in trembling, broken accents said, almost in her ear:

“One word, just one word from you, and I’m saved.”

The prince turned sharply round and looked at both of them. Gania’s
face was full of real despair; he seemed to have said the words almost
unconsciously and on the impulse of the moment.

Aglaya gazed at him for some seconds with precisely the same composure
and calm astonishment as she had shown a little while before, when the
prince handed her the note, and it appeared that this calm surprise and
seemingly absolute incomprehension of what was said to her, were more
terribly overwhelming to Gania than even the most plainly expressed
disdain would have been.

“What shall I write?” asked the prince.

“I’ll dictate to you,” said Aglaya, coming up to the table. “Now then,
are you ready? Write, ‘I never condescend to bargain!’ Now put your name
and the date. Let me see it.”

The prince handed her the album.

“Capital! How beautifully you have written it! Thanks so much. _Au
revoir_, prince. Wait a minute,” she added, “I want to give you
something for a keepsake. Come with me this way, will you?”

The prince followed her. Arrived at the dining-room, she stopped.

“Read this,” she said, handing him Gania’s note.

The prince took it from her hand, but gazed at her in bewilderment.

“Oh! I _know_ you haven’t read it, and that you could never be that
man’s accomplice. Read it, I wish you to read it.”

The letter had evidently been written in a hurry:

“My fate is to be decided today” (it ran), “you know how. This day I
must give my word irrevocably. I have no right to ask your help, and I
dare not allow myself to indulge in any hopes; but once you said just
one word, and that word lighted up the night of my life, and became the
beacon of my days. Say one more such word, and save me from utter ruin.
Only tell me, ‘break off the whole thing!’ and I will do so this very
day. Oh! what can it cost you to say just this one word? In doing so you
will but be giving me a sign of your sympathy for me, and of your pity;
only this, only this; nothing more, _nothing_. I dare not indulge in any
hope, because I am unworthy of it. But if you say but this word, I will
take up my cross again with joy, and return once more to my battle with
poverty. I shall meet the storm and be glad of it; I shall rise up with
renewed strength.

“Send me back then this one word of sympathy, only sympathy, I swear
to you; and oh! do not be angry with the audacity of despair, with the
drowning man who has dared to make this last effort to save himself from
perishing beneath the waters.

“G.L.”

“This man assures me,” said Aglaya, scornfully, when the prince had
finished reading the letter, “that the words ‘break off everything’
do not commit me to anything whatever; and himself gives me a written
guarantee to that effect, in this letter. Observe how ingenuously he
underlines certain words, and how crudely he glosses over his hidden
thoughts. He must know that if he ‘broke off everything,’ _first_, by
himself, and without telling me a word about it or having the slightest
hope on my account, that in that case I should perhaps be able to change
my opinion of him, and even accept his--friendship. He must know that,
but his soul is such a wretched thing. He knows it and cannot make
up his mind; he knows it and yet asks for guarantees. He cannot bring
himself to _trust_, he wants me to give him hopes of myself before he lets
go of his hundred thousand roubles. As to the ‘former word’ which he
declares ‘lighted up the night of his life,’ he is simply an impudent
liar; I merely pitied him once. But he is audacious and shameless. He
immediately began to hope, at that very moment. I saw it. He has tried
to catch me ever since; he is still fishing for me. Well, enough of
this. Take the letter and give it back to him, as soon as you have left
our house; not before, of course.”

“And what shall I tell him by way of answer?”

“Nothing--of course! That’s the best answer. Is it the case that you are
going to live in his house?”

“Yes, your father kindly recommended me to him.”

“Then look out for him, I warn you! He won’t forgive you easily, for
taking back the letter.”

Aglaya pressed the prince’s hand and left the room. Her face was serious
and frowning; she did not even smile as she nodded good-bye to him at
the door.

“I’ll just get my parcel and we’ll go,” said the prince to Gania, as he
re-entered the drawing-room. Gania stamped his foot with impatience. His
face looked dark and gloomy with rage.

At last they left the house behind them, the prince carrying his bundle.

“The answer--quick--the answer!” said Gania, the instant they were
outside. “What did she say? Did you give the letter?” The prince
silently held out the note. Gania was struck motionless with amazement.

“How, what? my letter?” he cried. “He never delivered it! I might have
guessed it, oh! curse him! Of course she did not understand what I
meant, naturally! Why--why--_why_ didn’t you give her the note, you--”

“Excuse me; I was able to deliver it almost immediately after receiving
your commission, and I gave it, too, just as you asked me to. It has
come into my hands now because Aglaya Ivanovna has just returned it to
me.”

“How? When?”

“As soon as I finished writing in her album for her, and when she asked
me to come out of the room with her (you heard?), we went into the
dining-room, and she gave me your letter to read, and then told me to
return it.”

“To _read?_” cried Gania, almost at the top of his voice; “to _read_,
and you read it?”

And again he stood like a log in the middle of the pavement; so amazed
that his mouth remained open after the last word had left it.

