hands, and so remained for ten minutes. Suddenly he put his hand in his
coat-pocket and hurriedly produced three letters.

But the door opened again, and out came Colia.

The prince actually felt glad that he had been interrupted,--and might
return the letters to his pocket. He was glad of the respite.

“Well,” said Colia, plunging in medias res, as he always did, “here’s
a go! What do you think of Hippolyte now? Don’t respect him any longer,
eh?”

“Why not? But look here, Colia, I’m tired; besides, the subject is too
melancholy to begin upon again. How is he, though?”

“Asleep--he’ll sleep for a couple of hours yet. I quite
understand--you haven’t slept--you walked about the park, I know.
Agitation--excitement--all that sort of thing--quite natural, too!”

“How do you know I walked in the park and didn’t sleep at home?”

“Vera just told me. She tried to persuade me not to come, but I couldn’t
help myself, just for one minute. I have been having my turn at the
bedside for the last two hours; Kostia Lebedeff is there now. Burdovsky
has gone. Now, lie down, prince, make yourself comfortable, and sleep
well! I’m awfully impressed, you know.”

“Naturally, all this--”

“No, no, I mean with the ‘explanation,’ especially that part of it where
he talks about Providence and a future life. There is a gigantic thought
there.”

The prince gazed affectionately at Colia, who, of course, had come in
solely for the purpose of talking about this “gigantic thought.”

“But it is not any one particular thought, only; it is the general
circumstances of the case. If Voltaire had written this now, or
Rousseau, I should have just read it and thought it remarkable, but
should not have been so _impressed_ by it. But a man who knows for
certain that he has but ten minutes to live and can talk like
that--why--it’s--it’s _pride_, that is! It is really a most extraordinary,
exalted assertion of personal dignity, it’s--it’s _defiant!_ What a
_gigantic_ strength of will, eh? And to accuse a fellow like that of not
putting in the cap on purpose; it’s base and mean! You know he deceived
us last night, the cunning rascal. I never packed his bag for him, and
I never saw his pistol. He packed it himself. But he put me off my guard
like that, you see. Vera says you are going to let him stay on; I swear
there’s no danger, especially as we are always with him.”

“Who was by him at night?”

“I, and Burdovsky, and Kostia Lebedeff. Keller stayed a little while,
and then went over to Lebedeff’s to sleep. Ferdishenko slept at
Lebedeff’s, too; but he went away at seven o’clock. My father is always
at Lebedeff’s; but he has gone out just now. I dare say Lebedeff will be
coming in here directly; he has been looking for you; I don’t know what
he wants. Shall we let him in or not, if you are asleep? I’m going to
have a nap, too. By-the-by, such a curious thing happened. Burdovsky
woke me at seven, and I met my father just outside the room, so drunk,
he didn’t even know me. He stood before me like a log, and when he
recovered himself, asked hurriedly how Hippolyte was. ‘Yes,’ he said,
when I told him, ‘that’s all very well, but I _really_ came to warn you
that you must be very careful what you say before Ferdishenko.’ Do you
follow me, prince?”

“Yes. Is it really so? However, it’s all the same to us, of course.”

“Of course it is; we are not a secret society; and that being the case,
it is all the more curious that the general should have been on his way
to wake me up in order to tell me this.”

“Ferdishenko has gone, you say?”

“Yes, he went at seven o’clock. He came into the room on his way out; I
was watching just then. He said he was going to spend ‘the rest of the
night’ at Wilkin’s; there’s a tipsy fellow, a friend of his, of that
name. Well, I’m off. Oh, here’s Lebedeff himself! The prince wants to go
to sleep, Lukian Timofeyovitch, so you may just go away again.”

“One moment, my dear prince, just one. I must absolutely speak to you
about something which is most grave,” said Lebedeff, mysteriously and
solemnly, entering the room with a bow and looking extremely important.
He had but just returned, and carried his hat in his hand. He looked
preoccupied and most unusually dignified.

The prince begged him to take a chair.

“I hear you have called twice; I suppose you are still worried about
yesterday’s affair.”

“What, about that boy, you mean? Oh dear no, yesterday my ideas were
a little--well--mixed. Today, I assure you, I shall not oppose in the
slightest degree any suggestions it may please you to make.”

“What’s up with you this morning, Lebedeff? You look so important and
dignified, and you choose your words so carefully,” said the prince,
smiling.

“Nicolai Ardalionovitch!” said Lebedeff, in a most amiable tone of
voice, addressing the boy. “As I have a communication to make to the
prince which concerns only myself--”

“Of course, of course, not my affair. All right,” said Colia, and away
he went.

“I love that boy for his perception,” said Lebedeff, looking after
him. “My dear prince,” he continued, “I have had a terrible misfortune,
either last night or early this morning. I cannot tell the exact time.”

“What is it?”

“I have lost four hundred roubles out of my side pocket! They’re gone!”
 said Lebedeff, with a sour smile.

“You’ve lost four hundred roubles? Oh! I’m sorry for that.”

“Yes, it is serious for a poor man who lives by his toil.”

“Of course, of course! How was it?”

“Oh, the wine is to blame, of course. I confess to you, prince, as I
would to Providence itself. Yesterday I received four hundred roubles
from a debtor at about five in the afternoon, and came down here by
train. I had my purse in my pocket. When I changed, I put the money
into the pocket of my plain clothes, intending to keep it by me, as I
expected to have an applicant for it in the evening.”

“It’s true then, Lebedeff, that you advertise to lend money on gold or
silver articles?”

“Yes, through an agent. My own name doesn’t appear. I have a large
family, you see, and at a small percentage--”

“Quite so, quite so. I only asked for information--excuse the question.
Go on.”

“Well, meanwhile that sick boy was brought here, and those guests came
in, and we had tea, and--well, we made merry--to my ruin! Hearing of
your birthday afterwards, and excited with the circumstances of the
evening, I ran upstairs and changed my plain clothes once more for my
uniform [Civil Service clerks in Russia wear uniform.]--you must have
noticed I had my uniform on all the evening? Well, I forgot the money in
the pocket of my old coat--you know when God will ruin a man he first
of all bereaves him of his senses--and it was only this morning at
half-past seven that I woke up and grabbed at my coat pocket, first
thing. The pocket was empty--the purse gone, and not a trace to be
found!”

“Dear me! This is very unpleasant!”
