“H’m! well--here, you fellow--you can come along with me now if you
like!” cried Rogojin to Lebedeff, and so they all left the carriage.

Lebedeff had his desire. He went off with the noisy group of Rogojin’s
friends towards the Voznesensky, while the prince’s route lay towards
the Litaynaya. It was damp and wet. The prince asked his way of
passers-by, and finding that he was a couple of miles or so from his
destination, he determined to take a droshky.

II.

General Epanchin lived in his own house near the Litaynaya. Besides this
large residence--five-sixths of which was let in flats and lodgings--the
general was owner of another enormous house in the Sadovaya bringing in
even more rent than the first. Besides these houses he had a delightful
little estate just out of town, and some sort of factory in another part
of the city. General Epanchin, as everyone knew, had a good deal to
do with certain government monopolies; he was also a voice, and an
important one, in many rich public companies of various descriptions;
in fact, he enjoyed the reputation of being a well-to-do man of busy
habits, many ties, and affluent means. He had made himself indispensable
in several quarters, amongst others in his department of the government;
and yet it was a known fact that Fedor Ivanovitch Epanchin was a man of
no education whatever, and had absolutely risen from the ranks.

This last fact could, of course, reflect nothing but credit upon the
general; and yet, though unquestionably a sagacious man, he had his own
little weaknesses--very excusable ones,--one of which was a dislike to
any allusion to the above circumstance. He was undoubtedly clever. For
instance, he made a point of never asserting himself when he would
gain more by keeping in the background; and in consequence many exalted
personages valued him principally for his humility and simplicity, and
because “he knew his place.” And yet if these good people could only
have had a peep into the mind of this excellent fellow who “knew his
place” so well! The fact is that, in spite of his knowledge of the world
and his really remarkable abilities, he always liked to appear to be
carrying out other people’s ideas rather than his own. And also, his
luck seldom failed him, even at cards, for which he had a passion that
he did not attempt to conceal. He played for high stakes, and moved,
altogether, in very varied society.

As to age, General Epanchin was in the very prime of life; that is,
about fifty-five years of age,--the flowering time of existence, when
real enjoyment of life begins. His healthy appearance, good colour,
sound, though discoloured teeth, sturdy figure, preoccupied air during
business hours, and jolly good humour during his game at cards in the
evening, all bore witness to his success in life, and combined to make
existence a bed of roses to his excellency. The general was lord of a
flourishing family, consisting of his wife and three grown-up daughters.
He had married young, while still a lieutenant, his wife being a girl of
about his own age, who possessed neither beauty nor education, and who
brought him no more than fifty souls of landed property, which
little estate served, however, as a nest-egg for far more important
accumulations. The general never regretted his early marriage, or
regarded it as a foolish youthful escapade; and he so respected and
feared his wife that he was very near loving her. Mrs. Epanchin came of
the princely stock of Muishkin, which if not a brilliant, was, at all
events, a decidedly ancient family; and she was extremely proud of her
descent.

With a few exceptions, the worthy couple had lived through their long
union very happily. While still young the wife had been able to make
important friends among the aristocracy, partly by virtue of her family
descent, and partly by her own exertions; while, in after life, thanks
to their wealth and to the position of her husband in the service, she
took her place among the higher circles as by right.

During these last few years all three of the general’s
daughters--Alexandra, Adelaida, and Aglaya--had grown up and matured. Of
course they were only Epanchins, but their mother’s family was noble;
they might expect considerable fortunes; their father had hopes of
attaining to very high rank indeed in his country’s service--all of which
was satisfactory. All three of the girls were decidedly pretty, even
the eldest, Alexandra, who was just twenty-five years old. The middle
daughter was now twenty-three, while the youngest, Aglaya, was twenty.
This youngest girl was absolutely a beauty, and had begun of late to
attract considerable attention in society. But this was not all, for
every one of the three was clever, well educated, and accomplished.

It was a matter of general knowledge that the three girls were very fond
of one another, and supported each other in every way; it was even said
that the two elder ones had made certain sacrifices for the sake of
the idol of the household, Aglaya. In society they not only disliked
asserting themselves, but were actually retiring. Certainly no one could
blame them for being too arrogant or haughty, and yet everybody was well
aware that they were proud and quite understood their own value. The
eldest was musical, while the second was a clever artist, which fact
she had concealed until lately. In a word, the world spoke well of the
girls; but they were not without their enemies, and occasionally people
talked with horror of the number of books they had read.

They were in no hurry to marry. They liked good society, but were not
too keen about it. All this was the more remarkable, because everyone
was well aware of the hopes and aims of their parents.

It was about eleven o’clock in the forenoon when the prince rang the
bell at General Epanchin’s door. The general lived on the first floor
or flat of the house, as modest a lodging as his position permitted. A
liveried servant opened the door, and the prince was obliged to enter
into long explanations with this gentleman, who, from the first glance,
looked at him and his bundle with grave suspicion. At last, however, on
the repeated positive assurance that he really was Prince Muishkin, and
must absolutely see the general on business, the bewildered domestic
showed him into a little ante-chamber leading to a waiting-room that
adjoined the general’s study, there handing him over to another servant,
whose duty it was to be in this ante-chamber all the morning, and
announce visitors to the general. This second individual wore a dress
coat, and was some forty years of age; he was the general’s special
study servant, and well aware of his own importance.

“Wait in the next room, please; and leave your bundle here,” said the
door-keeper, as he sat down comfortably in his own easy-chair in the
ante-chamber. He looked at the prince in severe surprise as the latter
settled himself in another chair alongside, with his bundle on his
knees.

“If you don’t mind, I would rather sit here with you,” said the prince;
“I should prefer it to sitting in there.”

“Oh, but you can’t stay here. You are a visitor--a guest, so to speak.
Is it the general himself you wish to see?”

The man evidently could not take in the idea of such a shabby-looking
visitor, and had decided to ask once more.

“Yes--I have business--” began the prince.

“I do not ask you what your business may be, all I have to do is to
announce you; and unless the secretary comes in here I cannot do that.”

The man’s suspicions seemed to increase more and more. The prince was
too unlike the usual run of daily visitors; and although the general
certainly did receive, on business, all sorts and conditions of men, yet
in spite of this fact the servant felt great doubts on the subject
of this particular visitor. The presence of the secretary as an
intermediary was, he judged, essential in this case.

“Surely you--are from abroad?” he inquired at last, in a confused sort
of way. He had begun his sentence intending to say, “Surely you are not
Prince Muishkin, are you?”

“Yes, straight from the train! Did not you intend to say, ‘Surely you
are not Prince Muishkin?’ just now, but refrained out of politeness?”

“H’m!” grunted the astonished servant.

“I assure you I am not deceiving you; you shall not have to answer for
me. As to my being dressed like this, and carrying a bundle, there’s
nothing surprising in that--the fact is, my circumstances are not
particularly rosy at this moment.”
