
“Only, of course that’s not nearly your worst action,” said the actress,
with evident dislike in her face.

“That was a psychological phenomenon, not an action,” remarked Totski.

“And what about the maid?” asked Nastasia Philipovna, with undisguised
contempt.

“Oh, she was turned out next day, of course. It’s a very strict
household, there!”

“And you allowed it?”

“I should think so, rather! I was not going to return and confess
next day,” laughed Ferdishenko, who seemed a little surprised at the
disagreeable impression which his story had made on all parties.

“How mean you were!” said Nastasia.

“Bah! you wish to hear a man tell of his worst actions, and you expect
the story to come out goody-goody! One’s worst actions always are mean.
We shall see what the general has to say for himself now. All is not
gold that glitters, you know; and because a man keeps his carriage he
need not be specially virtuous, I assure you, all sorts of people keep
carriages. And by what means?”

In a word, Ferdishenko was very angry and rapidly forgetting himself;
his whole face was drawn with passion. Strange as it may appear, he had
expected much better success for his story. These little errors of taste
on Ferdishenko’s part occurred very frequently. Nastasia trembled with
rage, and looked fixedly at him, whereupon he relapsed into alarmed
silence. He realized that he had gone a little too far.

“Had we not better end this game?” asked Totski.

“It’s my turn, but I plead exemption,” said Ptitsin.

“You don’t care to oblige us?” asked Nastasia.

“I cannot, I assure you. I confess I do not understand how anyone can
play this game.”

“Then, general, it’s your turn,” continued Nastasia Philipovna, “and if
you refuse, the whole game will fall through, which will disappoint me
very much, for I was looking forward to relating a certain ‘page of my
own life.’ I am only waiting for you and Afanasy Ivanovitch to have your
turns, for I require the support of your example,” she added, smiling.

“Oh, if you put it in that way,” cried the general, excitedly, “I’m
ready to tell the whole story of my life, but I must confess that I
prepared a little story in anticipation of my turn.”

Nastasia smiled amiably at him; but evidently her depression and
irritability were increasing with every moment. Totski was dreadfully
alarmed to hear her promise a revelation out of her own life.

“I, like everyone else,” began the general, “have committed certain not
altogether graceful actions, so to speak, during the course of my life.
But the strangest thing of all in my case is, that I should consider the
little anecdote which I am now about to give you as a confession of
the worst of my ‘bad actions.’ It is thirty-five years since it all
happened, and yet I cannot to this very day recall the circumstances
without, as it were, a sudden pang at the heart.

“It was a silly affair--I was an ensign at the time. You know
ensigns--their blood is boiling water, their circumstances generally
penurious. Well, I had a servant Nikifor who used to do everything for
me in my quarters, economized and managed for me, and even laid hands on
anything he could find (belonging to other people), in order to augment
our household goods; but a faithful, honest fellow all the same.

“I was strict, but just by nature. At that time we were stationed in
a small town. I was quartered at an old widow’s house, a lieutenant’s
widow of eighty years of age. She lived in a wretched little wooden
house, and had not even a servant, so poor was she.

“Her relations had all died off--her husband was dead and buried forty
years since; and a niece, who had lived with her and bullied her up to
three years ago, was dead too; so that she was quite alone.

“Well, I was precious dull with her, especially as she was so childish
that there was nothing to be got out of her. Eventually, she stole a
fowl of mine; the business is a mystery to this day; but it could have
been no one but herself. I requested to be quartered somewhere else,
and was shifted to the other end of the town, to the house of a merchant
with a large family, and a long beard, as I remember him. Nikifor and I
were delighted to go; but the old lady was not pleased at our departure.

“Well, a day or two afterwards, when I returned from drill, Nikifor
says to me: ‘We oughtn’t to have left our tureen with the old lady, I’ve
nothing to serve the soup in.’

“I asked how it came about that the tureen had been left. Nikifor
explained that the old lady refused to give it up, because, she said,
we had broken her bowl, and she must have our tureen in place of it; she
had declared that I had so arranged the matter with herself.

“This baseness on her part of course aroused my young blood to fever
heat; I jumped up, and away I flew.

“I arrived at the old woman’s house beside myself. She was sitting in
a corner all alone, leaning her face on her hand. I fell on her like a
clap of thunder. ‘You old wretch!’ I yelled and all that sort of thing,
in real Russian style. Well, when I began cursing at her, a strange
thing happened. I looked at her, and she stared back with her eyes
starting out of her head, but she did not say a word. She seemed to
sway about as she sat, and looked and looked at me in the strangest
way. Well, I soon stopped swearing and looked closer at her, asked her
questions, but not a word could I get out of her. The flies were buzzing
about the room and only this sound broke the silence; the sun was
setting outside; I didn’t know what to make of it, so I went away.

“Before I reached home I was met and summoned to the major’s, so that it
was some while before I actually got there. When I came in, Nikifor met
me. ‘Have you heard, sir, that our old lady is dead?’ ‘_dead_, when?’ ‘Oh,
an hour and a half ago.’ That meant nothing more nor less than that she
was dying at the moment when I pounced on her and began abusing her.

“This produced a great effect upon me. I used to dream of the poor old
woman at nights. I really am not superstitious, but two days after, I
went to her funeral, and as time went on I thought more and more about
her. I said to myself, ‘This woman, this human being, lived to a great
age. She had children, a husband and family, friends and relations; her
household was busy and cheerful; she was surrounded by smiling faces;
and then suddenly they are gone, and she is left alone like a solitary
fly... like a fly, cursed with the burden of her age. At last, God calls
her to Himself. At sunset, on a lovely summer’s evening, my little old
woman passes away--a thought, you will notice, which offers much food
for reflection--and behold! instead of tears and prayers to start her
on her last journey, she has insults and jeers from a young ensign, who
stands before her with his hands in his pockets, making a terrible row
about a soup tureen!’ Of course I was to blame, and even now that I have
time to look back at it calmly, I pity the poor old thing no less.
I repeat that I wonder at myself, for after all I was not really
responsible. Why did she take it into her head to die at that moment?
But the more I thought of it, the more I felt the weight of it upon my
mind; and I never got quite rid of the impression until I put a couple
of old women into an almshouse and kept them there at my own expense.
There, that’s all. I repeat I dare say I have committed many a grievous
sin in my day; but I cannot help always looking back upon this as the
worst action I have ever perpetrated.”

“H’m! and instead of a bad action, your excellency has detailed one of
your noblest deeds,” said Ferdishenko. “Ferdishenko is ‘done.’”

“Dear me, general,” said Nastasia Philipovna, absently, “I really never
imagined you had such a good heart.”

The general laughed with great satisfaction, and applied himself once
