
“Oh,” cried the prince, “I have often thought that! Why, I know of a
murder, for the sake of a watch. It’s in all the papers now. But if
some writer had invented it, all the critics would have jumped down his
throat and said the thing was too improbable for anything. And yet you
read it in the paper, and you can’t help thinking that out of these
strange disclosures is to be gained the full knowledge of Russian life
and character. You said that well, general; it is so true,” concluded
the prince, warmly, delighted to have found a refuge from the fiery
blushes which had covered his face.

“Yes, it’s quite true, isn’t it?” cried the general, his eyes sparkling
with gratification. “A small boy, a child, would naturally realize no
danger; he would shove his way through the crowds to see the shine and
glitter of the uniforms, and especially the great man of whom everyone
was speaking, for at that time all the world had been talking of no one
but this man for some years past. The world was full of his name; I--so
to speak--drew it in with my mother’s milk. Napoleon, passing a couple
of paces from me, caught sight of me accidentally. I was very well
dressed, and being all alone, in that crowd, as you will easily
imagine...”

“Oh, of course! Naturally the sight impressed him, and proved to him
that not _all_ the aristocracy had left Moscow; that at least some nobles
and their children had remained behind.”

“Just so! just so! He wanted to win over the aristocracy! When his eagle
eye fell on me, mine probably flashed back in response. ‘_Voilà un garçon
bien éveillé! Qui est ton père?_’ I immediately replied, almost panting
with excitement, ‘A general, who died on the battle-fields of his country!’
‘_Le fils d’un boyard et d’un brave, pardessus le marché. J’aime
les boyards. M’aimes-tu, petit?_’

“To this keen question I replied as keenly, ‘The Russian heart can
recognize a great man even in the bitter enemy of his country.’ At
least, I don’t remember the exact words, you know, but the idea was
as I say. Napoleon was struck; he thought a minute and then said to
his suite: ‘I like that boy’s pride; if all Russians think like this
child, then--’ he didn’t finish, but went on and entered the palace.
I instantly mixed with his suite, and followed him. I was already in
high favour. I remember when he came into the first hall, the emperor
stopped before a portrait of the Empress Katherine, and after a
thoughtful glance remarked, ‘That was a great woman,’ and passed on.

“Well, in a couple of days I was known all over the palace and the
Kremlin as ‘le petit boyard.’ I only went home to sleep. They were
nearly out of their minds about me at home. A couple of days after this,
Napoleon’s page, De Bazancour, died; he had not been able to stand the
trials of the campaign. Napoleon remembered me; I was taken away without
explanation; the dead page’s uniform was tried on me, and when I was
taken before the emperor, dressed in it, he nodded his head to me, and I
was told that I was appointed to the vacant post of page.

“Well, I was glad enough, for I had long felt the greatest sympathy for
this man; and then the pretty uniform and all that--only a child, you
know--and so on. It was a dark green dress coat with gold buttons--red
facings, white trousers, and a white silk waistcoat--silk stockings,
shoes with buckles, and top-boots if I were riding out with his majesty
or with the suite.

“Though the position of all of us at that time was not particularly
brilliant, and the poverty was dreadful all round, yet the etiquette at
court was strictly preserved, and the more strictly in proportion to the
growth of the forebodings of disaster.”

“Quite so, quite so, of course!” murmured the poor prince, who didn’t
know where to look. “Your memoirs would be most interesting.”

The general was, of course, repeating what he had told Lebedeff the
night before, and thus brought it out glibly enough, but here he looked
suspiciously at the prince out of the corners of his eyes.

“My memoirs!” he began, with redoubled pride and dignity. “Write my
memoirs? The idea has not tempted me. And yet, if you please, my memoirs
have long been written, but they shall not see the light until dust
returns to dust. Then, I doubt not, they will be translated into all
languages, not of course on account of their actual literary merit, but
because of the great events of which I was the actual witness, though
but a child at the time. As a child, I was able to penetrate into the
secrecy of the great man’s private room. At nights I have heard the
groans and wailings of this ‘giant in distress.’ He could feel no shame
in weeping before such a mere child as I was, though I understood even
then that the reason for his suffering was the silence of the Emperor
Alexander.”

“Yes, of course; he had written letters to the latter with proposals of
peace, had he not?” put in the prince.

“We did not know the details of his proposals, but he wrote letter after
letter, all day and every day. He was dreadfully agitated. Sometimes at
night I would throw myself upon his breast with tears (Oh, how I
loved that man!). ‘Ask forgiveness, Oh, ask forgiveness of the Emperor
Alexander!’ I would cry. I should have said, of course, ‘Make peace
with Alexander,’ but as a child I expressed my idea in the naive way
recorded. ‘Oh, my child,’ he would say (he loved to talk to me and
seemed to forget my tender years), ‘Oh, my child, I am ready to kiss
Alexander’s feet, but I hate and abominate the King of Prussia and the
Austrian Emperor, and--and--but you know nothing of politics, my child.’
He would pull up, remembering whom he was speaking to, but his eyes
would sparkle for a long while after this. Well now, if I were to
describe all this, and I have seen greater events than these, all these
critical gentlemen of the press and political parties--Oh, no thanks!
I’m their very humble servant, but no thanks!”

“Quite so--parties--you are very right,” said the prince. “I was reading
a book about Napoleon and the Waterloo campaign only the other day, by
Charasse, in which the author does not attempt to conceal his joy at
Napoleon’s discomfiture at every page. Well now, I don’t like that;
it smells of ‘party,’ you know. You are quite right. And were you much
occupied with your service under Napoleon?”

The general was in ecstasies, for the prince’s remarks, made, as they
evidently were, in all seriousness and simplicity, quite dissipated the
last relics of his suspicion.

“I know Charasse’s book! Oh! I was so angry with his work! I wrote to
him and said--I forget what, at this moment. You ask whether I was very
busy under the Emperor? Oh no! I was called ‘page,’ but hardly took my
duty seriously. Besides, Napoleon very soon lost hope of conciliating
the Russians, and he would have forgotten all about me had he not loved
me--for personal reasons--I don’t mind saying so now. My heart was
greatly drawn to him, too. My duties were light. I merely had to be at
the palace occasionally to escort the Emperor out riding, and that
was about all. I rode very fairly well. He used to have a ride before
dinner, and his suite on those occasions were generally Davoust, myself,
and Roustan.”

“Constant?” said the prince, suddenly, and quite involuntarily.

“No; Constant was away then, taking a letter to the Empress Josephine.
Instead of him there were always a couple of orderlies--and that was
all, excepting, of course, the generals and marshals whom Napoleon
always took with him for the inspection of various localities, and
for the sake of consultation generally. I remember there was
one--Davoust--nearly always with him--a big man with spectacles. They
used to argue and quarrel sometimes. Once they were in the Emperor’s
study together--just those two and myself--I was unobserved--and
they argued, and the Emperor seemed to be agreeing to something under
protest. Suddenly his eye fell on me and an idea seemed to flash across
him.

“‘Child,’ he said, abruptly. ‘If I were to recognize the Russian
orthodox religion and emancipate the serfs, do you think Russia would
come over to me?’”

“‘Never!’ I cried, indignantly.”

“The Emperor was much struck.”

“‘In the flashing eyes of this patriotic child I read and accept the
