“You see, Lebedeff, a mistake here would be a dreadful thing. This
Ferdishenko, I would not say a word against him, of course; but, who
knows? Perhaps it really was he? I mean he really does seem to be a more
likely man than... than any other.”

Lebedeff strained his eyes and ears to take in what the prince was
saying. The latter was frowning more and more, and walking excitedly up
and down, trying not to look at Lebedeff.

“You see,” he said, “I was given to understand that Ferdishenko was that
sort of man,--that one can’t say everything before him. One has to take
care not to say too much, you understand? I say this to prove that he
really is, so to speak, more likely to have done this than anyone else,
eh? You understand? The important thing is, not to make a mistake.”

“And who told you this about Ferdishenko?”

“Oh, I was told. Of course I don’t altogether believe it. I am very
sorry that I should have had to say this, because I assure you I don’t
believe it myself; it is all nonsense, of course. It was stupid of me to
say anything about it.”

“You see, it is very important, it is most important to know where you
got this report from,” said Lebedeff, excitedly. He had risen from his
seat, and was trying to keep step with the prince, running after him, up
and down. “Because look here, prince, I don’t mind telling you now that
as we were going along to Wilkin’s this morning, after telling me what
you know about the fire, and saving the count and all that, the general
was pleased to drop certain hints to the same effect about Ferdishenko,
but so vaguely and clumsily that I thought better to put a few questions
to him on the matter, with the result that I found the whole thing was
an invention of his excellency’s own mind. Of course, he only lies with
the best intentions; still, he lies. But, such being the case, where
could you have heard the same report? It was the inspiration of the
moment with him, you understand, so who could have told _you?_ It is an
important question, you see!”

“It was Colia told me, and his father told _him_ at about six this
morning. They met at the threshold, when Colia was leaving the room for
something or other.” The prince told Lebedeff all that Colia had made
known to himself, in detail.

“There now, that’s what we may call _scent!_” said Lebedeff, rubbing his
hands and laughing silently. “I thought it must be so, you see. The
general interrupted his innocent slumbers, at six o’clock, in order
to go and wake his beloved son, and warn him of the dreadful danger of
companionship with Ferdishenko. Dear me! what a dreadfully dangerous man
Ferdishenko must be, and what touching paternal solicitude, on the part
of his excellency, ha! ha! ha!”

“Listen, Lebedeff,” began the prince, quite overwhelmed; “_do_ act
quietly--don’t make a scandal, Lebedeff, I ask you--I entreat you! No
one must know--_no one_, mind! In that case only, I will help you.”

“Be assured, most honourable, most worthy of princes--be assured that
the whole matter shall be buried within my heart!” cried Lebedeff, in a
paroxysm of exaltation. “I’d give every drop of my blood... Illustrious
prince, I am a poor wretch in soul and spirit, but ask the veriest
scoundrel whether he would prefer to deal with one like himself, or with
a noble-hearted man like you, and there is no doubt as to his choice!
He’ll answer that he prefers the noble-hearted man--and there you
have the triumph of virtue! _Au revoir_, honoured prince! You and I
together--softly! softly!”

X.

The prince understood at last why he shivered with dread every time
he thought of the three letters in his pocket, and why he had put off
reading them until the evening.

When he fell into a heavy sleep on the sofa on the verandah, without
having had the courage to open a single one of the three envelopes, he
again dreamed a painful dream, and once more that poor, “sinful” woman
appeared to him. Again she gazed at him with tears sparkling on her long
lashes, and beckoned him after her; and again he awoke, as before, with
the picture of her face haunting him.

He longed to get up and go to her at once--but he _could not_. At length,
almost in despair, he unfolded the letters, and began to read them.

These letters, too, were like a dream. We sometimes have strange,
impossible dreams, contrary to all the laws of nature. When we awake we
remember them and wonder at their strangeness. You remember, perhaps,
that you were in full possession of your reason during this succession
of fantastic images; even that you acted with extraordinary logic and
cunning while surrounded by murderers who hid their intentions and made
great demonstrations of friendship, while waiting for an opportunity
to cut your throat. You remember how you escaped them by some ingenious
stratagem; then you doubted if they were really deceived, or whether
they were only pretending not to know your hiding-place; then you
thought of another plan and hoodwinked them once again. You remember all
this quite clearly, but how is it that your reason calmly accepted all
the manifest absurdities and impossibilities that crowded into your
dream? One of the murderers suddenly changed into a woman before your
very eyes; then the woman was transformed into a hideous, cunning little
dwarf; and you believed it, and accepted it all almost as a matter of
course--while at the same time your intelligence seemed unusually keen,
and accomplished miracles of cunning, sagacity, and logic! Why is it
that when you awake to the world of realities you nearly always feel,
sometimes very vividly, that the vanished dream has carried with it some
enigma which you have failed to solve? You smile at the extravagance
of your dream, and yet you feel that this tissue of absurdity contained
some real idea, something that belongs to your true life,--something
that exists, and has always existed, in your heart. You search your
dream for some prophecy that you were expecting. It has left a deep
impression upon you, joyful or cruel, but what it means, or what has
been predicted to you in it, you can neither understand nor remember.

The reading of these letters produced some such effect upon the prince.
He felt, before he even opened the envelopes, that the very fact of
their existence was like a nightmare. How could she ever have made up
her mind to write to her? he asked himself. How could she write about
that at all? And how could such a wild idea have entered her head?
And yet, the strangest part of the matter was, that while he read the
letters, he himself almost believed in the possibility, and even in the
justification, of the idea he had thought so wild. Of course it was a
mad dream, a nightmare, and yet there was something cruelly real about
it. For hours he was haunted by what he had read. Several passages
returned again and again to his mind, and as he brooded over them, he
felt inclined to say to himself that he had foreseen and known all that
was written here; it even seemed to him that he had read the whole of
this some time or other, long, long ago; and all that had tormented and
grieved him up to now was to be found in these old, long since read,
letters.

“When you open this letter” (so the first began), “look first at the
signature. The signature will tell you all, so that I need explain
nothing, nor attempt to justify myself. Were I in any way on a footing
with you, you might be offended at my audacity; but who am I, and who
are you? We are at such extremes, and I am so far removed from you, that
I could not offend you if I wished to do so.”

Farther on, in another place, she wrote: “Do not consider my words
as the sickly ecstasies of a diseased mind, but you are, in my
opinion--perfection! I have seen you--I see you every day. I do not
judge you; I have not weighed you in the scales of Reason and found you
Perfection--it is simply an article of faith. But I must confess one sin
against you--I love you. One should not love perfection. One should
only look on it as perfection--yet I am in love with you. Though love
equalizes, do not fear. I have not lowered you to my level, even in
my most secret thoughts. I have written ‘Do not fear,’ as if you could
fear. I would kiss your footprints if I could; but, oh! I am not putting
myself on a level with you!--Look at the signature--quick, look at the
signature!”

“However, observe” (she wrote in another of the letters), “that although
I couple you with him, yet I have not once asked you whether you love
him. He fell in love with you, though he saw you but once. He spoke of
you as of ‘the light.’ These are his own words--I heard him use them.
But I understood without his saying it that you were all that light is
