eleven. It was a quiet, warm, clear night--a real Petersburg night of
early June; but in the dense avenue, where he was sitting, it was almost
pitch dark.

If anyone had come up at this moment and told him that he was in love,
passionately in love, he would have rejected the idea with astonishment,
and, perhaps, with irritation. And if anyone had added that Aglaya’s
note was a love-letter, and that it contained an appointment to a
lover’s rendezvous, he would have blushed with shame for the speaker,
and, probably, have challenged him to a duel.

All this would have been perfectly sincere on his part. He had never
for a moment entertained the idea of the possibility of this girl loving
him, or even of such a thing as himself falling in love with her. The
possibility of being loved himself, “a man like me,” as he put it, he
ranked among ridiculous suppositions. It appeared to him that it was
simply a joke on Aglaya’s part, if there really were anything in it at
all; but that seemed to him quite natural. His preoccupation was caused
by something different.

As to the few words which the general had let slip about Aglaya laughing
at everybody, and at himself most of all--he entirely believed them. He
did not feel the slightest sensation of offence; on the contrary, he was
quite certain that it was as it should be.

His whole thoughts were now as to next morning early; he would see
her; he would sit by her on that little green bench, and listen to how
pistols were loaded, and look at her. He wanted nothing more.

The question as to what she might have to say of special interest to
himself occurred to him once or twice. He did not doubt, for a moment,
that she really had some such subject of conversation in store, but so
very little interested in the matter was he that it did not strike him
to wonder what it could be. The crunch of gravel on the path suddenly
caused him to raise his head.

A man, whose face it was difficult to see in the gloom, approached the
bench, and sat down beside him. The prince peered into his face, and
recognized the livid features of Rogojin.

“I knew you’d be wandering about somewhere here. I didn’t have to look
for you very long,” muttered the latter between his teeth.

It was the first time they had met since the encounter on the staircase
at the hotel.

Painfully surprised as he was at this sudden apparition of Rogojin,
the prince, for some little while, was unable to collect his thoughts.
Rogojin, evidently, saw and understood the impression he had made; and
though he seemed more or less confused at first, yet he began talking
with what looked like assumed ease and freedom. However, the prince soon
changed his mind on this score, and thought that there was not only no
affectation of indifference, but that Rogojin was not even particularly
agitated. If there were a little apparent awkwardness, it was only in
his words and gestures. The man could not change his heart.

“How did you--find me here?” asked the prince for the sake of saying
something.

“Keller told me (I found him at your place) that you were in the park.
‘Of course he is!’ I thought.”

“Why so?” asked the prince uneasily.

Rogojin smiled, but did not explain.

“I received your letter, Lef Nicolaievitch--what’s the good of all
that?--It’s no use, you know. I’ve come to you from _her_,--she bade me
tell you that she must see you, she has something to say to you. She
told me to find you today.”

“I’ll come tomorrow. Now I’m going home--are you coming to my house?”

“Why should I? I’ve given you the message.--Goodbye!”

“Won’t you come?” asked the prince in a gentle voice.

“What an extraordinary man you are! I wonder at you!” Rogojin laughed
sarcastically.

“Why do you hate me so?” asked the prince, sadly. “You know yourself
that all you suspected is quite unfounded. I felt you were still angry
with me, though. Do you know why? Because you tried to kill me--that’s
why you can’t shake off your wrath against me. I tell you that I only
remember the Parfen Rogojin with whom I exchanged crosses, and vowed
brotherhood. I wrote you this in yesterday’s letter, in order that you
might forget all that madness on your part, and that you might not feel
called to talk about it when we met. Why do you avoid me? Why do you
hold your hand back from me? I tell you again, I consider all that has
passed a delirium, an insane dream. I can understand all you did,
and all you felt that day, as if it were myself. What you were then
imagining was not the case, and could never be the case. Why, then,
should there be anger between us?”

“You don’t know what anger is!” laughed Rogojin, in reply to the
prince’s heated words.

He had moved a pace or two away, and was hiding his hands behind him.

“No, it is impossible for me to come to your house again,” he added
slowly.

“Why? Do you hate me so much as all that?”

“I don’t love you, Lef Nicolaievitch, and, therefore, what would be
the use of my coming to see you? You are just like a child--you want a
plaything, and it must be taken out and given you--and then you don’t
know how to work it. You are simply repeating all you said in your
letter, and what’s the use? Of course I believe every word you say, and
I know perfectly well that you neither did or ever can deceive me in
any way, and yet, I don’t love you. You write that you’ve forgotten
everything, and only remember your brother Parfen, with whom you
exchanged crosses, and that you don’t remember anything about the
Rogojin who aimed a knife at your throat. What do you know about my
feelings, eh?” (Rogojin laughed disagreeably.) “Here you are holding out
your brotherly forgiveness to me for a thing that I have perhaps never
repented of in the slightest degree. I did not think of it again all
that evening; all my thoughts were centred on something else--”

“Not think of it again? Of course you didn’t!” cried the prince. “And I
dare swear that you came straight away down here to Pavlofsk to listen
to the music and dog her about in the crowd, and stare at her, just as
you did today. There’s nothing surprising in that! If you hadn’t been in
that condition of mind that you could think of nothing but one subject,
you would, probably, never have raised your knife against me. I had a
presentiment of what you would do, that day, ever since I saw you first
in the morning. Do you know yourself what you looked like? I knew
you would try to murder me even at the very moment when we exchanged
crosses. What did you take me to your mother for? Did you think to stay
your hand by doing so? Perhaps you did not put your thoughts into words,
but you and I were thinking the same thing, or feeling the same thing
looming over us, at the same moment. What should you think of me now if
you had not raised your knife to me--the knife which God averted from my
throat? I would have been guilty of suspecting you all the same--and you
would have intended the murder all the same; therefore we should have
been mutually guilty in any case. Come, don’t frown; you needn’t laugh
at me, either. You say you haven’t ‘repented.’ Repented! You probably
couldn’t, if you were to try; you dislike me too much for that. Why,
if I were an angel of light, and as innocent before you as a babe, you
would still loathe me if you believed that _she_ loved me, instead of
loving yourself. That’s jealousy--that is the real jealousy.

“But do you know what I have been thinking out during this last week,
Parfen? I’ll tell you. What if she loves you now better than anyone? And
what if she torments you _because_ she loves you, and in proportion to her
love for you, so she torments you the more? She won’t tell you this, of
course; you must have eyes to see. Why do you suppose she consents to
marry you? She must have a reason, and that reason she will tell you
some day. Some women desire the kind of love you give her, and she is
probably one of these. Your love and your wild nature impress her. Do
