charity. You can hardly believe it, gentlemen! You are scandalized and
disgusted; you cry out in indignation! But that is what he did! Needless
to say, the money was returned, or rather flung back in his face. The
case is not within the province of the law, it must be referred to the
tribunal of public opinion; this is what we now do, guaranteeing the
truth of all the details which we have related.”

When Colia had finished reading, he handed the paper to the prince, and
retired silently to a corner of the room, hiding his face in his
hands. He was overcome by a feeling of inexpressible shame; his boyish
sensitiveness was wounded beyond endurance. It seemed to him that
something extraordinary, some sudden catastrophe had occurred, and that
he was almost the cause of it, because he had read the article aloud.

Yet all the others were similarly affected. The girls were uncomfortable
and ashamed. Lizabetha Prokofievna restrained her violent anger by a
great effort; perhaps she bitterly regretted her interference in the
matter; for the present she kept silence. The prince felt as very shy
people often do in such a case; he was so ashamed of the conduct of
other people, so humiliated for his guests, that he dared not look them
in the face. Ptitsin, Varia, Gania, and Lebedeff himself, all looked
rather confused. Stranger still, Hippolyte and the “son of Pavlicheff”
 also seemed slightly surprised, and Lebedeff’s nephew was obviously
far from pleased. The boxer alone was perfectly calm; he twisted his
moustaches with affected dignity, and if his eyes were cast down it was
certainly not in confusion, but rather in noble modesty, as if he did
not wish to be insolent in his triumph. It was evident that he was
delighted with the article.

“The devil knows what it means,” growled Ivan Fedorovitch, under his
breath; “it must have taken the united wits of fifty footmen to write
it.”

“May I ask your reason for such an insulting supposition, sir?” said
Hippolyte, trembling with rage.

“You will admit yourself, general, that for an honourable man, if the
author is an honourable man, that is an--an insult,” growled the boxer
suddenly, with convulsive jerkings of his shoulders.

“In the first place, it is not for you to address me as ‘sir,’ and,
in the second place, I refuse to give you any explanation,” said Ivan
Fedorovitch vehemently; and he rose without another word, and went and
stood on the first step of the flight that led from the verandah to the
street, turning his back on the company. He was indignant with Lizabetha
Prokofievna, who did not think of moving even now.

“Gentlemen, gentlemen, let me speak at last,” cried the prince, anxious
and agitated. “Please let us understand one another. I say nothing about
the article, gentlemen, except that every word is false; I say this
because you know it as well as I do. It is shameful. I should be
surprised if any one of you could have written it.”

“I did not know of its existence till this moment,” declared Hippolyte.
“I do not approve of it.”

“I knew it had been written, but I would not have advised its
publication,” said Lebedeff’s nephew, “because it is premature.”

“I knew it, but I have a right. I... I...” stammered the “son of
Pavlicheff.”

“What! Did you write all that yourself? Is it possible?” asked the
prince, regarding Burdovsky with curiosity.

“One might dispute your right to ask such questions,” observed
Lebedeff’s nephew.

“I was only surprised that Mr. Burdovsky should have--however, this is
what I have to say. Since you had already given the matter publicity,
why did you object just now, when I began to speak of it to my friends?”

“At last!” murmured Lizabetha Prokofievna indignantly.

Lebedeff could restrain himself no longer; he made his way through the
row of chairs.

“Prince,” he cried, “you are forgetting that if you consented to receive
and hear them, it was only because of your kind heart which has no
equal, for they had not the least right to demand it, especially as you
had placed the matter in the hands of Gavrila Ardalionovitch, which
was also extremely kind of you. You are also forgetting, most excellent
prince, that you are with friends, a select company; you cannot
sacrifice them to these gentlemen, and it is only for you to have them
turned out this instant. As the master of the house I shall have great
pleasure ....”

“Quite right!” agreed General Ivolgin in a loud voice.

“That will do, Lebedeff, that will do--” began the prince, when an
indignant outcry drowned his words.

“Excuse me, prince, excuse me, but now that will not do,” shouted
Lebedeff’s nephew, his voice dominating all the others. “The matter must
be clearly stated, for it is obviously not properly understood. They
are calling in some legal chicanery, and upon that ground they are
threatening to turn us out of the house! Really, prince, do you think we
are such fools as not to be aware that this matter does not come within
the law, and that legally we cannot claim a rouble from you? But we are
also aware that if actual law is not on our side, human law is for us,
natural law, the law of common-sense and conscience, which is no less
binding upon every noble and honest man--that is, every man of sane
judgment--because it is not to be found in miserable legal codes. If we
come here without fear of being turned out (as was threatened just now)
because of the imperative tone of our demand, and the unseemliness of
such a visit at this late hour (though it was not late when we arrived,
we were kept waiting in your anteroom), if, I say, we came in without
fear, it is just because we expected to find you a man of sense; I mean,
a man of honour and conscience. It is quite true that we did not present
ourselves humbly, like your flatterers and parasites, but holding up our
heads as befits independent men. We present no petition, but a proud and
free demand (note it well, we do not beseech, we demand!). We ask you
fairly and squarely in a dignified manner. Do you believe that in this
affair of Burdovsky you have right on your side? Do you admit that
Pavlicheff overwhelmed you with benefits, and perhaps saved your life?
If you admit it (which we take for granted), do you intend, now that you
are a millionaire, and do you not think it in conformity with justice,
to indemnify Burdovsky? Yes or no? If it is yes, or, in other words, if
you possess what you call honour and conscience, and we more justly call
common-sense, then accede to our demand, and the matter is at an end.
Give us satisfaction, without entreaties or thanks from us; do not
expect thanks from us, for what you do will be done not for our sake,
but for the sake of justice. If you refuse to satisfy us, that is, if
your answer is no, we will go away at once, and there will be an end of
the matter. But we will tell you to your face before the present company
that you are a man of vulgar and undeveloped mind; we will openly deny
you the right to speak in future of your honour and conscience, for you
have not paid the fair price of such a right. I have no more to say--I
have put the question before you. Now turn us out if you dare. You can
do it; force is on your side. But remember that we do not beseech, we
demand! We do not beseech, we demand!”

With these last excited words, Lebedeff’s nephew was silent.

“We demand, we demand, we demand, we do not beseech,” spluttered
Burdovsky, red as a lobster.

The speech of Lebedeff’s nephew caused a certain stir among the company;
murmurs arose, though with the exception of Lebedeff, who was still
very much excited, everyone was careful not to interfere in the matter.
Strangely enough, Lebedeff, although on the prince’s side, seemed quite
proud of his nephew’s eloquence. Gratified vanity was visible in the
glances he cast upon the assembled company.

“In my opinion, Mr. Doktorenko,” said the prince, in rather a low
voice, “you are quite right in at least half of what you say. I would
go further and say that you are altogether right, and that I quite agree
with you, if there were not something lacking in your speech. I cannot
undertake to say precisely what it is, but you have certainly omitted
something, and you cannot be quite just while there is something
