are unworthy to tie your shoe, prince. I don’t say _mine_, mind--you will
understand me, prince. Only _you_ understand me, prince--no one else.
_He_ doesn’t understand me, he is absolutely--_absolutely_ unable to
sympathize. The first qualification for understanding another is Heart.”

The prince was rather alarmed at all this, and was obliged to end by
appointing the same hour of the following day for the interview desired.
The general left him much comforted and far less agitated than when he
had arrived.

At seven in the evening, the prince sent to request Lebedeff to pay
him a visit. Lebedeff came at once, and “esteemed it an honour,” as he
observed, the instant he entered the room. He acted as though there
had never been the slightest suspicion of the fact that he had
systematically avoided the prince for the last three days.

He sat down on the edge of his chair, smiling and making faces,
and rubbing his hands, and looking as though he were in delighted
expectation of hearing some important communication, which had been long
guessed by all.

The prince was instantly covered with confusion; for it appeared to be
plain that everyone expected something of him--that everyone looked at
him as though anxious to congratulate him, and greeted him with hints,
and smiles, and knowing looks.

Keller, for instance, had run into the house three times of late, “just
for a moment,” and each time with the air of desiring to offer his
congratulations. Colia, too, in spite of his melancholy, had once
or twice begun sentences in much the same strain of suggestion or
insinuation.

The prince, however, immediately began, with some show of annoyance, to
question Lebedeff categorically, as to the general’s present condition,
and his opinion thereon. He described the morning’s interview in a few
words.

“Everyone has his worries, prince, especially in these strange and
troublous times of ours,” Lebedeff replied, drily, and with the air of a
man disappointed of his reasonable expectations.

“Dear me, what a philosopher you are!” laughed the prince.

“Philosophy is necessary, sir--very necessary--in our day. It is too
much neglected. As for me, much esteemed prince, I am sensible of having
experienced the honour of your confidence in a certain matter up to
a certain point, but never beyond that point. I do not for a moment
complain--”

“Lebedeff, you seem to be angry for some reason!” said the prince.

“Not the least bit in the world, esteemed and revered prince! Not the
least bit in the world!” cried Lebedeff, solemnly, with his hand upon
his heart. “On the contrary, I am too painfully aware that neither by my
position in the world, nor by my gifts of intellect and heart, nor by
my riches, nor by any former conduct of mine, have I in any way deserved
your confidence, which is far above my highest aspirations and hopes.
Oh no, prince; I may serve you, but only as your humble slave! I am not
angry, oh no! Not angry; pained perhaps, but nothing more.”

“My dear Lebedeff, I--”

“Oh, nothing more, nothing more! I was saying to myself but now... ‘I am
quite unworthy of friendly relations with him,’ say I; ‘but perhaps as
landlord of this house I may, at some future date, in his good time,
receive information as to certain imminent and much to be desired
changes--’”

So saying Lebedeff fixed the prince with his sharp little eyes, still in
hope that he would get his curiosity satisfied.

The prince looked back at him in amazement.

“I don’t understand what you are driving at!” he cried, almost angrily,
“and, and--what an intriguer you are, Lebedeff!” he added, bursting into
a fit of genuine laughter.

Lebedeff followed suit at once, and it was clear from his radiant face
that he considered his prospects of satisfaction immensely improved.

“And do you know,” the prince continued, “I am amazed at your naive
ways, Lebedeff! Don’t be angry with me--not only yours, everybody else’s
also! You are waiting to hear something from me at this very moment with
such simplicity that I declare I feel quite ashamed of myself for having
nothing whatever to tell you. I swear to you solemnly, that there is
nothing to tell. There! Can you take that in?” The prince laughed again.

Lebedeff assumed an air of dignity. It was true enough that he was
sometimes naive to a degree in his curiosity; but he was also an
excessively cunning gentleman, and the prince was almost converting
him into an enemy by his repeated rebuffs. The prince did not snub
Lebedeff’s curiosity, however, because he felt any contempt for him; but
simply because the subject was too delicate to talk about. Only a few
days before he had looked upon his own dreams almost as crimes. But
Lebedeff considered the refusal as caused by personal dislike to
himself, and was hurt accordingly. Indeed, there was at this moment a
piece of news, most interesting to the prince, which Lebedeff knew
and even had wished to tell him, but which he now kept obstinately to
himself.

“And what can I do for you, esteemed prince? Since I am told you sent
for me just now,” he said, after a few moments’ silence.

“Oh, it was about the general,” began the prince, waking abruptly from
the fit of musing which he too had indulged in “and--and about the theft
you told me of.”

“That is--er--about--what theft?”

“Oh come! just as if you didn’t understand, Lukian Timofeyovitch! What
are you up to? I can’t make you out! The money, the money, sir! The four
hundred roubles that you lost that day. You came and told me about
it one morning, and then went off to Petersburg. There, _now_ do you
understand?”

“Oh--h--h! You mean the four hundred roubles!” said Lebedeff, dragging
the words out, just as though it had only just dawned upon him what
the prince was talking about. “Thanks very much, prince, for your kind
interest--you do me too much honour. I found the money, long ago!”

“You found it? Thank God for that!”

“Your exclamation proves the generous sympathy of your nature, prince;
for four hundred roubles--to a struggling family man like myself--is no
small matter!”

“I didn’t mean that; at least, of course, I’m glad for your sake, too,”
 added the prince, correcting himself, “but--how did you find it?”

“Very simply indeed! I found it under the chair upon which my coat had
hung; so that it is clear the purse simply fell out of the pocket and on
to the floor!”

“Under the chair? Impossible! Why, you told me yourself that you had
searched every corner of the room? How could you not have looked in the
most likely place of all?”

“Of course I looked there,--of course I did! Very much so! I looked and
scrambled about, and felt for it, and wouldn’t believe it was not there,
and looked again and again. It is always so in such cases. One longs and
expects to find a lost article; one sees it is not there, and the place
is as bare as one’s palm; and yet one returns and looks again and again,
fifteen or twenty times, likely enough!”

“Oh, quite so, of course. But how was it in your case?--I don’t quite
understand,” said the bewildered prince. “You say it wasn’t there at
first, and that you searched the place thoroughly, and yet it turned up
on that very spot!”

“Yes, sir--on that very spot.” The prince gazed strangely at Lebedeff.
