threshold, and listened. “Shall I turn Rogojin off? Ha! ha! you thought
I would marry him for your benefit, did you? Why, I’ll call out _now_, if
you like, in your presence, ‘Rogojin, get out!’ and say to the prince,
‘Do you remember what you promised me?’ Heavens! what a fool I have been
to humiliate myself before them! Why, prince, you yourself gave me your
word that you would marry me whatever happened, and would never abandon
me. You said you loved me and would forgive me all, and--and resp--yes,
you even said that! I only ran away from you in order to set you free,
and now I don’t care to let you go again. Why does she treat me so--so
shamefully? I am not a loose woman--ask Rogojin there! He’ll tell you.
Will you go again now that she has insulted me, before your eyes, too;
turn away from me and lead her away, arm-in-arm? May you be accursed
too, for you were the only one I trusted among them all! Go away,
Rogojin, I don’t want you,” she continued, blind with fury, and forcing
the words out with dry lips and distorted features, evidently not
believing a single word of her own tirade, but, at the same time, doing
her utmost to prolong the moment of self-deception.

The outburst was so terribly violent that the prince thought it would
have killed her.

“There he is!” she shrieked again, pointing to the prince and addressing
Aglaya. “There he is! and if he does not approach me at once and take
_me_ and throw you over, then have him for your own--I give him up to
you! I don’t want him!”

Both she and Aglaya stood and waited as though in expectation, and both
looked at the prince like madwomen.

But he, perhaps, did not understand the full force of this challenge; in
fact, it is certain he did not. All he could see was the poor despairing
face which, as he had said to Aglaya, “had pierced his heart for ever.”

He could bear it no longer, and with a look of entreaty, mingled with
reproach, he addressed Aglaya, pointing to Nastasia the while:

“How can you?” he murmured; “she is so unhappy.”

But he had no time to say another word before Aglaya’s terrible look
bereft him of speech. In that look was embodied so dreadful a suffering
and so deadly a hatred, that he gave a cry and flew to her; but it was
too late.

She could not hold out long enough even to witness his movement in her
direction. She had hidden her face in her hands, cried once “Oh, my
God!” and rushed out of the room. Rogojin followed her to undo the bolts
of the door and let her out into the street.

The prince made a rush after her, but he was caught and held back. The
distorted, livid face of Nastasia gazed at him reproachfully, and her
blue lips whispered:

“What? Would you go to her--to her?”

She fell senseless into his arms.

He raised her, carried her into the room, placed her in an arm-chair,
and stood over her, stupefied. On the table stood a tumbler of water.
Rogojin, who now returned, took this and sprinkled a little in her face.
She opened her eyes, but for a moment she understood nothing.

Suddenly she looked around, shuddered, gave a loud cry, and threw
herself in the prince’s arms.

“Mine, mine!” she cried. “Has the proud young lady gone? Ha, ha, ha!”
 she laughed hysterically. “And I had given him up to her! Why--why did
I? Mad--mad! Get away, Rogojin! Ha, ha, ha!”

Rogojin stared intently at them; then he took his hat, and without a
word, left the room.

A few moments later, the prince was seated by Nastasia on the sofa,
gazing into her eyes and stroking her face and hair, as he would a
little child’s. He laughed when she laughed, and was ready to cry when
she cried. He did not speak, but listened to her excited, disconnected
chatter, hardly understanding a word of it the while. No sooner did
he detect the slightest appearance of complaining, or weeping, or
reproaching, than he would smile at her kindly, and begin stroking her
hair and her cheeks, soothing and consoling her once more, as if she
were a child.

IX.

A fortnight had passed since the events recorded in the last chapter,
and the position of the actors in our story had become so changed that
it is almost impossible for us to continue the tale without some few
explanations. Yet we feel that we ought to limit ourselves to the simple
record of facts, without much attempt at explanation, for a very patent
reason: because we ourselves have the greatest possible difficulty in
accounting for the facts to be recorded. Such a statement on our part
may appear strange to the reader. How is anyone to tell a story which he
cannot understand himself? In order to keep clear of a false position,
we had perhaps better give an example of what we mean; and probably the
intelligent reader will soon understand the difficulty. More especially
are we inclined to take this course since the example will constitute a
distinct march forward of our story, and will not hinder the progress of
the events remaining to be recorded.

During the next fortnight--that is, through the early part of July--the
history of our hero was circulated in the form of strange, diverting,
most unlikely-sounding stories, which passed from mouth to mouth,
through the streets and villas adjoining those inhabited by Lebedeff,
Ptitsin, Nastasia Philipovna and the Epanchins; in fact, pretty
well through the whole town and its environs. All society--both the
inhabitants of the place and those who came down of an evening for the
music--had got hold of one and the same story, in a thousand varieties
of detail--as to how a certain young prince had raised a terrible
scandal in a most respectable household, had thrown over a daughter of
the family, to whom he was engaged, and had been captured by a woman of
shady reputation whom he was determined to marry at once--breaking off
all old ties for the satisfaction of his insane idea; and, in spite of
the public indignation roused by his action, the marriage was to take
place in Pavlofsk openly and publicly, and the prince had announced his
intention of going through with it with head erect and looking the whole
world in the face. The story was so artfully adorned with scandalous
details, and persons of so great eminence and importance were
apparently mixed up in it, while, at the same time, the evidence was so
circumstantial, that it was no wonder the matter gave food for plenty of
curiosity and gossip.

According to the reports of the most talented gossip-mongers--those who,
in every class of society, are always in haste to explain every event
to their neighbours--the young gentleman concerned was of good family--a
prince--fairly rich--weak of intellect, but a democrat and a dabbler
in the Nihilism of the period, as exposed by Mr. Turgenieff. He could
hardly talk Russian, but had fallen in love with one of the Miss
Epanchins, and his suit met with so much encouragement that he had been
received in the house as the recognized bridegroom-to-be of the young
lady. But like the Frenchman of whom the story is told that he studied
for holy orders, took all the oaths, was ordained priest, and next
morning wrote to his bishop informing him that, as he did not believe
in God and considered it wrong to deceive the people and live upon their
pockets, he begged to surrender the orders conferred upon him the day
before, and to inform his lordship that he was sending this letter to
the public press,--like this Frenchman, the prince played a false game.
It was rumoured that he had purposely waited for the solemn occasion of
a large evening party at the house of his future bride, at which he was
introduced to several eminent persons, in order publicly to make known
his ideas and opinions, and thereby insult the “big-wigs,” and to throw
over his bride as offensively as possible; and that, resisting the
servants who were told off to turn him out of the house, he had seized
and thrown down a magnificent china vase. As a characteristic addition
to the above, it was currently reported that the young prince really
loved the lady to whom he was engaged, and had thrown her over out of
purely Nihilistic motives, with the intention of giving himself the
satisfaction of marrying a fallen woman in the face of all the world,
thereby publishing his opinion that there is no distinction between
virtuous and disreputable women, but that all women are alike, free; and
a “fallen” woman, indeed, somewhat superior to a virtuous one.

