
This sort of character is met with pretty frequently in a certain class.
They are people who know everyone--that is, they know where a man is
employed, what his salary is, whom he knows, whom he married, what money
his wife had, who are his cousins, and second cousins, etc., etc. These
men generally have about a hundred pounds a year to live on, and they
spend their whole time and talents in the amassing of this style of
knowledge, which they reduce--or raise--to the standard of a science.

During the latter part of the conversation the black-haired young man
had become very impatient. He stared out of the window, and fidgeted,
and evidently longed for the end of the journey. He was very absent;
he would appear to listen--and heard nothing; and he would laugh of a
sudden, evidently with no idea of what he was laughing about.

“Excuse me,” said the red-nosed man to the young fellow with the bundle,
rather suddenly; “whom have I the honour to be talking to?”

“Prince Lef Nicolaievitch Muishkin,” replied the latter, with perfect
readiness.

“Prince Muishkin? Lef Nicolaievitch? H’m! I don’t know, I’m sure! I may
say I have never heard of such a person,” said the clerk, thoughtfully.
“At least, the name, I admit, is historical. Karamsin must mention the
family name, of course, in his history--but as an individual--one never
hears of any Prince Muishkin nowadays.”

“Of course not,” replied the prince; “there are none, except myself.
I believe I am the last and only one. As to my forefathers, they have
always been a poor lot; my own father was a sublieutenant in the army. I
don’t know how Mrs. Epanchin comes into the Muishkin family, but she is
descended from the Princess Muishkin, and she, too, is the last of her
line.”

“And did you learn science and all that, with your professor over
there?” asked the black-haired passenger.

“Oh yes--I did learn a little, but--”

“I’ve never learned anything whatever,” said the other.

“Oh, but I learned very little, you know!” added the prince, as though
excusing himself. “They could not teach me very much on account of my
illness.”

“Do you know the Rogojins?” asked his questioner, abruptly.

“No, I don’t--not at all! I hardly know anyone in Russia. Why, is that
your name?”

“Yes, I am Rogojin, Parfen Rogojin.”

“Parfen Rogojin? dear me--then don’t you belong to those very Rogojins,
perhaps--” began the clerk, with a very perceptible increase of civility
in his tone.

“Yes--those very ones,” interrupted Rogojin, impatiently, and with scant
courtesy. I may remark that he had not once taken any notice of the
blotchy-faced passenger, and had hitherto addressed all his remarks
direct to the prince.

“Dear me--is it possible?” observed the clerk, while his face assumed an
expression of great deference and servility--if not of absolute
alarm: “what, a son of that very Semen Rogojin--hereditary honourable
citizen--who died a month or so ago and left two million and a half of
roubles?”

“And how do _you_ know that he left two million and a half of roubles?”
 asked Rogojin, disdainfully, and not deigning so much as to look at the
other. “However, it’s true enough that my father died a month ago, and
that here am I returning from Pskoff, a month after, with hardly a boot
to my foot. They’ve treated me like a dog! I’ve been ill of fever at
Pskoff the whole time, and not a line, nor farthing of money, have I
received from my mother or my confounded brother!”

“And now you’ll have a million roubles, at least--goodness gracious me!”
 exclaimed the clerk, rubbing his hands.

“Five weeks since, I was just like yourself,” continued Rogojin,
addressing the prince, “with nothing but a bundle and the clothes I
wore. I ran away from my father and came to Pskoff to my aunt’s house,
where I caved in at once with fever, and he went and died while I was
away. All honour to my respected father’s memory--but he uncommonly
nearly killed me, all the same. Give you my word, prince, if I hadn’t
cut and run then, when I did, he’d have murdered me like a dog.”

“I suppose you angered him somehow?” asked the prince, looking at the
millionaire with considerable curiosity. But though there may have been
something remarkable in the fact that this man was heir to millions of
roubles there was something about him which surprised and interested
the prince more than that. Rogojin, too, seemed to have taken up the
conversation with unusual alacrity it appeared that he was still in a
considerable state of excitement, if not absolutely feverish, and was
in real need of someone to talk to for the mere sake of talking, as
safety-valve to his agitation.

As for his red-nosed neighbour, the latter--since the information as to
the identity of Rogojin--hung over him, seemed to be living on the
honey of his words and in the breath of his nostrils, catching at every
syllable as though it were a pearl of great price.

“Oh, yes; I angered him--I certainly did anger him,” replied Rogojin.
“But what puts me out so is my brother. Of course my mother couldn’t do
anything--she’s too old--and whatever brother Senka says is law for her!
But why couldn’t he let me know? He sent a telegram, they say. What’s
the good of a telegram? It frightened my aunt so that she sent it back
to the office unopened, and there it’s been ever since! It’s only thanks
to Konief that I heard at all; he wrote me all about it. He says my
brother cut off the gold tassels from my father’s coffin, at night
‘because they’re worth a lot of money!’ says he. Why, I can get him
sent off to Siberia for that alone, if I like; it’s sacrilege. Here,
you--scarecrow!” he added, addressing the clerk at his side, “is it
sacrilege or not, by law?”

“Sacrilege, certainly--certainly sacrilege,” said the latter.

“And it’s Siberia for sacrilege, isn’t it?”

“Undoubtedly so; Siberia, of course!”

“They will think that I’m still ill,” continued Rogojin to the prince,
“but I sloped off quietly, seedy as I was, took the train and came away.
Aha, brother Senka, you’ll have to open your gates and let me in, my
boy! I know he told tales about me to my father--I know that well enough
but I certainly did rile my father about Nastasia Philipovna that’s very
sure, and that was my own doing.”

“Nastasia Philipovna?” said the clerk, as though trying to think out
something.

“Come, you know nothing about _her_,” said Rogojin, impatiently.

“And supposing I do know something?” observed the other, triumphantly.

“Bosh! there are plenty of Nastasia Philipovnas. And what an impertinent
beast you are!” he added angrily. “I thought some creature like you
would hang on to me as soon as I got hold of my money.”

“Oh, but I do know, as it happens,” said the clerk in an aggravating
manner. “Lebedeff knows all about her. You are pleased to reproach me,
your excellency, but what if I prove that I am right after all? Nastasia
Phillpovna’s family name is Barashkoff--I know, you see--and she is a
very well known lady, indeed, and comes of a good family, too. She is
connected with one Totski, Afanasy Ivanovitch, a man of considerable
property, a director of companies, and so on, and a great friend of
General Epanchin, who is interested in the same matters as he is.”

“My eyes!” said Rogojin, really surprised at last. “The devil take the
fellow, how does he know that?”

