alarmed.

“‘How dare you come in so? Be off!’ he shouted, trembling all over with
rage and scarcely able to articulate the words. Suddenly, however, he
observed his pocketbook in my hand.

“‘I think you dropped this,’ I remarked, as quietly and drily as I
could. (I thought it best to treat him so.) For some while he stood
before me in downright terror, and seemed unable to understand. He then
suddenly grabbed at his side-pocket, opened his mouth in alarm, and beat
his forehead with his hand.

“‘My God!’ he cried, ‘where did you find it? How?’ I explained in as few
words as I could, and as drily as possible, how I had seen it and picked
it up; how I had run after him, and called out to him, and how I had
followed him upstairs and groped my way to his door.

“‘Gracious Heaven!’ he cried, ‘all our papers are in it! My dear
sir, you little know what you have done for us. I should have been
lost--lost!’

“I had taken hold of the door-handle meanwhile, intending to leave
the room without reply; but I was panting with my run upstairs, and my
exhaustion came to a climax in a violent fit of coughing, so bad that I
could hardly stand.

“I saw how the man dashed about the room to find me an empty chair, how
he kicked the rags off a chair which was covered up by them, brought it
to me, and helped me to sit down; but my cough went on for another three
minutes or so. When I came to myself he was sitting by me on another
chair, which he had also cleared of the rubbish by throwing it all over
the floor, and was watching me intently.

“‘I’m afraid you are ill?’ he remarked, in the tone which doctors use
when they address a patient. ‘I am myself a medical man’ (he did not say
‘doctor’), with which words he waved his hands towards the room and
its contents as though in protest at his present condition. ‘I see that
you--’

“‘I’m in consumption,’ I said laconically, rising from my seat.

“He jumped up, too.

“‘Perhaps you are exaggerating--if you were to take proper measures
perhaps--”

“He was terribly confused and did not seem able to collect his scattered
senses; the pocket-book was still in his left hand.

“‘Oh, don’t mind me,’ I said. ‘Dr. B---- saw me last week’ (I lugged him
in again), ‘and my hash is quite settled; pardon me--’ I took hold of the
door-handle again. I was on the point of opening the door and leaving my
grateful but confused medical friend to himself and his shame, when my
damnable cough got hold of me again.

“My doctor insisted on my sitting down again to get my breath. He now
said something to his wife who, without leaving her place, addressed a
few words of gratitude and courtesy to me. She seemed very shy over it,
and her sickly face flushed up with confusion. I remained, but with the
air of a man who knows he is intruding and is anxious to get away. The
doctor’s remorse at last seemed to need a vent, I could see.

“‘If I--’ he began, breaking off abruptly every other moment, and
starting another sentence. ‘I--I am so very grateful to you, and I am so
much to blame in your eyes, I feel sure, I--you see--’ (he pointed to
the room again) ‘at this moment I am in such a position--’

“‘Oh!’ I said, ‘there’s nothing to see; it’s quite a clear case--you’ve
lost your post and have come up to make explanations and get another, if
you can!’

“‘How do you know that?’ he asked in amazement.

“‘Oh, it was evident at the first glance,’ I said ironically, but
not intentionally so. ‘There are lots of people who come up from the
provinces full of hope, and run about town, and have to live as best
they can.’

“He began to talk at once excitedly and with trembling lips; he began
complaining and telling me his story. He interested me, I confess; I sat
there nearly an hour. His story was a very ordinary one. He had been a
provincial doctor; he had a civil appointment, and had no sooner taken
it up than intrigues began. Even his wife was dragged into these. He was
proud, and flew into a passion; there was a change of local government
which acted in favour of his opponents; his position was undermined,
complaints were made against him; he lost his post and came up to
Petersburg with his last remaining money, in order to appeal to higher
authorities. Of course nobody would listen to him for a long time; he
would come and tell his story one day and be refused promptly; another
day he would be fed on false promises; again he would be treated
harshly; then he would be told to sign some documents; then he would
sign the paper and hand it in, and they would refuse to receive it, and
tell him to file a formal petition. In a word he had been driven about
from office to office for five months and had spent every farthing he
had; his wife’s last rags had just been pawned; and meanwhile a child
had been born to them and--and today I have a final refusal to my
petition, and I have hardly a crumb of bread left--I have nothing left;
my wife has had a baby lately--and I--I--’

“He sprang up from his chair and turned away. His wife was crying in the
corner; the child had begun to moan again. I pulled out my note-book and
began writing in it. When I had finished and rose from my chair he was
standing before me with an expression of alarmed curiosity.

“‘I have jotted down your name,’ I told him, ‘and all the rest of
it--the place you served at, the district, the date, and all. I have a
friend, Bachmatoff, whose uncle is a councillor of state and has to do
with these matters, one Peter Matveyevitch Bachmatoff.’

“‘Peter Matveyevitch Bachmatoff!’ he cried, trembling all over with
excitement. ‘Why, nearly everything depends on that very man!’

“It is very curious, this story of the medical man, and my visit, and
the happy termination to which I contributed by accident! Everything
fitted in, as in a novel. I told the poor people not to put much hope in
me, because I was but a poor schoolboy myself--(I am not really, but
I humiliated myself as much as possible in order to make them less
hopeful)--but that I would go at once to the Vassili Ostroff and see my
friend; and that as I knew for certain that his uncle adored him, and
was absolutely devoted to him as the last hope and branch of the family,
perhaps the old man might do something to oblige his nephew.

“‘If only they would allow me to explain all to his excellency! If I
could but be permitted to tell my tale to him!” he cried, trembling with
feverish agitation, and his eyes flashing with excitement. I repeated
once more that I could not hold out much hope--that it would probably
end in smoke, and if I did not turn up next morning they must make up
their minds that there was no more to be done in the matter.

“They showed me out with bows and every kind of respect; they seemed
quite beside themselves. I shall never forget the expression of their
faces!

“I took a droshky and drove over to the Vassili Ostroff at once. For
some years I had been at enmity with this young Bachmatoff, at school.
We considered him an aristocrat; at all events I called him one. He used
to dress smartly, and always drove to school in a private trap. He was
a good companion, and was always merry and jolly, sometimes even witty,
though he was not very intellectual, in spite of the fact that he was
always top of the class; I myself was never top in anything! All his
companions were very fond of him, excepting myself. He had several times
during those years come up to me and tried to make friends; but I had
always turned sulkily away and refused to have anything to do with him.
I had not seen him for a whole year now; he was at the university. When,
at nine o’clock, or so, this evening, I arrived and was shown up to him
with great ceremony, he first received me with astonishment, and not too
affably, but he soon cheered up, and suddenly gazed intently at me and
burst out laughing.

“‘Why, what on earth can have possessed you to come and see _me_,
