“No, I’m not; I’m not a bit ashamed!” she murmured. “And how do you
know my heart is innocent? And how dared you send me a love-letter that
time?”

“_Love-letter?_ My letter a love-letter? That letter was the most
respectful of letters; it went straight from my heart, at what was
perhaps the most painful moment of my life! I thought of you at the time
as a kind of light. I--”

“Well, very well, very well!” she said, but quite in a different tone.
She was remorseful now, and bent forward to touch his shoulder, though
still trying not to look him in the face, as if the more persuasively
to beg him not to be angry with her. “Very well,” she continued, looking
thoroughly ashamed of herself, “I feel that I said a very foolish thing.
I only did it just to try you. Take it as unsaid, and if I offended you,
forgive me. Don’t look straight at me like that, please; turn your head
away. You called it a ‘horrible idea’; I only said it to shock you.
Very often I am myself afraid of saying what I intend to say, and out it
comes all the same. You have just told me that you wrote that letter at
the most painful moment of your life. I know what moment that was!” she
added softly, looking at the ground again.

“Oh, if you could know all!”

“I _do_ know all!” she cried, with another burst of indignation. “You were
living in the same house as that horrible woman with whom you ran away.”
 She did not blush as she said this; on the contrary, she grew pale,
and started from her seat, apparently oblivious of what she did, and
immediately sat down again. Her lip continued to tremble for a long
time.

There was silence for a moment. The prince was taken aback by the
suddenness of this last reply, and did not know to what he should
attribute it.

“I don’t love you a bit!” she said suddenly, just as though the words
had exploded from her mouth.

The prince did not answer, and there was silence again. “I love Gavrila
Ardalionovitch,” she said, quickly; but hardly audibly, and with her
head bent lower than ever.

“That is _not_ true,” said the prince, in an equally low voice.

“What! I tell stories, do I? It is true! I gave him my promise a couple
of days ago on this very seat.”

The prince was startled, and reflected for a moment.

“It is not true,” he repeated, decidedly; “you have just invented it!”

“You are wonderfully polite. You know he is greatly improved. He loves
me better than his life. He let his hand burn before my very eyes in
order to prove to me that he loved me better than his life!”

“He burned his hand!”

“Yes, believe it or not! It’s all the same to me!”

The prince sat silent once more. Aglaya did not seem to be joking; she
was too angry for that.

“What! he brought a candle with him to this place? That is, if the
episode happened here; otherwise I can’t.”

“Yes, a candle! What’s there improbable about that?”

“A whole one, and in a candlestick?”

“Yes--no--half a candle--an end, you know--no, it was a whole candle;
it’s all the same. Be quiet, can’t you! He brought a box of matches too,
if you like, and then lighted the candle and held his finger in it for
half an hour and more!--There! Can’t that be?”

“I saw him yesterday, and his fingers were all right!”

Aglaya suddenly burst out laughing, as simply as a child.

“Do you know why I have just told you these lies?” She appealed to the
prince, of a sudden, with the most childlike candour, and with the
laugh still trembling on her lips. “Because when one tells a lie, if one
insists on something unusual and eccentric--something too ‘out of the
way’ for anything, you know--the more impossible the thing is, the more
plausible does the lie sound. I’ve noticed this. But I managed it badly;
I didn’t know how to work it.” She suddenly frowned again at this point
as though at some sudden unpleasant recollection.

“If”--she began, looking seriously and even sadly at him--“if when I
read you all that about the ‘poor knight,’ I wished to-to praise you
for one thing--I also wished to show you that I knew all--and did not
approve of your conduct.”

“You are very unfair to me, and to that unfortunate woman of whom you
spoke just now in such dreadful terms, Aglaya.”

“Because I know all, all--and that is why I speak so. I know very well
how you--half a year since--offered her your hand before everybody.
Don’t interrupt me. You see, I am merely stating facts without any
comment upon them. After that she ran away with Rogojin. Then you lived
with her at some village or town, and she ran away from you.” (Aglaya
blushed dreadfully.) “Then she returned to Rogojin again, who loves
her like a madman. Then you--like a wise man as you are--came back here
after her as soon as ever you heard that she had returned to Petersburg.
Yesterday evening you sprang forward to protect her, and just now you
dreamed about her. You see, I know all. You did come back here for her,
for her--now didn’t you?”

“Yes--for her!” said the prince softly and sadly, and bending his head
down, quite unconscious of the fact that Aglaya was gazing at him with
eyes which burned like live coals. “I came to find out something--I
don’t believe in her future happiness as Rogojin’s wife, although--in a
word, I did not know how to help her or what to do for her--but I came,
on the chance.”

He glanced at Aglaya, who was listening with a look of hatred on her
face.

“If you came without knowing why, I suppose you love her very much
indeed!” she said at last.

“No,” said the prince, “no, I do not love her. Oh! if you only knew with
what horror I recall the time I spent with her!”

A shudder seemed to sweep over his whole body at the recollection.

“Tell me about it,” said Aglaya.

“There is nothing which you might not hear. Why I should wish to tell
you, and only you, this experience of mine, I really cannot say;
perhaps it really is because I love you very much. This unhappy woman is
persuaded that she is the most hopeless, fallen creature in the world.
Oh, do not condemn her! Do not cast stones at her! She has suffered too
much already in the consciousness of her own undeserved shame.

“And she is not guilty--oh God!--Every moment she bemoans and bewails
herself, and cries out that she does not admit any guilt, that she is
the victim of circumstances--the victim of a wicked libertine.

“But whatever she may say, remember that she does not believe it
herself,--remember that she will believe nothing but that she is a
guilty creature.

“When I tried to rid her soul of this gloomy fallacy, she suffered so
terribly that my heart will never be quite at peace so long as I can
remember that dreadful time!--Do you know why she left me? Simply to
prove to me what is not true--that she is base. But the worst of it is,
she did not realize herself that that was all she wanted to prove by
her departure! She went away in response to some inner prompting to
do something disgraceful, in order that she might say to
herself--‘There--you’ve done a new act of shame--you degraded creature!’
