considerably. He had a feeling that he ought to be asking her something,
that there was something he wanted to find out far more important than
how to load a pistol; but his thoughts had all scattered, and he was
only aware that she was sitting by him, and talking to him, and that
he was looking at her; as to what she happened to be saying to him, that
did not matter in the least.

The general now appeared on the verandah, coming from upstairs. He was
on his way out, with an expression of determination on his face, and of
preoccupation and worry also.

“Ah! Lef Nicolaievitch, it’s you, is it? Where are you off to now?” he
asked, oblivious of the fact that the prince had not showed the least
sign of moving. “Come along with me; I want to say a word or two to
you.”

“_Au revoir_, then!” said Aglaya, holding out her hand to the prince.

It was quite dark now, and Muishkin could not see her face clearly, but
a minute or two later, when he and the general had left the villa, he
suddenly flushed up, and squeezed his right hand tightly.

It appeared that he and the general were going in the same direction. In
spite of the lateness of the hour, the general was hurrying away to talk
to someone upon some important subject. Meanwhile he talked incessantly
but disconnectedly to the prince, and continually brought in the name of
Lizabetha Prokofievna.

If the prince had been in a condition to pay more attention to what
the general was saying, he would have discovered that the latter was
desirous of drawing some information out of him, or indeed of asking him
some question outright; but that he could not make up his mind to come
to the point.

Muishkin was so absent, that from the very first he could not attend
to a word the other was saying; and when the general suddenly stopped
before him with some excited question, he was obliged to confess,
ignominiously, that he did not know in the least what he had been
talking about.

The general shrugged his shoulders.

“How strange everyone, yourself included, has become of late,” said
he. “I was telling you that I cannot in the least understand Lizabetha
Prokofievna’s ideas and agitations. She is in hysterics up there, and
moans and says that we have been ‘shamed and disgraced.’ How? Why? When?
By whom? I confess that I am very much to blame myself; I do not conceal
the fact; but the conduct, the outrageous behaviour of this woman, must
really be kept within limits, by the police if necessary, and I am just
on my way now to talk the question over and make some arrangements.
It can all be managed quietly and gently, even kindly, and without the
slightest fuss or scandal. I foresee that the future is pregnant with
events, and that there is much that needs explanation. There is intrigue
in the wind; but if on one side nothing is known, on the other side
nothing will be explained. If I have heard nothing about it, nor have
_you_, nor _he_, nor _she_--who _has_ heard about it, I should like to
know? How _can_ all this be explained except by the fact that half of
it is mirage or moonshine, or some hallucination of that sort?”

“_She_ is insane,” muttered the prince, suddenly recollecting all that had
passed, with a spasm of pain at his heart.

“I too had that idea, and I slept in peace. But now I see that their
opinion is more correct. I do not believe in the theory of madness! The
woman has no common sense; but she is not only not insane, she is artful
to a degree. Her outburst of this evening about Evgenie’s uncle proves
that conclusively. It was _villainous_, simply jesuitical, and it was all
for some special purpose.”

“What about Evgenie’s uncle?”

“My goodness, Lef Nicolaievitch, why, you can’t have heard a single
word I said! Look at me, I’m still trembling all over with the dreadful
shock! It is that that kept me in town so late. Evgenie Pavlovitch’s
uncle--”

“Well?” cried the prince.

“Shot himself this morning, at seven o’clock. A respected, eminent old
man of seventy; and exactly point for point as she described it; a sum
of money, a considerable sum of government money, missing!”

“Why, how could she--”

“What, know of it? Ha, ha, ha! Why, there was a whole crowd round her
the moment she appeared on the scenes here. You know what sort of people
surround her nowadays, and solicit the honour of her ‘acquaintance.’
Of course she might easily have heard the news from someone coming from
town. All Petersburg, if not all Pavlofsk, knows it by now. Look at the
slyness of her observation about Evgenie’s uniform! I mean, her remark
that he had retired just in time! There’s a venomous hint for you,
if you like! No, no! there’s no insanity there! Of course I refuse
to believe that Evgenie Pavlovitch could have known beforehand of the
catastrophe; that is, that at such and such a day at seven o’clock, and
all that; but he might well have had a presentiment of the truth. And
I--all of us--Prince S. and everybody, believed that he was to inherit
a large fortune from this uncle. It’s dreadful, horrible! Mind, I don’t
suspect Evgenie of anything, be quite clear on that point; but the
thing is a little suspicious, nevertheless. Prince S. can’t get over it.
Altogether it is a very extraordinary combination of circumstances.”

“What suspicion attaches to Evgenie Pavlovitch?”

“Oh, none at all! He has behaved very well indeed. I didn’t mean to
drop any sort of hint. His own fortune is intact, I believe. Lizabetha
Prokofievna, of course, refuses to listen to anything. That’s the worst
of it all, these family catastrophes or quarrels, or whatever you like
to call them. You know, prince, you are a friend of the family, so I
don’t mind telling you; it now appears that Evgenie Pavlovitch proposed
to Aglaya a month ago, and was refused.”

“Impossible!” cried the prince.

“Why? Do you know anything about it? Look here,” continued the general,
more agitated than ever, and trembling with excitement, “maybe I have
been letting the cat out of the bag too freely with you, if so, it
is because you are--that sort of man, you know! Perhaps you have some
special information?”

“I know nothing about Evgenie Pavlovitch!” said the prince.

“Nor do I! They always try to bury me underground when there’s anything
going on; they don’t seem to reflect that it is unpleasant to a man
to be treated so! I won’t stand it! We have just had a terrible
scene!--mind, I speak to you as I would to my own son! Aglaya laughs at
her mother. Her sisters guessed about Evgenie having proposed and been
rejected, and told Lizabetha.

“I tell you, my dear fellow, Aglaya is such an extraordinary, such a
self-willed, fantastical little creature, you wouldn’t believe it! Every
high quality, every brilliant trait of heart and mind, are to be
found in her, and, with it all, so much caprice and mockery, such wild
fancies--indeed, a little devil! She has just been laughing at her
mother to her very face, and at her sisters, and at Prince S., and
everybody--and of course she always laughs at me! You know I love the
child--I love her even when she laughs at me, and I believe the wild
little creature has a special fondness for me for that very reason. She
is fonder of me than any of the others. I dare swear she has had a
good laugh at _you_ before now! You were having a quiet talk just now, I
observed, after all the thunder and lightning upstairs. She was sitting
with you just as though there had been no row at all.”

The prince blushed painfully in the darkness, and closed his right hand
tightly, but he said nothing.

“My dear good Prince Lef Nicolaievitch,” began the general again,
suddenly, “both I and Lizabetha Prokofievna--(who has begun to respect
you once more, and me through you, goodness knows why!)--we both love
you very sincerely, and esteem you, in spite of any appearances to the
contrary. But you’ll admit what a riddle it must have been for us when
