 and went on.

When they were almost arrived at Daria Alexeyevna’s house (it was a
large wooden structure of ancient date), a gorgeously-dressed lady and
a young girl came out of it. Both these ladies took their seats in a
carriage, which was waiting at the door, talking and laughing loudly
the while, and drove away without appearing to notice the approaching
couple.

No sooner had the carriage driven off than the door opened once more;
and Rogojin, who had apparently been awaiting them, let them in and
closed it after them.

“There is not another soul in the house now excepting our four selves,”
 he said aloud, looking at the prince in a strange way.

Nastasia Philipovna was waiting for them in the first room they went
into. She was dressed very simply, in black.

She rose at their entrance, but did not smile or give her hand, even to
the prince. Her anxious eyes were fixed upon Aglaya. Both sat down, at
a little distance from one another--Aglaya on the sofa, in the corner
of the room, Nastasia by the window. The prince and Rogojin remained
standing, and were not invited to sit.

Muishkin glanced at Rogojin in perplexity, but the latter only smiled
disagreeably, and said nothing. The silence continued for some few
moments.

An ominous expression passed over Nastasia Philipovna’s face, of a
sudden. It became obstinate-looking, hard, and full of hatred; but she
did not take her eyes off her visitors for a moment.

Aglaya was clearly confused, but not frightened. On entering she had
merely glanced momentarily at her rival, and then had sat still, with
her eyes on the ground, apparently in thought. Once or twice she
glanced casually round the room. A shade of disgust was visible in her
expression; she looked as though she were afraid of contamination in
this place.

She mechanically arranged her dress, and fidgeted uncomfortably,
eventually changing her seat to the other end of the sofa. Probably
she was unconscious of her own movements; but this very unconsciousness
added to the offensiveness of their suggested meaning.

At length she looked straight into Nastasia’s eyes, and instantly read
all there was to read in her rival’s expression. Woman understood woman!
Aglaya shuddered.

“You know of course why I requested this meeting?” she said at last,
quietly, and pausing twice in the delivery of this very short sentence.

“No--I know nothing about it,” said Nastasia, drily and abruptly.

Aglaya blushed. Perhaps it struck her as very strange and impossible
that she should really be sitting here and waiting for “that woman’s”
 reply to her question.

At the first sound of Nastasia’s voice a shudder ran through her frame.
Of course “that woman” observed and took in all this.

“You know quite well, but you are pretending to be ignorant,” said
Aglaya, very low, with her eyes on the ground.

“Why should I?” asked Nastasia Philipovna, smiling slightly.

“You want to take advantage of my position, now that I am in your
house,” continued Aglaya, awkwardly.

“For that position _you_ are to blame and not I,” said Nastasia, flaring
up suddenly. “_I_ did not invite _you_, but you me; and to this moment I
am quite ignorant as to why I am thus honoured.”

Aglaya raised her head haughtily.

“Restrain your tongue!” she said. “I did not come here to fight you with
your own weapons.

“Oh! then you did come ‘to fight,’ I may conclude? Dear me!--and I
thought you were cleverer--”

They looked at one another with undisguised malice. One of these women
had written to the other, so lately, such letters as we have seen; and
it all was dispersed at their first meeting. Yet it appeared that
not one of the four persons in the room considered this in any degree
strange.

The prince who, up to yesterday, would not have believed that he could
even dream of such an impossible scene as this, stood and listened and
looked on, and felt as though he had long foreseen it all. The most
fantastic dream seemed suddenly to have been metamorphosed into the most
vivid reality.

One of these women so despised the other, and so longed to express her
contempt for her (perhaps she had only come for that very purpose, as
Rogojin said next day), that howsoever fantastical was the other woman,
howsoever afflicted her spirit and disturbed her understanding, no
preconceived idea of hers could possibly stand up against that deadly
feminine contempt of her rival. The prince felt sure that Nastasia
would say nothing about the letters herself; but he could judge by her
flashing eyes and the expression of her face what the thought of those
letters must be costing her at this moment. He would have given half his
life to prevent Aglaya from speaking of them. But Aglaya suddenly braced
herself up, and seemed to master herself fully, all in an instant.

“You have not quite understood,” she said. “I did not come to quarrel
with you, though I do not like you. I came to speak to you as... as one
human being to another. I came with my mind made up as to what I had
to say to you, and I shall not change my intention, although you may
misunderstand me. So much the worse for you, not for myself! I wished to
reply to all you have written to me and to reply personally, because I
think that is the more convenient way. Listen to my reply to all your
letters. I began to be sorry for Prince Lef Nicolaievitch on the very
day I made his acquaintance, and when I heard--afterwards--of all that
took place at your house in the evening, I was sorry for him because he
was such a simple-minded man, and because he, in the simplicity of his
soul, believed that he could be happy with a woman of your character.
What I feared actually took place; you could not love him, you tortured
him, and threw him over. You could not love him because you are too
proud--no, not proud, that is an error; because you are too vain--no,
not quite that either; too self-loving; you are self-loving to madness.
Your letters to me are a proof of it. You could not love so simple a
soul as his, and perhaps in your heart you despised him and laughed at
him. All you could love was your shame and the perpetual thought that
you were disgraced and insulted. If you were less shameful, or had no
cause at all for shame, you would be still more unhappy than you are
now.”

Aglaya brought out these thronging words with great satisfaction. They
came from her lips hurriedly and impetuously, and had been prepared and
thought out long ago, even before she had ever dreamed of the present
meeting. She watched with eagerness the effect of her speech as shown in
Nastasia’s face, which was distorted with agitation.

“You remember,” she continued, “he wrote me a letter at that time;
he says you know all about that letter and that you even read it. I
understand all by means of this letter, and understand it correctly. He
has since confirmed it all to me--what I now say to you, word for word.
After receiving his letter I waited; I guessed that you would soon come
back here, because you could never do without Petersburg; you are still
too young and lovely for the provinces. However, this is not my own
idea,” she added, blushing dreadfully; and from this moment the colour
never left her cheeks to the end of her speech. “When I next saw the
prince I began to feel terribly pained and hurt on his account. Do not
laugh; if you laugh you are unworthy of understanding what I say.”

“Surely you see that I am not laughing,” said Nastasia, sadly and
sternly.

“However, it’s all the same to me; laugh or not, just as you please.
