while Lebedeff sat with his eyes fixed mournfully on the young man’s
face.

“Well!” said the latter, at last rousing himself. “Ah! yes! You know why
I came, Lebedeff. Your letter brought me. Speak! Tell me all about it.”

The clerk, rather confused, tried to say something, hesitated, began to
speak, and again stopped. The prince looked at him gravely.

“I think I understand, Lukian Timofeyovitch: you were not sure that I
should come. You did not think I should start at the first word from
you, and you merely wrote to relieve your conscience. However, you
see now that I have come, and I have had enough of trickery. Give up
serving, or trying to serve, two masters. Rogojin has been here these
three weeks. Have you managed to sell her to him as you did before? Tell
me the truth.”

“He discovered everything, the monster... himself......”

“Don’t abuse him; though I dare say you have something to complain
of....”

“He beat me, he thrashed me unmercifully!” replied Lebedeff vehemently.
“He set a dog on me in Moscow, a bloodhound, a terrible beast that
chased me all down the street.”

“You seem to take me for a child, Lebedeff. Tell me, is it a fact that
she left him while they were in Moscow?”

“Yes, it is a fact, and this time, let me tell you, on the very eve of
their marriage! It was a question of minutes when she slipped off to
Petersburg. She came to me directly she arrived--‘Save me, Lukian! find
me some refuge, and say nothing to the prince!’ She is afraid of you,
even more than she is of him, and in that she shows her wisdom!” And
Lebedeff slily put his finger to his brow as he said the last words.

“And now it is you who have brought them together again?”

“Excellency, how could I, how could I prevent it?”

“That will do. I can find out for myself. Only tell me, where is she
now? At his house? With him?”

“Oh no! Certainly not! ‘I am free,’ she says; you know how she insists
on that point. ‘I am entirely free.’ She repeats it over and over again.
She is living in Petersburgskaia, with my sister-in-law, as I told you
in my letter.”

“She is there at this moment?”

“Yes, unless she has gone to Pavlofsk: the fine weather may have tempted
her, perhaps, into the country, with Daria Alexeyevna. ‘I am quite
free,’ she says. Only yesterday she boasted of her freedom to Nicolai
Ardalionovitch--a bad sign,” added Lebedeff, smiling.

“Colia goes to see her often, does he not?”

“He is a strange boy, thoughtless, and inclined to be indiscreet.”

“Is it long since you saw her?”

“I go to see her every day, every day.”

“Then you were there yesterday?”

“N-no: I have not been these three last days.”

“It is a pity you have taken too much wine, Lebedeff I want to ask you
something... but...”

“All right! all right! I am not drunk,” replied the clerk, preparing to
listen.

“Tell me, how was she when you left her?”

“She is a woman who is seeking...”

“Seeking?”

“She seems always to be searching about, as if she had lost something.
The mere idea of her coming marriage disgusts her; she looks on it as
an insult. She cares as much for _him_ as for a piece of orange-peel--not
more. Yet I am much mistaken if she does not look on him with fear and
trembling. She forbids his name to be mentioned before her, and they
only meet when unavoidable. He understands, well enough! But it must be
gone through. She is restless, mocking, deceitful, violent....”

“Deceitful and violent?”

“Yes, violent. I can give you a proof of it. A few days ago she tried
to pull my hair because I said something that annoyed her. I tried to
soothe her by reading the Apocalypse aloud.”

“What?” exclaimed the prince, thinking he had not heard aright.

“By reading the Apocalypse. The lady has a restless imagination, he-he!
She has a liking for conversation on serious subjects, of any kind; in
fact they please her so much, that it flatters her to discuss them. Now
for fifteen years at least I have studied the Apocalypse, and she agrees
with me in thinking that the present is the epoch represented by the
third horse, the black one whose rider holds a measure in his hand. It
seems to me that everything is ruled by measure in our century; all men
are clamouring for their rights; ‘a measure of wheat for a penny, and
three measures of barley for a penny.’ But, added to this, men desire
freedom of mind and body, a pure heart, a healthy life, and all God’s
good gifts. Now by pleading their rights alone, they will never attain
all this, so the white horse, with his rider Death, comes next, and
is followed by Hell. We talked about this matter when we met, and it
impressed her very much.”

“Do you believe all this?” asked Muishkin, looking curiously at his
companion.

“I both believe it and explain it. I am but a poor creature, a beggar,
an atom in the scale of humanity. Who has the least respect for
Lebedeff? He is a target for all the world, the butt of any fool who
chooses to kick him. But in interpreting revelation I am the equal
of anyone, great as he may be! Such is the power of the mind and
the spirit. I have made a lordly personage tremble, as he sat in his
armchair... only by talking to him of things concerning the spirit.
Two years ago, on Easter Eve, His Excellency Nil Alexeyovitch, whose
subordinate I was then, wished to hear what I had to say, and sent a
message by Peter Zakkaritch to ask me to go to his private room. ‘They
tell me you expound the prophecies relating to Antichrist,’ said he,
when we were alone. ‘Is that so?’ ‘Yes,’ I answered unhesitatingly, and
I began to give some comments on the Apostle’s allegorical vision. At
first he smiled, but when we reached the numerical computations and
correspondences, he trembled, and turned pale. Then he begged me to
close the book, and sent me away, promising to put my name on the reward
list. That took place as I said on the eve of Easter, and eight days
later his soul returned to God.”

“What?”

“It is the truth. One evening after dinner he stumbled as he stepped
out of his carriage. He fell, and struck his head on the curb, and died
immediately. He was seventy-three years of age, and had a red face, and
white hair; he deluged himself with scent, and was always smiling like
a child. Peter Zakkaritch recalled my interview with him, and said, ‘_you
foretold his death._’”

The prince rose from his seat, and Lebedeff, surprised to see his
guest preparing to go so soon, remarked: “You are not interested?” in a
respectful tone.

“I am not very well, and my head aches. Doubtless the effect of the
journey,” replied the prince, frowning.

“You should go into the country,” said Lebedeff timidly.

