have but a few copecks left. There certainly is one question upon which
I am anxious to have advice, but--”

“Tell me, how do you intend to live now, and what are your plans?”
 interrupted the general.

“I wish to work, somehow or other.”

“Oh yes, but then, you see, you are a philosopher. Have you any talents,
or ability in any direction--that is, any that would bring in money and
bread? Excuse me again--”

“Oh, don’t apologize. No, I don’t think I have either talents or special
abilities of any kind; on the contrary. I have always been an invalid
and unable to learn much. As for bread, I should think--”

The general interrupted once more with questions; while the prince again
replied with the narrative we have heard before. It appeared that the
general had known Pavlicheff; but why the latter had taken an interest
in the prince, that young gentleman could not explain; probably by
virtue of the old friendship with his father, he thought.

The prince had been left an orphan when quite a little child, and
Pavlicheff had entrusted him to an old lady, a relative of his own,
living in the country, the child needing the fresh air and exercise of
country life. He was educated, first by a governess, and afterwards by a
tutor, but could not remember much about this time of his life. His fits
were so frequent then, that they made almost an idiot of him (the prince
used the expression “idiot” himself). Pavlicheff had met Professor
Schneider in Berlin, and the latter had persuaded him to send the boy
to Switzerland, to Schneider’s establishment there, for the cure of his
epilepsy, and, five years before this time, the prince was sent off. But
Pavlicheff had died two or three years since, and Schneider had himself
supported the young fellow, from that day to this, at his own expense.
Although he had not quite cured him, he had greatly improved his
condition; and now, at last, at the prince’s own desire, and because
of a certain matter which came to the ears of the latter, Schneider had
despatched the young man to Russia.

The general was much astonished.

“Then you have no one, absolutely _no_ one in Russia?” he asked.

“No one, at present; but I hope to make friends; and then I have a
letter from--”

“At all events,” put in the general, not listening to the news about the
letter, “at all events, you must have learned _something_, and your
malady would not prevent your undertaking some easy work, in one of the
departments, for instance?”

“Oh dear no, oh no! As for a situation, I should much like to find one
for I am anxious to discover what I really am fit for. I have learned
a good deal in the last four years, and, besides, I read a great many
Russian books.”

“Russian books, indeed? Then, of course, you can read and write quite
correctly?”

“Oh dear, yes!”

“Capital! And your handwriting?”

“Ah, there I am _really_ talented! I may say I am a real caligraphist. Let
me write you something, just to show you,” said the prince, with some
excitement.

“With pleasure! In fact, it is very necessary. I like your readiness,
prince; in fact, I must say--I--I--like you very well, altogether,” said
the general.

“What delightful writing materials you have here, such a lot of pencils
and things, and what beautiful paper! It’s a charming room altogether.
I know that picture, it’s a Swiss view. I’m sure the artist painted it
from nature, and that I have seen the very place--”

“Quite likely, though I bought it here. Gania, give the prince some
paper. Here are pens and paper; now then, take this table. What’s
this?” the general continued to Gania, who had that moment taken a large
photograph out of his portfolio, and shown it to his senior. “Halloa!
Nastasia Philipovna! Did she send it you herself? Herself?” he inquired,
with much curiosity and great animation.

“She gave it me just now, when I called in to congratulate her. I asked
her for it long ago. I don’t know whether she meant it for a hint that
I had come empty-handed, without a present for her birthday, or what,”
 added Gania, with an unpleasant smile.

“Oh, nonsense, nonsense,” said the general, with decision. “What
extraordinary ideas you have, Gania! As if she would hint; that’s
not her way at all. Besides, what could _you_ give her, without having
thousands at your disposal? You might have given her your portrait,
however. Has she ever asked you for it?”

“No, not yet. Very likely she never will. I suppose you haven’t
forgotten about tonight, have you, Ivan Fedorovitch? You were one of
those specially invited, you know.”

“Oh no, I remember all right, and I shall go, of course. I should think
so! She’s twenty-five years old today! And, you know, Gania, you must
be ready for great things; she has promised both myself and Afanasy
Ivanovitch that she will give a decided answer tonight, yes or no. So be
prepared!”

Gania suddenly became so ill at ease that his face grew paler than ever.

“Are you sure she said that?” he asked, and his voice seemed to quiver
as he spoke.

“Yes, she promised. We both worried her so that she gave in; but she
wished us to tell you nothing about it until the day.”

The general watched Gania’s confusion intently, and clearly did not like
it.

“Remember, Ivan Fedorovitch,” said Gania, in great agitation, “that I
was to be free too, until her decision; and that even then I was to have
my ‘yes or no’ free.”

“Why, don’t you, aren’t you--” began the general, in alarm.

“Oh, don’t misunderstand--”

“But, my dear fellow, what are you doing, what do you mean?”

“Oh, I’m not rejecting her. I may have expressed myself badly, but I
didn’t mean that.”

“Reject her! I should think not!” said the general with annoyance, and
apparently not in the least anxious to conceal it. “Why, my dear
fellow, it’s not a question of your rejecting her, it is whether you are
prepared to receive her consent joyfully, and with proper satisfaction.
How are things going on at home?”

“At home? Oh, I can do as I like there, of course; only my father will
make a fool of himself, as usual. He is rapidly becoming a general
nuisance. I don’t ever talk to him now, but I hold him in check, safe
enough. I swear if it had not been for my mother, I should have shown
him the way out, long ago. My mother is always crying, of course, and my
sister sulks. I had to tell them at last that I intended to be master of
my own destiny, and that I expect to be obeyed at home. At least, I gave
my sister to understand as much, and my mother was present.”

“Well, I must say, I cannot understand it!” said the general, shrugging
his shoulders and dropping his hands. “You remember your mother, Nina
Alexandrovna, that day she came and sat here and groaned--and when I
asked her what was the matter, she says, ‘Oh, it’s such a _dishonour_
to us!’ dishonour! Stuff and nonsense! I should like to know who can
reproach Nastasia Philipovna, or who can say a word of any kind against
her. Did she mean because Nastasia had been living with Totski? What
