“I don’t follow you, Afanasy Ivanovitch; you are losing your head. In
the first place, what do you mean by ‘before company’? Isn’t the company
good enough for you? And what’s all that about ‘a game’? I wished to
tell my little story, and I told it! Don’t you like it? You heard what
I said to the prince? ‘As you decide, so it shall be!’ If he had said
‘yes,’ I should have given my consent! But he said ‘no,’ so I refused.
Here was my whole life hanging on his one word! Surely I was serious
enough?”

“The prince! What on earth has the prince got to do with it? Who the
deuce is the prince?” cried the general, who could conceal his wrath no
longer.

“The prince has this to do with it--that I see in him for the first
time in all my life, a man endowed with real truthfulness of spirit, and
I trust him. He trusted me at first sight, and I trust him!”

“It only remains for me, then, to thank Nastasia Philipovna for the
great delicacy with which she has treated me,” said Gania, as pale as
death, and with quivering lips. “That is my plain duty, of course; but
the prince--what has he to do in the matter?”

“I see what you are driving at,” said Nastasia Philipovna. “You imply
that the prince is after the seventy-five thousand roubles--I quite
understand you. Mr. Totski, I forgot to say, ‘Take your seventy-five
thousand roubles’--I don’t want them. I let you go free for nothing--take
your freedom! You must need it. Nine years and three months’ captivity
is enough for anybody. Tomorrow I shall start afresh--today I am a free
agent for the first time in my life.

“General, you must take your pearls back, too--give them to your
wife--here they are! Tomorrow I shall leave this flat altogether, and
then there’ll be no more of these pleasant little social gatherings,
ladies and gentlemen.”

So saying, she scornfully rose from her seat as though to depart.

“Nastasia Philipovna! Nastasia Philipovna!”

The words burst involuntarily from every mouth. All present started up
in bewildered excitement; all surrounded her; all had listened uneasily
to her wild, disconnected sentences. All felt that something had
happened, something had gone very far wrong indeed, but no one could
make head or tail of the matter.

At this moment there was a furious ring at the bell, and a great knock
at the door--exactly similar to the one which had startled the company
at Gania’s house in the afternoon.

“Ah, ah! here’s the climax at last, at half-past twelve!” cried Nastasia
Philipovna. “Sit down, gentlemen, I beg you. Something is about to
happen.”

So saying, she reseated herself; a strange smile played on her lips. She
sat quite still, but watched the door in a fever of impatience.

“Rogojin and his hundred thousand roubles, no doubt of it,” muttered
Ptitsin to himself.

XV.

Katia, the maid-servant, made her appearance, terribly frightened.

“Goodness knows what it means, ma’am,” she said. “There is a whole
collection of men come--all tipsy--and want to see you. They say that
‘it’s Rogojin, and she knows all about it.’”

“It’s all right, Katia, let them all in at once.”

“Surely not _all_, ma’am? They seem so disorderly--it’s dreadful to see
them.”

“Yes _all_, Katia, all--every one of them. Let them in, or they’ll come
in whether you like or no. Listen! what a noise they are making! Perhaps
you are offended, gentlemen, that I should receive such guests in your
presence? I am very sorry, and ask your forgiveness, but it cannot be
helped--and I should be very grateful if you could all stay and witness
this climax. However, just as you please, of course.”

The guests exchanged glances; they were annoyed and bewildered by the
episode; but it was clear enough that all this had been pre-arranged and
expected by Nastasia Philipovna, and that there was no use in trying to
stop her now--for she was little short of insane.

Besides, they were naturally inquisitive to see what was to happen.
There was nobody who would be likely to feel much alarm. There were
but two ladies present; one of whom was the lively actress, who was not
easily frightened, and the other the silent German beauty who, it turned
out, did not understand a word of Russian, and seemed to be as stupid as
she was lovely.

Her acquaintances invited her to their “At Homes” because she was so
decorative. She was exhibited to their guests like a valuable picture,
or vase, or statue, or firescreen. As for the men, Ptitsin was one of
Rogojin’s friends; Ferdishenko was as much at home as a fish in the sea,
Gania, not yet recovered from his amazement, appeared to be chained to
a pillory. The old professor did not in the least understand what was
happening; but when he noticed how extremely agitated the mistress of
the house, and her friends, seemed, he nearly wept, and trembled with
fright: but he would rather have died than leave Nastasia Philipovna at
such a crisis, for he loved her as if she were his own granddaughter.
Afanasy Ivanovitch greatly disliked having anything to do with the
affair, but he was too much interested to leave, in spite of the mad
turn things had taken; and a few words that had dropped from the lips
of Nastasia puzzled him so much, that he felt he could not go without
an explanation. He resolved therefore, to see it out, and to adopt the
attitude of silent spectator, as most suited to his dignity. General
Epanchin alone determined to depart. He was annoyed at the manner in
which his gift had been returned, as though he had condescended, under
the influence of passion, to place himself on a level with Ptitsin and
Ferdishenko, his self-respect and sense of duty now returned together
with a consciousness of what was due to his social rank and official
importance. In short, he plainly showed his conviction that a man in his
position could have nothing to do with Rogojin and his companions. But
Nastasia interrupted him at his first words.

“Ah, general!” she cried, “I was forgetting! If I had only foreseen
this unpleasantness! I won’t insist on keeping you against your will,
although I should have liked you to be beside me now. In any case, I am
most grateful to you for your visit, and flattering attention... but if
you are afraid...”

“Excuse me, Nastasia Philipovna,” interrupted the general, with
chivalric generosity. “To whom are you speaking? I have remained until
now simply because of my devotion to you, and as for danger, I am only
afraid that the carpets may be ruined, and the furniture smashed!... You
should shut the door on the lot, in my opinion. But I confess that I am
extremely curious to see how it ends.”

“Rogojin!” announced Ferdishenko.

“What do you think about it?” said the general in a low voice to Totski.
“Is she mad? I mean mad in the medical sense of the word .... eh?”

“I’ve always said she was predisposed to it,” whispered Afanasy
Ivanovitch slyly. “Perhaps it is a fever!”

Since their visit to Gania’s home, Rogojin’s followers had been
increased by two new recruits--a dissolute old man, the hero of some
ancient scandal, and a retired sub-lieutenant. A laughable story was
told of the former. He possessed, it was said, a set of false teeth, and
one day when he wanted money for a drinking orgy, he pawned them, and
was never able to reclaim them! The officer appeared to be a rival of
the gentleman who was so proud of his fists. He was known to none of
Rogojin’s followers, but as they passed by the Nevsky, where he stood
begging, he had joined their ranks. His claim for the charity he desired
seemed based on the fact that in the days of his prosperity he had given
away as much as fifteen roubles at a time. The rivals seemed more than
a little jealous of one another. The athlete appeared injured at the
admission of the “beggar” into the company. By nature taciturn, he now
