“Don’t be cross, Daria Alexeyevna!” laughed Nastasia. “I was not angry
when I spoke; I wasn’t reproaching Gania. I don’t know how it was that I
ever could have indulged the whim of entering an honest family like his.
I saw his mother--and kissed her hand, too. I came and stirred up all
that fuss, Gania, this afternoon, on purpose to see how much you could
swallow--you surprised me, my friend--you did, indeed. Surely you could
not marry a woman who accepts pearls like those you knew the general was
going to give me, on the very eve of her marriage? And Rogojin! Why, in
your own house and before your own brother and sister, he bargained with
me! Yet you could come here and expect to be betrothed to me before you
left the house! You almost brought your sister, too. Surely what Rogojin
said about you is not really true: that you would crawl all the way to
the other end of the town, on hands and knees, for three roubles?”

“Yes, he would!” said Rogojin, quietly, but with an air of absolute
conviction.

“H’m! and he receives a good salary, I’m told. Well, what should you get
but disgrace and misery if you took a wife you hated into your family
(for I know very well that you do hate me)? No, no! I believe now that a
man like you would murder anyone for money--sharpen a razor and come
up behind his best friend and cut his throat like a sheep--I’ve read
of such people. Everyone seems money-mad nowadays. No, no! I may be
shameless, but you are far worse. I don’t say a word about that other--”

“Nastasia Philipovna, is this really you? You, once so refined and
delicate of speech. Oh, what a tongue! What dreadful things you are
saying,” cried the general, wringing his hands in real grief.

“I am intoxicated, general. I am having a day out, you know--it’s my
birthday! I have long looked forward to this happy occasion. Daria
Alexeyevna, you see that nosegay-man, that Monsieur aux Camelias,
sitting there laughing at us?”

“I am not laughing, Nastasia Philipovna; I am only listening with all my
attention,” said Totski, with dignity.

“Well, why have I worried him, for five years, and never let him go
free? Is he worth it? He is only just what he ought to be--nothing
particular. He thinks I am to blame, too. He gave me my education, kept
me like a countess. Money--my word! What a lot of money he spent over
me! And he tried to find me an honest husband first, and then this
Gania, here. And what do you think? All these five years I did not
live with him, and yet I took his money, and considered I was quite
justified.

“You say, take the hundred thousand and kick that man out. It is true,
it is an abominable business, as you say. I might have married long ago,
not Gania--Oh, no!--but that would have been abominable too.

“Would you believe it, I had some thoughts of marrying Totski, four
years ago! I meant mischief, I confess--but I could have had him, I give
you my word; he asked me himself. But I thought, no! it’s not worthwhile
to take such advantage of him. No! I had better go on to the streets, or
accept Rogojin, or become a washerwoman or something--for I have nothing
of my own, you know. I shall go away and leave everything behind, to
the last rag--he shall have it all back. And who would take me without
anything? Ask Gania, there, whether he would. Why, even Ferdishenko
wouldn’t have me!”

“No, Ferdishenko would not; he is a candid fellow, Nastasia Philipovna,”
 said that worthy. “But the prince would. You sit here making complaints,
but just look at the prince. I’ve been observing him for a long while.”

Nastasia Philipovna looked keenly round at the prince.

“Is that true?” she asked.

“Quite true,” whispered the prince.

“You’ll take me as I am, with nothing?”

“I will, Nastasia Philipovna.”

“Here’s a pretty business!” cried the general. “However, it might have
been expected of him.”

The prince continued to regard Nastasia with a sorrowful, but intent and
piercing, gaze.

“Here’s another alternative for me,” said Nastasia, turning once more to
the actress; “and he does it out of pure kindness of heart. I know him.
I’ve found a benefactor. Perhaps, though, what they say about him may be
true--that he’s an--we know what. And what shall you live on, if you are
really so madly in love with Rogojin’s mistress, that you are ready to
marry her--eh?”

“I take you as a good, honest woman, Nastasia Philipovna--not as
Rogojin’s mistress.”

“Who? I?--good and honest?”

“Yes, you.”

“Oh, you get those ideas out of novels, you know. Times are changed
now, dear prince; the world sees things as they really are. That’s all
nonsense. Besides, how can you marry? You need a nurse, not a wife.”

The prince rose and began to speak in a trembling, timid tone, but with
the air of a man absolutely sure of the truth of his words.

“I know nothing, Nastasia Philipovna. I have seen nothing. You are right
so far; but I consider that you would be honouring me, and not I you. I
am a nobody. You have suffered, you have passed through hell and emerged
pure, and that is very much. Why do you shame yourself by desiring to
go with Rogojin? You are delirious. You have returned to Mr. Totski his
seventy-five thousand roubles, and declared that you will leave this
house and all that is in it, which is a line of conduct that not one
person here would imitate. Nastasia Philipovna, I love you! I would die
for you. I shall never let any man say one word against you, Nastasia
Philipovna! and if we are poor, I can work for both.”

As the prince spoke these last words a titter was heard from
Ferdishenko; Lebedeff laughed too. The general grunted with irritation;
Ptitsin and Totski barely restrained their smiles. The rest all sat
listening, open-mouthed with wonder.

“But perhaps we shall not be poor; we may be very rich, Nastasia
Philipovna,” continued the prince, in the same timid, quivering tones.
“I don’t know for certain, and I’m sorry to say I haven’t had an
opportunity of finding out all day; but I received a letter from Moscow,
while I was in Switzerland, from a Mr. Salaskin, and he acquaints me
with the fact that I am entitled to a very large inheritance. This
letter--”

The prince pulled a letter out of his pocket.

“Is he raving?” said the general. “Are we really in a mad-house?”

There was silence for a moment. Then Ptitsin spoke.

“I think you said, prince, that your letter was from Salaskin? Salaskin
is a very eminent man, indeed, in his own world; he is a wonderfully
clever solicitor, and if he really tells you this, I think you may be
pretty sure that he is right. It so happens, luckily, that I know his
handwriting, for I have lately had business with him. If you would allow
me to see it, I should perhaps be able to tell you.”

The prince held out the letter silently, but with a shaking hand.

“What, what?” said the general, much agitated.

“What’s all this? Is he really heir to anything?”

All present concentrated their attention upon Ptitsin, reading the
prince’s letter. The general curiosity had received a new fillip.
Ferdishenko could not sit still. Rogojin fixed his eyes first on the
prince, and then on Ptitsin, and then back again; he was extremely
agitated. Lebedeff could not stand it. He crept up and read over
Ptitsin’s shoulder, with the air of a naughty boy who expects a box on
