
“Well, and did you like it very much? Was it very edifying and
instructive?” asked Aglaya.

“No, I didn’t like it at all, and was ill after seeing it; but I confess
I stared as though my eyes were fixed to the sight. I could not tear
them away.”

“I, too, should have been unable to tear my eyes away,” said Aglaya.

“They do not at all approve of women going to see an execution there.
The women who do go are condemned for it afterwards in the newspapers.”

“That is, by contending that it is not a sight for women they admit that
it is a sight for men. I congratulate them on the deduction. I suppose
you quite agree with them, prince?”

“Tell us about the execution,” put in Adelaida.

“I would much rather not, just now,” said the prince, a little disturbed
and frowning slightly.

“You don’t seem to want to tell us,” said Aglaya, with a mocking air.

“No,--the thing is, I was telling all about the execution a little while
ago, and--”

“Whom did you tell about it?”

“The man-servant, while I was waiting to see the general.”

“Our man-servant?” exclaimed several voices at once.

“Yes, the one who waits in the entrance hall, a greyish, red-faced
man--”

“The prince is clearly a democrat,” remarked Aglaya.

“Well, if you could tell Aleksey about it, surely you can tell us too.”

“I do so want to hear about it,” repeated Adelaida.

“Just now, I confess,” began the prince, with more animation, “when you
asked me for a subject for a picture, I confess I had serious thoughts
of giving you one. I thought of asking you to draw the face of a
criminal, one minute before the fall of the guillotine, while the
wretched man is still standing on the scaffold, preparatory to placing
his neck on the block.”

“What, his face? only his face?” asked Adelaida. “That would be a
strange subject indeed. And what sort of a picture would that make?”

“Oh, why not?” the prince insisted, with some warmth. “When I was in
Basle I saw a picture very much in that style--I should like to tell you
about it; I will some time or other; it struck me very forcibly.”

“Oh, you shall tell us about the Basle picture another time; now we must
have all about the execution,” said Adelaida. “Tell us about that face
as it appeared to your imagination--how should it be drawn?--just the
face alone, do you mean?”

“It was just a minute before the execution,” began the prince, readily,
carried away by the recollection and evidently forgetting everything
else in a moment; “just at the instant when he stepped off the ladder on
to the scaffold. He happened to look in my direction: I saw his eyes and
understood all, at once--but how am I to describe it? I do so wish you
or somebody else could draw it, you, if possible. I thought at the time
what a picture it would make. You must imagine all that went before, of
course, all--all. He had lived in the prison for some time and had not
expected that the execution would take place for at least a week yet--he
had counted on all the formalities and so on taking time; but it so
happened that his papers had been got ready quickly. At five o’clock in
the morning he was asleep--it was October, and at five in the morning
it was cold and dark. The governor of the prison comes in on tip-toe and
touches the sleeping man’s shoulder gently. He starts up. ‘What is it?’
he says. ‘The execution is fixed for ten o’clock.’ He was only just
awake, and would not believe at first, but began to argue that his
papers would not be out for a week, and so on. When he was wide awake
and realized the truth, he became very silent and argued no more--so
they say; but after a bit he said: ‘It comes very hard on one so
suddenly’ and then he was silent again and said nothing.

“The three or four hours went by, of course, in necessary
preparations--the priest, breakfast, (coffee, meat, and some wine they
gave him; doesn’t it seem ridiculous?) And yet I believe these people
give them a good breakfast out of pure kindness of heart, and believe
that they are doing a good action. Then he is dressed, and then begins
the procession through the town to the scaffold. I think he, too,
must feel that he has an age to live still while they cart him along.
Probably he thought, on the way, ‘Oh, I have a long, long time yet.
Three streets of life yet! When we’ve passed this street there’ll be
that other one; and then that one where the baker’s shop is on the
right; and when shall we get there? It’s ages, ages!’ Around him are
crowds shouting, yelling--ten thousand faces, twenty thousand eyes.
All this has to be endured, and especially the thought: ‘Here are ten
thousand men, and not one of them is going to be executed, and yet I am
to die.’ Well, all that is preparatory.

“At the scaffold there is a ladder, and just there he burst into
tears--and this was a strong man, and a terribly wicked one, they say!
There was a priest with him the whole time, talking; even in the cart
as they drove along, he talked and talked. Probably the other heard
nothing; he would begin to listen now and then, and at the third word or
so he had forgotten all about it.

“At last he began to mount the steps; his legs were tied, so that he had
to take very small steps. The priest, who seemed to be a wise man, had
stopped talking now, and only held the cross for the wretched fellow to
kiss. At the foot of the ladder he had been pale enough; but when he set
foot on the scaffold at the top, his face suddenly became the colour
of paper, positively like white notepaper. His legs must have become
suddenly feeble and helpless, and he felt a choking in his throat--you
know the sudden feeling one has in moments of terrible fear, when one
does not lose one’s wits, but is absolutely powerless to move? If some
dreadful thing were suddenly to happen; if a house were just about to
fall on one;--don’t you know how one would long to sit down and shut
one’s eyes and wait, and wait? Well, when this terrible feeling came
over him, the priest quickly pressed the cross to his lips, without a
word--a little silver cross it was--and he kept on pressing it to the
man’s lips every second. And whenever the cross touched his lips, the
eyes would open for a moment, and the legs moved once, and he kissed the
cross greedily, hurriedly--just as though he were anxious to catch hold
of something in case of its being useful to him afterwards, though he
could hardly have had any connected religious thoughts at the time. And
so up to the very block.

“How strange that criminals seldom swoon at such a moment! On
the contrary, the brain is especially active, and works
incessantly--probably hard, hard, hard--like an engine at full pressure.
I imagine that various thoughts must beat loud and fast through
his head--all unfinished ones, and strange, funny thoughts, very
likely!--like this, for instance: ‘That man is looking at me, and he
has a wart on his forehead! and the executioner has burst one of his
buttons, and the lowest one is all rusty!’ And meanwhile he notices and
remembers everything. There is one point that cannot be forgotten, round
which everything else dances and turns about; and because of this
point he cannot faint, and this lasts until the very final quarter of
a second, when the wretched neck is on the block and the victim listens
and waits and _knows_--that’s the point, he _knows_ that he is just _now_
about to die, and listens for the rasp of the iron over his head. If I
lay there, I should certainly listen for that grating sound, and hear
it, too! There would probably be but the tenth part of an instant left
to hear it in, but one would certainly hear it. And imagine, some people
declare that when the head flies off it is _conscious_ of having flown
off! Just imagine what a thing to realize! Fancy if consciousness were
to last for even five seconds!

“Draw the scaffold so that only the top step of the ladder comes in
clearly. The criminal must be just stepping on to it, his face as white
as note-paper. The priest is holding the cross to his blue lips, and the
