
“There, you are laughing at me--I know why you laugh. It is perfectly
true that we lived apart from one another all the time, in different
towns. I told you before that I did not love her with love, but with
pity! You said then that you understood me; did you really understand
me or not? What hatred there is in your eyes at this moment! I came
to relieve your mind, because you are dear to me also. I love you
very much, Parfen; and now I shall go away and never come back again.
Goodbye.”

The prince rose.

“Stay a little,” said Parfen, not leaving his chair and resting his head
on his right hand. “I haven’t seen you for a long time.”

The prince sat down again. Both were silent for a few moments.

“When you are not with me I hate you, Lef Nicolaievitch. I have loathed
you every day of these three months since I last saw you. By heaven I
have!” said Rogojin. “I could have poisoned you at any minute. Now, you
have been with me but a quarter of an hour, and all my malice seems to
have melted away, and you are as dear to me as ever. Stay here a little
longer.”

“When I am with you you trust me; but as soon as my back is turned you
suspect me,” said the prince, smiling, and trying to hide his emotion.

“I trust your voice, when I hear you speak. I quite understand that you
and I cannot be put on a level, of course.”

“Why did you add that?--There! Now you are cross again,” said the
prince, wondering.

“We were not asked, you see. We were made different, with different
tastes and feelings, without being consulted. You say you love her with
pity. I have no pity for her. She hates me--that’s the plain truth of
the matter. I dream of her every night, and always that she is laughing
at me with another man. And so she does laugh at me. She thinks no more
of marrying me than if she were changing her shoe. Would you believe it,
I haven’t seen her for five days, and I daren’t go near her. She asks me
what I come for, as if she were not content with having disgraced me--”

“Disgraced you! How?”

“Just as though you didn’t know! Why, she ran away from me, and went to
you. You admitted it yourself, just now.”

“But surely you do not believe that she...”

“That she did not disgrace me at Moscow with that officer, Zemtuznikoff?
I know for certain she did, after having fixed our marriage-day
herself!”

“Impossible!” cried the prince.

“I know it for a fact,” replied Rogojin, with conviction.

“It is not like her, you say? My friend, that’s absurd. Perhaps such an
act would horrify her, if she were with you, but it is quite different
where I am concerned. She looks on me as vermin. Her affair with Keller
was simply to make a laughing-stock of me. You don’t know what a fool
she made of me in Moscow; and the money I spent over her! The money! the
money!”

“And you can marry her now, Parfen! What will come of it all?” said the
prince, with dread in his voice.

Rogojin gazed back gloomily, and with a terrible expression in his eyes,
but said nothing.

“I haven’t been to see her for five days,” he repeated, after a slight
pause. “I’m afraid of being turned out. She says she’s still her own
mistress, and may turn me off altogether, and go abroad. She told me
this herself,” he said, with a peculiar glance at Muishkin. “I think she
often does it merely to frighten me. She is always laughing at me, for
some reason or other; but at other times she’s angry, and won’t say a
word, and that’s what I’m afraid of. I took her a shawl one day, the
like of which she might never have seen, although she did live in luxury
and she gave it away to her maid, Katia. Sometimes when I can keep away
no longer, I steal past the house on the sly, and once I watched at the
gate till dawn--I thought something was going on--and she saw me from
the window. She asked me what I should do if I found she had deceived
me. I said, ‘You know well enough.’”

“What did she know?” cried the prince.

“How was I to tell?” replied Rogojin, with an angry laugh. “I did my
best to catch her tripping in Moscow, but did not succeed. However, I
caught hold of her one day, and said: ‘You are engaged to be married
into a respectable family, and do you know what sort of a woman you are?
_That’s_ the sort of woman you are,’ I said.”

“You told her that?”

“Yes.”

“Well, go on.”

“She said, ‘I wouldn’t even have you for a footman now, much less for
a husband.’ ‘I shan’t leave the house,’ I said, ‘so it doesn’t matter.’
‘Then I shall call somebody and have you kicked out,’ she cried. So then
I rushed at her, and beat her till she was bruised all over.”

“Impossible!” cried the prince, aghast.

“I tell you it’s true,” said Rogojin quietly, but with eyes ablaze with
passion.

“Then for a day and a half I neither slept, nor ate, nor drank, and
would not leave her. I knelt at her feet: ‘I shall die here,’ I said,
‘if you don’t forgive me; and if you have me turned out, I shall drown
myself; because, what should I be without you now?’ She was like a
madwoman all that day; now she would cry; now she would threaten me with
a knife; now she would abuse me. She called in Zaleshoff and Keller,
and showed me to them, shamed me in their presence. ‘Let’s all go to
the theatre,’ she says, ‘and leave him here if he won’t go--it’s not
my business. They’ll give you some tea, Parfen Semeonovitch, while I
am away, for you must be hungry.’ She came back from the theatre alone.
‘Those cowards wouldn’t come,’ she said. ‘They are afraid of you, and
tried to frighten me, too. “He won’t go away as he came,” they said,
“he’ll cut your throat--see if he doesn’t.” Now, I shall go to my
bedroom, and I shall not even lock my door, just to show you how much
I am afraid of you. You must be shown that once for all. Did you have
tea?’ ‘No,’ I said, ‘and I don’t intend to.’ ‘Ha, ha! you are playing
off your pride against your stomach! That sort of heroism doesn’t sit
well on you,’ she said.

“With that she did as she had said she would; she went to bed, and did
not lock her door. In the morning she came out. ‘Are you quite mad?’ she
said, sharply. ‘Why, you’ll die of hunger like this.’ ‘Forgive me,’
I said. ‘No, I won’t, and I won’t marry you. I’ve said it. Surely you
haven’t sat in this chair all night without sleeping?’ ‘I didn’t
sleep,’ I said. ‘H’m! how sensible of you. And are you going to have no
breakfast or dinner today?’ ‘I told you I wouldn’t. Forgive me!’ ‘You’ve
no idea how unbecoming this sort of thing is to you,’ she said, ‘it’s
like putting a saddle on a cow’s back. Do you think you are frightening
me? My word, what a dreadful thing that you should sit here and eat no
food! How terribly frightened I am!’ She wasn’t angry long, and didn’t
seem to remember my offence at all. I was surprised, for she is a
vindictive, resentful woman--but then I thought that perhaps she
despised me too much to feel any resentment against me. And that’s the
truth.

“She came up to me and said, ‘Do you know who the Pope of Rome is?’
‘I’ve heard of him,’ I said. ‘I suppose you’ve read the Universal
History, Parfen Semeonovitch, haven’t you?’ she asked. ‘I’ve learned
nothing at all,’ I said. ‘Then I’ll lend it to you to read. You must
know there was a Roman Pope once, and he was very angry with a certain
Emperor; so the Emperor came and neither ate nor drank, but knelt before
the Pope’s palace till he should be forgiven. And what sort of vows do
