“Besides,” said Burdovsky, “the prince would not like it, would he?” So
they gave up the pursuit.

Rogojin and Nastasia Philipovna reached the station just in time for the
train. As he jumped out of the carriage and was almost on the point
of entering the train, Rogojin accosted a young girl standing on the
platform and wearing an old-fashioned, but respectable-looking, black
cloak and a silk handkerchief over her head.

“Take fifty roubles for your cloak?” he shouted, holding the money
out to the girl. Before the astonished young woman could collect her
scattered senses, he pushed the money into her hand, seized the mantle,
and threw it and the handkerchief over Nastasia’s head and shoulders.
The latter’s wedding-array would have attracted too much attention, and
it was not until some time later that the girl understood why her old
cloak and kerchief had been bought at such a price.

The news of what had happened reached the church with extraordinary
rapidity. When Keller arrived, a host of people whom he did not know
thronged around to ask him questions. There was much excited talking,
and shaking of heads, even some laughter; but no one left the church,
all being anxious to observe how the now celebrated bridegroom would
take the news. He grew very pale upon hearing it, but took it quite
quietly.

“I was afraid,” he muttered, scarcely audibly, “but I hardly thought it
would come to this.” Then after a short silence, he added: “However, in
her state, it is quite consistent with the natural order of things.”

Even Keller admitted afterwards that this was “extraordinarily
philosophical” on the prince’s part. He left the church quite calm, to
all appearances, as many witnesses were found to declare afterwards. He
seemed anxious to reach home and be left alone as quickly as possible;
but this was not to be. He was accompanied by nearly all the invited
guests, and besides this, the house was almost besieged by excited bands
of people, who insisted upon being allowed to enter the verandah. The
prince heard Keller and Lebedeff remonstrating and quarrelling with
these unknown individuals, and soon went out himself. He approached
the disturbers of his peace, requested courteously to be told what was
desired; then politely putting Lebedeff and Keller aside, he addressed
an old gentleman who was standing on the verandah steps at the head of
the band of would-be guests, and courteously requested him to honour him
with a visit. The old fellow was quite taken aback by this, but entered,
followed by a few more, who tried to appear at their ease. The rest
remained outside, and presently the whole crowd was censuring those who
had accepted the invitation. The prince offered seats to his strange
visitors, tea was served, and a general conversation sprang up.
Everything was done most decorously, to the considerable surprise of the
intruders. A few tentative attempts were made to turn the conversation
to the events of the day, and a few indiscreet questions were asked; but
Muishkin replied to everybody with such simplicity and good-humour, and
at the same time with so much dignity, and showed such confidence in the
good breeding of his guests, that the indiscreet talkers were quickly
silenced. By degrees the conversation became almost serious. One
gentleman suddenly exclaimed, with great vehemence: “Whatever happens,
I shall not sell my property; I shall wait. Enterprise is better than
money, and there, sir, you have my whole system of economy, if you
wish!” He addressed the prince, who warmly commended his sentiments,
though Lebedeff whispered in his ear that this gentleman, who talked so
much of his “property,” had never had either house or home.

Nearly an hour passed thus, and when tea was over the visitors seemed to
think that it was time to go. As they went out, the doctor and the old
gentleman bade Muishkin a warm farewell, and all the rest took their
leave with hearty protestations of good-will, dropping remarks to the
effect that “it was no use worrying,” and that “perhaps all would turn
out for the best,” and so on. Some of the younger intruders would have
asked for champagne, but they were checked by the older ones. When all
had departed, Keller leaned over to Lebedeff, and said:

“With you and me there would have been a scene. We should have shouted
and fought, and called in the police. But he has simply made some new
friends--and such friends, too! I know them!”

Lebedeff, who was slightly intoxicated, answered with a sigh:

“Things are hidden from the wise and prudent, and revealed unto babes.
I have applied those words to him before, but now I add that God has
preserved the babe himself from the abyss, He and all His saints.”

At last, about half-past ten, the prince was left alone. His head ached.
Colia was the last to go, after having helped him to change his wedding
clothes. They parted on affectionate terms, and, without speaking of
what had happened, Colia promised to come very early the next day. He
said later that the prince had given no hint of his intentions when they
said good-bye, but had hidden them even from him. Soon there was hardly
anyone left in the house. Burdovsky had gone to see Hippolyte; Keller
and Lebedeff had wandered off together somewhere.

Only Vera Lebedeff remained hurriedly rearranging the furniture in
the rooms. As she left the verandah, she glanced at the prince. He was
seated at the table, with both elbows upon it, and his head resting
on his hands. She approached him, and touched his shoulder gently.
The prince started and looked at her in perplexity; he seemed to be
collecting his senses for a minute or so, before he could remember where
he was. As recollection dawned upon him, he became violently agitated.
All he did, however, was to ask Vera very earnestly to knock at his door
and awake him in time for the first train to Petersburg next morning.
Vera promised, and the prince entreated her not to tell anyone of his
intention. She promised this, too; and at last, when she had half-closed
the door, he called her back a third time, took her hands in his, kissed
them, then kissed her forehead, and in a rather peculiar manner said to
her, “Until tomorrow!”

Such was Vera’s story afterwards.

She went away in great anxiety about him, but when she saw him in the
morning, he seemed to be quite himself again, greeted her with a smile,
and told her that he would very likely be back by the evening. It
appears that he did not consider it necessary to inform anyone excepting
Vera of his departure for town.

XI.

An hour later he was in St. Petersburg, and by ten o’clock he had rung
the bell at Rogojin’s.

He had gone to the front door, and was kept waiting a long while before
anyone came. At last the door of old Mrs. Rogojin’s flat was opened, and
an aged servant appeared.

“Parfen Semionovitch is not at home,” she announced from the doorway.
“Whom do you want?”

“Parfen Semionovitch.”

“He is not in.”

The old woman examined the prince from head to foot with great
curiosity.

“At all events tell me whether he slept at home last night, and whether
he came alone?”

The old woman continued to stare at him, but said nothing.

“Was not Nastasia Philipovna here with him, yesterday evening?”

“And, pray, who are you yourself?”

“Prince Lef Nicolaievitch Muishkin; he knows me well.”

“He is not at home.”

The woman lowered her eyes.

“And Nastasia Philipovna?”

“I know nothing about it.”

