rooms, a nice enough lodging, and one would have thought a little too
good for a clerk on two thousand roubles a year. But it was designed
to accommodate a few lodgers on board terms, and had been taken a few
months since, much to the disgust of Gania, at the urgent request of his
mother and his sister, Varvara Ardalionovna, who longed to do something
to increase the family income a little, and fixed their hopes upon
letting lodgings. Gania frowned upon the idea. He thought it _infra dig_,
and did not quite like appearing in society afterwards--that society in
which he had been accustomed to pose up to now as a young man of rather
brilliant prospects. All these concessions and rebuffs of fortune,
of late, had wounded his spirit severely, and his temper had become
extremely irritable, his wrath being generally quite out of proportion
to the cause. But if he had made up his mind to put up with this sort of
life for a while, it was only on the plain understanding with his inner
self that he would very soon change it all, and have things as he
chose again. Yet the very means by which he hoped to make this change
threatened to involve him in even greater difficulties than he had had
before.

The flat was divided by a passage which led straight out of the
entrance-hall. Along one side of this corridor lay the three rooms which
were designed for the accommodation of the “highly recommended” lodgers.
Besides these three rooms there was another small one at the end of the
passage, close to the kitchen, which was allotted to General Ivolgin,
the nominal master of the house, who slept on a wide sofa, and was
obliged to pass into and out of his room through the kitchen, and up
or down the back stairs. Colia, Gania’s young brother, a school-boy of
thirteen, shared this room with his father. He, too, had to sleep on
an old sofa, a narrow, uncomfortable thing with a torn rug over it; his
chief duty being to look after his father, who needed to be watched more
and more every day.

The prince was given the middle room of the three, the first being
occupied by one Ferdishenko, while the third was empty.

But Gania first conducted the prince to the family apartments. These
consisted of a “salon,” which became the dining-room when required; a
drawing-room, which was only a drawing-room in the morning, and became
Gania’s study in the evening, and his bedroom at night; and lastly Nina
Alexandrovna’s and Varvara’s bedroom, a small, close chamber which they
shared together.

In a word, the whole place was confined, and a “tight fit” for the
party. Gania used to grind his teeth with rage over the state of
affairs; though he was anxious to be dutiful and polite to his mother.
However, it was very soon apparent to anyone coming into the house, that
Gania was the tyrant of the family.

Nina Alexandrovna and her daughter were both seated in the drawing-room,
engaged in knitting, and talking to a visitor, Ivan Petrovitch Ptitsin.

The lady of the house appeared to be a woman of about fifty years of
age, thin-faced, and with black lines under the eyes. She looked ill and
rather sad; but her face was a pleasant one for all that; and from the
first word that fell from her lips, any stranger would at once conclude
that she was of a serious and particularly sincere nature. In spite of
her sorrowful expression, she gave the idea of possessing considerable
firmness and decision.

Her dress was modest and simple to a degree, dark and elderly in style;
but both her face and appearance gave evidence that she had seen better
days.

Varvara was a girl of some twenty-three summers, of middle height, thin,
but possessing a face which, without being actually beautiful, had
the rare quality of charm, and might fascinate even to the extent of
passionate regard.

She was very like her mother: she even dressed like her, which proved
that she had no taste for smart clothes. The expression of her grey eyes
was merry and gentle, when it was not, as lately, too full of thought
and anxiety. The same decision and firmness was to be observed in her
face as in her mother’s, but her strength seemed to be more vigorous
than that of Nina Alexandrovna. She was subject to outbursts of temper,
of which even her brother was a little afraid.

The present visitor, Ptitsin, was also afraid of her. This was a young
fellow of something under thirty, dressed plainly, but neatly. His
manners were good, but rather ponderously so. His dark beard bore
evidence to the fact that he was not in any government employ. He could
speak well, but preferred silence. On the whole he made a decidedly
agreeable impression. He was clearly attracted by Varvara, and made no
secret of his feelings. She trusted him in a friendly way, but had not
shown him any decided encouragement as yet, which fact did not quell his
ardour in the least.

Nina Alexandrovna was very fond of him, and had grown quite confidential
with him of late. Ptitsin, as was well known, was engaged in the
business of lending out money on good security, and at a good rate of
interest. He was a great friend of Gania’s.

After a formal introduction by Gania (who greeted his mother very
shortly, took no notice of his sister, and immediately marched Ptitsin
out of the room), Nina Alexandrovna addressed a few kind words to the
prince and forthwith requested Colia, who had just appeared at the door,
to show him to the “middle room.”

Colia was a nice-looking boy. His expression was simple and confiding,
and his manners were very polite and engaging.

“Where’s your luggage?” he asked, as he led the prince away to his room.

“I had a bundle; it’s in the entrance hall.”

“I’ll bring it you directly. We only have a cook and one maid, so I have
to help as much as I can. Varia looks after things, generally, and
loses her temper over it. Gania says you have only just arrived from
Switzerland?”

“Yes.”

“Is it jolly there?”

“Very.”

“Mountains?”

“Yes.”

“I’ll go and get your bundle.”

Here Varvara joined them.

“The maid shall bring your bed-linen directly. Have you a portmanteau?”

“No; a bundle--your brother has just gone to the hall for it.”

“There’s nothing there except this,” said Colia, returning at this
moment. “Where did you put it?”

“Oh! but that’s all I have,” said the prince, taking it.

“Ah! I thought perhaps Ferdishenko had taken it.”

“Don’t talk nonsense,” said Varia, severely. She seemed put out, and was
only just polite with the prince.

“Oho!” laughed the boy, “you can be nicer than that to _me_, you know--I’m
not Ptitsin!”

“You ought to be whipped, Colia, you silly boy. If you want anything”
 (to the prince) “please apply to the servant. We dine at half-past four.
You can take your dinner with us, or have it in your room, just as you
please. Come along, Colia, don’t disturb the prince.”

At the door they met Gania coming in.

“Is father in?” he asked. Colia whispered something in his ear and went
out.

