
“Not at all!” said the prince, blushing. “I was only going to say that
you--not that you could not be like Gleboff--but that you would have
been more like--”

“I guess what you mean--I should be an Osterman, not a Gleboff--eh? Is
that what you meant?”

“What Osterman?” asked the prince in some surprise.

“Why, Osterman--the diplomatist. Peter’s Osterman,” muttered Hippolyte,
confused. There was a moment’s pause of mutual confusion.

“Oh, no, no!” said the prince at last, “that was not what I was going to
say--oh no! I don’t think you would ever have been like Osterman.”

Hippolyte frowned gloomily.

“I’ll tell you why I draw the conclusion,” explained the prince,
evidently desirous of clearing up the matter a little. “Because, though
I often think over the men of those times, I cannot for the life of me
imagine them to be like ourselves. It really appears to me that they
were of another race altogether than ourselves of today. At that time
people seemed to stick so to one idea; now, they are more nervous, more
sensitive, more enlightened--people of two or three ideas at once--as
it were. The man of today is a broader man, so to speak--and I declare
I believe that is what prevents him from being so self-contained and
independent a being as his brother of those earlier days. Of course my
remark was only made under this impression, and not in the least--”

“I quite understand. You are trying to comfort me for the naiveness with
which you disagreed with me--eh? Ha! ha! ha! You are a regular
child, prince! However, I cannot help seeing that you always treat me
like--like a fragile china cup. Never mind, never mind, I’m not a bit
angry! At all events we have had a very funny talk. Do you know, all
things considered, I should like to be something better than Osterman!
I wouldn’t take the trouble to rise from the dead to be an Osterman.
However, I see I must make arrangements to die soon, or I myself--.
Well--leave me now! _Au revoir._ Look here--before you go, just give me
your opinion: how do you think I ought to die, now? I mean--the best,
the most virtuous way? Tell me!”

“You should pass us by and forgive us our happiness,” said the prince in
a low voice.

“Ha! ha! ha! I thought so. I thought I should hear something like
that. Well, you are--you really are--oh dear me! Eloquence, eloquence!
Good-bye!”

VI.

As to the evening party at the Epanchins’ at which Princess Bielokonski
was to be present, Varia had reported with accuracy; though she had
perhaps expressed herself too strongly.

The thing was decided in a hurry and with a certain amount of quite
unnecessary excitement, doubtless because “nothing could be done in this
house like anywhere else.”

The impatience of Lizabetha Prokofievna “to get things settled”
 explained a good deal, as well as the anxiety of both parents for the
happiness of their beloved daughter. Besides, Princess Bielokonski was
going away soon, and they hoped that she would take an interest in
the prince. They were anxious that he should enter society under the
auspices of this lady, whose patronage was the best of recommendations
for any young man.

Even if there seems something strange about the match, the general and
his wife said to each other, the “world” will accept Aglaya’s fiance
without any question if he is under the patronage of the princess. In
any case, the prince would have to be “shown” sooner or later; that is,
introduced into society, of which he had, so far, not the least idea.
Moreover, it was only a question of a small gathering of a few intimate
friends. Besides Princess Bielokonski, only one other lady was expected,
the wife of a high dignitary. Evgenie Pavlovitch, who was to escort the
princess, was the only young man.

Muishkin was told of the princess’s visit three days beforehand, but
nothing was said to him about the party until the night before it was to
take place.

He could not help observing the excited and agitated condition of all
members of the family, and from certain hints dropped in conversation he
gathered that they were all anxious as to the impression he should
make upon the princess. But the Epanchins, one and all, believed that
Muishkin, in his simplicity of mind, was quite incapable of realizing
that they could be feeling any anxiety on his account, and for this
reason they all looked at him with dread and uneasiness.

In point of fact, he did attach marvellously little importance to the
approaching event. He was occupied with altogether different thoughts.
Aglaya was growing hourly more capricious and gloomy, and this
distressed him. When they told him that Evgenie Pavlovitch was expected,
he evinced great delight, and said that he had long wished to see
him--and somehow these words did not please anyone.

Aglaya left the room in a fit of irritation, and it was not until late
in the evening, past eleven, when the prince was taking his departure,
that she said a word or two to him, privately, as she accompanied him as
far as the front door.

“I should like you,” she said, “not to come here tomorrow until evening,
when the guests are all assembled. You know there are to be guests,
don’t you?”

She spoke impatiently and with severity; this was the first allusion she
had made to the party of tomorrow.

She hated the idea of it, everyone saw that; and she would probably
have liked to quarrel about it with her parents, but pride and modesty
prevented her from broaching the subject.

The prince jumped to the conclusion that Aglaya, too, was nervous about
him, and the impression he would make, and that she did not like to
admit her anxiety; and this thought alarmed him.

“Yes, I am invited,” he replied.

She was evidently in difficulties as to how best to go on. “May I speak
of something serious to you, for once in my life?” she asked, angrily.
She was irritated at she knew not what, and could not restrain her
wrath.

“Of course you may; I am very glad to listen,” replied Muishkin.

Aglaya was silent a moment and then began again with evident dislike of
her subject:

“I do not wish to quarrel with them about this; in some things they
won’t be reasonable. I always did feel a loathing for the laws which
seem to guide mamma’s conduct at times. I don’t speak of father, for
he cannot be expected to be anything but what he is. Mother is a
noble-minded woman, I know; you try to suggest anything mean to her,
and you’ll see! But she is such a slave to these miserable creatures! I
don’t mean old Bielokonski alone. She is a contemptible old thing, but
she is able to twist people round her little finger, and I admire that
in her, at all events! How mean it all is, and how foolish! We were
always middle-class, thoroughly middle-class, people. Why should we
attempt to climb into the giddy heights of the fashionable world? My
sisters are all for it. It’s Prince S. they have to thank for poisoning
their minds. Why are you so glad that Evgenie Pavlovitch is coming?”

“Listen to me, Aglaya,” said the prince, “I do believe you are nervous
lest I shall make a fool of myself tomorrow at your party?”

“Nervous about you?” Aglaya blushed. “Why should I be nervous about
you? What would it matter to me if you were to make ever such a fool of
yourself? How can you say such a thing? What do you mean by ‘making a
fool of yourself’? What a vulgar expression! I suppose you intend to
talk in that sort of way tomorrow evening? Look up a few more such
