say?”

She did not rise from her knees; she would not listen to him; she put
her questions hurriedly, as though she were pursued.

“I am going away tomorrow, as you bade me--I won’t write--so that this
is the last time I shall see you, the last time! This is really the _last
time!_”

“Oh, be calm--be calm! Get up!” he entreated, in despair.

She gazed thirstily at him and clutched his hands.

“Good-bye!” she said at last, and rose and left him, very quickly.

The prince noticed that Rogojin had suddenly appeared at her side, and
had taken her arm and was leading her away.

“Wait a minute, prince,” shouted the latter, as he went. “I shall be
back in five minutes.”

He reappeared in five minutes as he had said. The prince was waiting for
him.

“I’ve put her in the carriage,” he said; “it has been waiting round the
corner there since ten o’clock. She expected that you would be with _them_
all the evening. I told her exactly what you wrote me. She won’t write
to the girl any more, she promises; and tomorrow she will be off, as you
wish. She desired to see you for the last time, although you refused,
so we’ve been sitting and waiting on that bench till you should pass on
your way home.”

“Did she bring you with her of her own accord?”

“Of course she did!” said Rogojin, showing his teeth; “and I saw for
myself what I knew before. You’ve read her letters, I suppose?”

“Did you read them?” asked the prince, struck by the thought.

“Of course--she showed them to me herself. You are thinking of the
razor, eh? Ha, ha, ha!”

“Oh, she is mad!” cried the prince, wringing his hands.

“Who knows? Perhaps she is not so mad after all,” said Rogojin, softly, as though
thinking aloud.

The prince made no reply.

“Well, good-bye,” said Rogojin. “I’m off tomorrow too, you know.
Remember me kindly! By-the-by,” he added, turning round sharply again,
“did you answer her question just now? Are you happy, or not?”

“No, no, no!” cried the prince, with unspeakable sadness.

“Ha, ha! I never supposed you would say ‘yes,’” cried Rogojin, laughing
sardonically.

And he disappeared, without looking round again.




PART IV

I.

A week had elapsed since the rendezvous of our two friends on the
green bench in the park, when, one fine morning at about half-past ten
o’clock, Varvara Ardalionovna, otherwise Mrs. Ptitsin, who had been
out to visit a friend, returned home in a state of considerable mental
depression.

There are certain people of whom it is difficult to say anything which
will at once throw them into relief--in other words, describe them
graphically in their typical characteristics. These are they who are
generally known as “commonplace people,” and this class comprises, of
course, the immense majority of mankind. Authors, as a rule, attempt to
select and portray types rarely met with in their entirety, but these
types are nevertheless more real than real life itself.

“Podkoleosin” [A character in Gogol’s comedy, The Wedding.] was perhaps
an exaggeration, but he was by no means a non-existent character; on the
contrary, how many intelligent people, after hearing of this Podkoleosin
from Gogol, immediately began to find that scores of their friends were
exactly like him! They knew, perhaps, before Gogol told them, that their
friends were like Podkoleosin, but they did not know what name to give
them. In real life, young fellows seldom jump out of the window just
before their weddings, because such a feat, not to speak of its other
aspects, must be a decidedly unpleasant mode of escape; and yet there
are plenty of bridegrooms, intelligent fellows too, who would be ready
to confess themselves Podkoleosins in the depths of their consciousness,
just before marriage. Nor does every husband feel bound to repeat
at every step, “_Tu l’as voulu, Georges Dandin!_” like another typical
personage; and yet how many millions and billions of Georges Dandins
there are in real life who feel inclined to utter this soul-drawn cry
after their honeymoon, if not the day after the wedding! Therefore,
without entering into any more serious examination of the question, I
will content myself with remarking that in real life typical characters
are “watered down,” so to speak; and all these Dandins and Podkoleosins
actually exist among us every day, but in a diluted form. I will just
add, however, that Georges Dandin might have existed exactly as Molière
presented him, and probably does exist now and then, though rarely; and
so I will end this scientific examination, which is beginning to
look like a newspaper criticism. But for all this, the question
remains,--what are the novelists to do with commonplace people, and how
are they to be presented to the reader in such a form as to be in
the least degree interesting? They cannot be left out altogether, for
commonplace people meet one at every turn of life, and to leave them out
would be to destroy the whole reality and probability of the story. To
fill a novel with typical characters only, or with merely strange and
uncommon people, would render the book unreal and improbable, and
would very likely destroy the interest. In my opinion, the duty of the
novelist is to seek out points of interest and instruction even in the
characters of commonplace people.

For instance, when the whole essence of an ordinary person’s nature lies
in his perpetual and unchangeable commonplaceness; and when in spite of
all his endeavours to do something out of the common, this person ends,
eventually, by remaining in his unbroken line of routine--. I think
such an individual really does become a type of his own--a type of
commonplaceness which will not for the world, if it can help it,
be contented, but strains and yearns to be something original and
independent, without the slightest possibility of being so. To
this class of commonplace people belong several characters in this
novel;--characters which--I admit--I have not drawn very vividly up to
now for my reader’s benefit.

Such were, for instance, Varvara Ardalionovna Ptitsin, her husband, and
her brother, Gania.

There is nothing so annoying as to be fairly rich, of a fairly good
family, pleasing presence, average education, to be “not stupid,”
 kind-hearted, and yet to have no talent at all, no originality, not a
single idea of one’s own--to be, in fact, “just like everyone else.”

Of such people there are countless numbers in this world--far more even
than appear. They can be divided into two classes as all men can--that
is, those of limited intellect, and those who are much cleverer. The
former of these classes is the happier.

To a commonplace man of limited intellect, for instance, nothing is
simpler than to imagine himself an original character, and to revel in
that belief without the slightest misgiving.

Many of our young women have thought fit to cut their hair short, put on
blue spectacles, and call themselves Nihilists. By doing this they have
been able to persuade themselves, without further trouble, that they
have acquired new convictions of their own. Some men have but felt some
little qualm of kindness towards their fellow-men, and the fact has
