had found a new faith, not perceiving that he has pinned his faith to
a negation. Such is our anguish of thirst! ‘Whoso has no country has no
God.’ That is not my own expression; it is the expression of a merchant,
one of the Old Believers, whom I once met while travelling. He did not
say exactly these words. I think his expression was:

“‘Whoso forsakes his country forsakes his God.’

“But let these thirsty Russian souls find, like Columbus’ discoverers, a
new world; let them find the Russian world, let them search and discover
all the gold and treasure that lies hid in the bosom of their own land!
Show them the restitution of lost humanity, in the future, by Russian
thought alone, and by means of the God and of the Christ of our Russian
faith, and you will see how mighty and just and wise and good a giant
will rise up before the eyes of the astonished and frightened world;
astonished because they expect nothing but the sword from us, because
they think they will get nothing out of us but barbarism. This has
been the case up to now, and the longer matters go on as they are now
proceeding, the more clear will be the truth of what I say; and I--”

But at this moment something happened which put a most unexpected end to
the orator’s speech. All this heated tirade, this outflow of passionate
words and ecstatic ideas which seemed to hustle and tumble over each
other as they fell from his lips, bore evidence of some unusually
disturbed mental condition in the young fellow who had “boiled over” in
such a remarkable manner, without any apparent reason.

Of those who were present, such as knew the prince listened to his
outburst in a state of alarm, some with a feeling of mortification. It
was so unlike his usual timid self-constraint; so inconsistent with his
usual taste and tact, and with his instinctive feeling for the higher
proprieties. They could not understand the origin of the outburst; it
could not be simply the news of Pavlicheff’s perversion. By the ladies
the prince was regarded as little better than a lunatic, and Princess
Bielokonski admitted afterwards that “in another minute she would have
bolted.”

The two old gentlemen looked quite alarmed. The old general (Epanchin’s
chief) sat and glared at the prince in severe displeasure. The colonel
sat immovable. Even the German poet grew a little pale, though he wore
his usual artificial smile as he looked around to see what the others
would do.

In point of fact it is quite possible that the matter would have ended
in a very commonplace and natural way in a few minutes. The undoubtedly
astonished, but now more collected, General Epanchin had several times
endeavoured to interrupt the prince, and not having succeeded he was now
preparing to take firmer and more vigorous measures to attain his end.
In another minute or two he would probably have made up his mind to lead
the prince quietly out of the room, on the plea of his being ill (and it
was more than likely that the general was right in his belief that the
prince _was_ actually ill), but it so happened that destiny had something
different in store.

At the beginning of the evening, when the prince first came into the
room, he had sat down as far as possible from the Chinese vase which
Aglaya had spoken of the day before.

Will it be believed that, after Aglaya’s alarming words, an ineradicable
conviction had taken possession of his mind that, however he might try
to avoid this vase next day, he must certainly break it? But so it was.

During the evening other impressions began to awaken in his mind, as
we have seen, and he forgot his presentiment. But when Pavlicheff was
mentioned and the general introduced him to Ivan Petrovitch, he had
changed his place, and went over nearer to the table; when, it so
happened, he took the chair nearest to the beautiful vase, which stood
on a pedestal behind him, just about on a level with his elbow.

As he spoke his last words he had risen suddenly from his seat with a
wave of his arm, and there was a general cry of horror.

The huge vase swayed backwards and forwards; it seemed to be uncertain
whether or no to topple over on to the head of one of the old men,
but eventually determined to go the other way, and came crashing over
towards the German poet, who darted out of the way in terror.

The crash, the cry, the sight of the fragments of valuable china
covering the carpet, the alarm of the company--what all this meant
to the poor prince it would be difficult to convey to the mind of the
reader, or for him to imagine.

But one very curious fact was that all the shame and vexation and
mortification which he felt over the accident were less powerful than
the deep impression of the almost supernatural truth of his premonition.
He stood still in alarm--in almost superstitious alarm, for a moment;
then all mists seemed to clear away from his eyes; he was conscious of
nothing but light and joy and ecstasy; his breath came and went; but
the moment passed. Thank God it was not that! He drew a long breath and
looked around.

For some minutes he did not seem to comprehend the excitement around
him; that is, he comprehended it and saw everything, but he stood aside,
as it were, like someone invisible in a fairy tale, as though he had
nothing to do with what was going on, though it pleased him to take an
interest in it.

He saw them gather up the broken bits of china; he heard the loud
talking of the guests and observed how pale Aglaya looked, and how very
strangely she was gazing at him. There was no hatred in her expression,
and no anger whatever. It was full of alarm for him, and sympathy and
affection, while she looked around at the others with flashing, angry
eyes. His heart filled with a sweet pain as he gazed at her.

At length he observed, to his amazement, that all had taken their seats
again, and were laughing and talking as though nothing had happened.
Another minute and the laughter grew louder--they were laughing at him,
at his dumb stupor--laughing kindly and merrily. Several of them
spoke to him, and spoke so kindly and cordially, especially Lizabetha
Prokofievna--she was saying the kindest possible things to him.

Suddenly he became aware that General Epanchin was tapping him on the
shoulder; Ivan Petrovitch was laughing too, but still more kind and
sympathizing was the old dignitary. He took the prince by the hand and
pressed it warmly; then he patted it, and quietly urged him to recollect
himself--speaking to him exactly as he would have spoken to a little
frightened child, which pleased the prince wonderfully; and next seated
him beside himself.

The prince gazed into his face with pleasure, but still seemed to have
no power to speak. His breath failed him. The old man’s face pleased him
greatly.

“Do you really forgive me?” he said at last. “And--and Lizabetha
Prokofievna too?” The laugh increased, tears came into the prince’s
eyes, he could not believe in all this kindness--he was enchanted.

“The vase certainly was a very beautiful one. I remember it here for
fifteen years--yes, quite that!” remarked Ivan Petrovitch.

“Oh, what a dreadful calamity! A wretched vase smashed, and a man half
dead with remorse about it,” said Lizabetha Prokofievna, loudly. “What
made you so dreadfully startled, Lef Nicolaievitch?” she added, a little
timidly. “Come, my dear boy! cheer up. You really alarm me, taking the
accident so to heart.”

“Do you forgive me all--_all_, besides the vase, I mean?” said the prince,
rising from his seat once more, but the old gentleman caught his hand
and drew him down again--he seemed unwilling to let him go.

“_C’est très-curieux et c’est très-sérieux_,” he whispered across the
table to Ivan Petrovitch, rather loudly. Probably the prince heard him.

“So that I have not offended any of you? You will not believe how happy
I am to be able to think so. It is as it should be. As if I _could_ offend
anyone here! I should offend you again by even suggesting such a thing.”

“Calm yourself, my dear fellow. You are exaggerating again; you really
have no occasion to be so grateful to us. It is a feeling which does you
great credit, but an exaggeration, for all that.”
