“Stop a minute! When will he come back?”

“I don’t know that either.”

The door was shut with these words, and the old woman disappeared. The
prince decided to come back within an hour. Passing out of the house, he
met the porter.

“Is Parfen Semionovitch at home?” he asked.

“Yes.”

“Why did they tell me he was not at home, then?”

“Where did they tell you so,--at his door?”

“No, at his mother’s flat; I rang at Parfen Semionovitch’s door and nobody came.”

“Well, he may have gone out. I can’t tell. Sometimes he takes the keys
with him, and leaves the rooms empty for two or three days.”

“Do you know for certain that he was at home last night?”

“Yes, he was.”

“Was Nastasia Philipovna with him?”

“I don’t know; she doesn’t come often. I think I should have known if
she had come.”

The prince went out deep in thought, and walked up and down the pavement
for some time. The windows of all the rooms occupied by Rogojin were
closed, those of his mother’s apartments were open. It was a hot, bright
day. The prince crossed the road in order to have a good look at the
windows again; not only were Rogojin’s closed, but the white blinds were
all down as well.

He stood there for a minute and then, suddenly and strangely enough, it
seemed to him that a little corner of one of the blinds was lifted,
and Rogojin’s face appeared for an instant and then vanished. He waited
another minute, and decided to go and ring the bell once more; however,
he thought better of it again and put it off for an hour.

The chief object in his mind at this moment was to get as quickly as
he could to Nastasia Philipovna’s lodging. He remembered that, not long
since, when she had left Pavlofsk at his request, he had begged her
to put up in town at the house of a respectable widow, who had
well-furnished rooms to let, near the Ismailofsky barracks. Probably
Nastasia had kept the rooms when she came down to Pavlofsk this last
time; and most likely she would have spent the night in them, Rogojin
having taken her straight there from the station.

The prince took a droshky. It struck him as he drove on that he ought
to have begun by coming here, since it was most improbable that Rogojin
should have taken Nastasia to his own house last night. He remembered
that the porter said she very rarely came at all, so that it was still
less likely that she would have gone there so late at night.

Vainly trying to comfort himself with these reflections, the prince
reached the Ismailofsky barracks more dead than alive.

To his consternation the good people at the lodgings had not only heard
nothing of Nastasia, but all came out to look at him as if he were a
marvel of some sort. The whole family, of all ages, surrounded him, and
he was begged to enter. He guessed at once that they knew perfectly well
who he was, and that yesterday ought to have been his wedding-day; and
further that they were dying to ask about the wedding, and especially
about why he should be here now, inquiring for the woman who in all
reasonable human probability might have been expected to be with him in
Pavlofsk.

He satisfied their curiosity, in as few words as possible, with regard
to the wedding, but their exclamations and sighs were so numerous and
sincere that he was obliged to tell the whole story--in a short form,
of course. The advice of all these agitated ladies was that the prince
should go at once and knock at Rogojin’s until he was let in: and when
let in insist upon a substantial explanation of everything. If Rogojin
was really not at home, the prince was advised to go to a certain house,
the address of which was given, where lived a German lady, a friend of
Nastasia Philipovna’s. It was possible that she might have spent the
night there in her anxiety to conceal herself.

The prince rose from his seat in a condition of mental collapse. The
good ladies reported afterwards that “his pallor was terrible to see,
and his legs seemed to give way underneath him.” With difficulty he was
made to understand that his new friends would be glad of his address, in
order to act with him if possible. After a moment’s thought he gave the
address of the small hotel, on the stairs of which he had had a fit some
five weeks since. He then set off once more for Rogojin’s.

This time they neither opened the door at Rogojin’s flat nor at the one
opposite. The prince found the porter with difficulty, but when found,
the man would hardly look at him or answer his questions, pretending
to be busy. Eventually, however, he was persuaded to reply so far as to
state that Rogojin had left the house early in the morning and gone to
Pavlofsk, and that he would not return today at all.

“I shall wait; he may come back this evening.”

“He may not be home for a week.”

“Then, at all events, he _did_ sleep here, did he?”

“Well--he did sleep here, yes.”

All this was suspicious and unsatisfactory. Very likely the porter had
received new instructions during the interval of the prince’s absence;
his manner was so different now. He had been obliging--now he was as
obstinate and silent as a mule. However, the prince decided to call
again in a couple of hours, and after that to watch the house, in case
of need. His hope was that he might yet find Nastasia at the address
which he had just received. To that address he now set off at full
speed.

But alas! at the German lady’s house they did not even appear to
understand what he wanted. After a while, by means of certain hints, he
was able to gather that Nastasia must have had a quarrel with her friend
two or three weeks ago, since which date the latter had neither heard
nor seen anything of her. He was given to understand that the subject of
Nastasia’s present whereabouts was not of the slightest interest to her;
and that Nastasia might marry all the princes in the world for all she
cared! So Muishkin took his leave hurriedly. It struck him now that she
might have gone away to Moscow just as she had done the last time, and
that Rogojin had perhaps gone after her, or even _with_ her. If only he
could find some trace!

However, he must take his room at the hotel; and he started off in that
direction. Having engaged his room, he was asked by the waiter whether
he would take dinner; replying mechanically in the affirmative, he sat
down and waited; but it was not long before it struck him that dining
would delay him. Enraged at this idea, he started up, crossed the
dark passage (which filled him with horrible impressions and gloomy
forebodings), and set out once more for Rogojin’s. Rogojin had not
returned, and no one came to the door. He rang at the old lady’s door
opposite, and was informed that Parfen Semionovitch would not return for
three days. The curiosity with which the old servant stared at him again
impressed the prince disagreeably. He could not find the porter this
time at all.

As before, he crossed the street and watched the windows from the other
side, walking up and down in anguish of soul for half an hour or so in
the stifling heat. Nothing stirred; the blinds were motionless; indeed,
the prince began to think that the apparition of Rogojin’s face could
have been nothing but fancy. Soothed by this thought, he drove off once
more to his friends at the Ismailofsky barracks. He was expected
there. The mother had already been to three or four places to look for
Nastasia, but had not found a trace of any kind.

The prince said nothing, but entered the room, sat down silently, and
stared at them, one after the other, with the air of a man who cannot
