now you can hardly breathe. You are gasping.”

“I shall have time to rest. Why will you not grant my last wish? Do you
know, Lizabetha Prokofievna, that I have dreamed of meeting you for a
long while? I had often heard of you from Colia; he is almost the only
person who still comes to see me. You are an original and eccentric
woman; I have seen that for myself--Do you know, I have even been rather
fond of you?”

“Good heavens! And I very nearly struck him!”

“You were prevented by Aglaya Ivanovna. I think I am not mistaken? That
is your daughter, Aglaya Ivanovna? She is so beautiful that I recognized
her directly, although I had never seen her before. Let me, at least,
look on beauty for the last time in my life,” he said with a wry smile.
“You are here with the prince, and your husband, and a large company.
Why should you refuse to gratify my last wish?”

“Give me a chair!” cried Lizabetha Prokofievna, but she seized one for
herself and sat down opposite to Hippolyte. “Colia, you must go home
with him,” she commanded, “and tomorrow I will come my self.”

“Will you let me ask the prince for a cup of tea?... I am exhausted. Do
you know what you might do, Lizabetha Prokofievna? I think you wanted to
take the prince home with you for tea. Stay here, and let us spend
the evening together. I am sure the prince will give us all some tea.
Forgive me for being so free and easy--but I know you are kind, and
the prince is kind, too. In fact, we are all good-natured people--it is
really quite comical.”

The prince bestirred himself to give orders. Lebedeff hurried out,
followed by Vera.

“It is quite true,” said Mrs. Epanchin decisively. “Talk, but not too
loud, and don’t excite yourself. You have made me sorry for you. Prince,
you don’t deserve that I should stay and have tea with you, yet I will,
all the same, but I won’t apologize. I apologize to nobody! Nobody! It
is absurd! However, forgive me, prince, if I blew you up--that is, if
you like, of course. But please don’t let me keep anyone,” she added
suddenly to her husband and daughters, in a tone of resentment, as
though they had grievously offended her. “I can come home alone quite
well.”

But they did not let her finish, and gathered round her eagerly. The
prince immediately invited everyone to stay for tea, and apologized
for not having thought of it before. The general murmured a few polite
words, and asked Lizabetha Prokofievna if she did not feel cold on the
terrace. He very nearly asked Hippolyte how long he had been at the
University, but stopped himself in time. Evgenie Pavlovitch and Prince
S. suddenly grew extremely gay and amiable. Adelaida and Alexandra
had not recovered from their surprise, but it was now mingled with
satisfaction; in short, everyone seemed very much relieved that
Lizabetha Prokofievna had got over her paroxysm. Aglaya alone still
frowned, and sat apart in silence. All the other guests stayed on as
well; no one wanted to go, not even General Ivolgin, but Lebedeff said
something to him in passing which did not seem to please him, for he
immediately went and sulked in a corner. The prince took care to offer
tea to Burdovsky and his friends as well as the rest. The invitation
made them rather uncomfortable. They muttered that they would wait for
Hippolyte, and went and sat by themselves in a distant corner of the
verandah. Tea was served at once; Lebedeff had no doubt ordered it
for himself and his family before the others arrived. It was striking
eleven.

X.

After moistening his lips with the tea which Vera Lebedeff brought him,
Hippolyte set the cup down on the table, and glanced round. He seemed
confused and almost at a loss.

“Just look, Lizabetha Prokofievna,” he began, with a kind of feverish
haste; “these china cups are supposed to be extremely valuable. Lebedeff
always keeps them locked up in his china-cupboard; they were part of his
wife’s dowry. Yet he has brought them out tonight--in your honour, of
course! He is so pleased--” He was about to add something else, but
could not find the words.

“There, he is feeling embarrassed; I expected as much,” whispered
Evgenie Pavlovitch suddenly in the prince’s ear. “It is a bad sign;
what do you think? Now, out of spite, he will come out with something
so outrageous that even Lizabetha Prokofievna will not be able to stand
it.”

Muishkin looked at him inquiringly.

“You do not care if he does?” added Evgenie Pavlovitch. “Neither do I;
in fact, I should be glad, merely as a proper punishment for our dear
Lizabetha Prokofievna. I am very anxious that she should get it, without
delay, and I shall stay till she does. You seem feverish.”

“Never mind; by-and-by; yes, I am not feeling well,” said the prince
impatiently, hardly listening. He had just heard Hippolyte mention his
own name.

“You don’t believe it?” said the invalid, with a nervous laugh. “I don’t
wonder, but the prince will have no difficulty in believing it; he will
not be at all surprised.”

“Do you hear, prince--do you hear that?” said Lizabetha Prokofievna,
turning towards him.

There was laughter in the group around her, and Lebedeff stood before
her gesticulating wildly.

“He declares that your humbug of a landlord revised this gentleman’s
article--the article that was read aloud just now--in which you got such
a charming dressing-down.”

The prince regarded Lebedeff with astonishment.

“Why don’t you say something?” cried Lizabetha Prokofievna, stamping her
foot.

“Well,” murmured the prince, with his eyes still fixed on Lebedeff, “I
can see now that he did.”

“Is it true?” she asked eagerly.

“Absolutely, your excellency,” said Lebedeff, without the least
hesitation.

Mrs. Epanchin almost sprang up in amazement at his answer, and at the
assurance of his tone.

“He actually seems to boast of it!” she cried.

“I am base--base!” muttered Lebedeff, beating his breast, and hanging
his head.

“What do I care if you are base or not? He thinks he has only to say,
‘I am base,’ and there is an end of it. As to you, prince, are you not
ashamed?--I repeat, are you not ashamed, to mix with such riff-raff? I
will never forgive you!”

“The prince will forgive me!” said Lebedeff with emotional conviction.

Keller suddenly left his seat, and approached Lizabetha Prokofievna.

“It was only out of generosity, madame,” he said in a resonant voice,
“and because I would not betray a friend in an awkward position, that
I did not mention this revision before; though you heard him yourself
threatening to kick us down the steps. To clear the matter up, I declare
now that I did have recourse to his assistance, and that I paid him six
roubles for it. But I did not ask him to correct my style; I simply went
to him for information concerning the facts, of which I was ignorant
to a great extent, and which he was competent to give. The story of the
gaiters, the appetite in the Swiss professor’s house, the substitution
of fifty roubles for two hundred and fifty--all such details, in fact,
were got from him. I paid him six roubles for them; but he did not
correct the style.”
