
“Oh, Aglaya--perhaps you cannot understand all this. Try to realize that
in the perpetual admission of guilt she probably finds some dreadful
unnatural satisfaction--as though she were revenging herself upon
someone.

“Now and then I was able to persuade her almost to see light around
her again; but she would soon fall, once more, into her old tormenting
delusions, and would go so far as to reproach me for placing myself on a
pedestal above her (I never had an idea of such a thing!), and informed
me, in reply to my proposal of marriage, that she ‘did not want
condescending sympathy or help from anybody.’ You saw her last night.
You don’t suppose she can be happy among such people as those--you
cannot suppose that such society is fit for her? You have no idea how
well-educated she is, and what an intellect she has! She astonished me
sometimes.”

“And you preached her sermons there, did you?”

“Oh no,” continued the prince thoughtfully, not noticing Aglaya’s
mocking tone, “I was almost always silent there. I often wished to
speak, but I really did not know what to say. In some cases it is best
to say nothing, I think. I loved her, yes, I loved her very much indeed;
but afterwards--afterwards she guessed all.”

“What did she guess?”

“That I only _pitied_ her--and--and loved her no longer!”

“How do you know that? How do you know that she is not really in love
with that--that rich cad--the man she eloped with?”

“Oh no! I know she only laughs at him; she has made a fool of him all
along.”

“Has she never laughed at you?”

“No--in anger, perhaps. Oh yes! she reproached me dreadfully in anger;
and suffered herself, too! But afterwards--oh! don’t remind me--don’t
remind me of that!”

He hid his face in his hands.

“Are you aware that she writes to me almost every day?”

“So that is true, is it?” cried the prince, greatly agitated. “I had
heard a report of it, but would not believe it.”

“Whom did you hear it from?” asked Aglaya, alarmed. “Rogojin said
something about it yesterday, but nothing definite.”

“Yesterday! Morning or evening? Before the music or after?”

“After--it was about twelve o’clock.”

“Ah! Well, if it was Rogojin--but do you know what she writes to me
about?”

“I should not be surprised by anything. She is mad!”

“There are the letters.” (Aglaya took three letters out of her pocket
and threw them down before the prince.) “For a whole week she has been
entreating and worrying and persuading me to marry you. She--well, she
is clever, though she may be mad--much cleverer than I am, as you say.
Well, she writes that she is in love with me herself, and tries to see
me every day, if only from a distance. She writes that you love me,
and that she has long known it and seen it, and that you and she talked
about me--there. She wishes to see you happy, and she says that she is
certain only I can ensure you the happiness you deserve. She writes such
strange, wild letters--I haven’t shown them to anyone. Now, do you know
what all this means? Can you guess anything?”

“It is madness--it is merely another proof of her insanity!” said the
prince, and his lips trembled.

“You are crying, aren’t you?”

“No, Aglaya. No, I’m not crying.” The prince looked at her.

“Well, what am I to do? What do you advise me? I cannot go on receiving
these letters, you know.”

“Oh, let her alone, I entreat you!” cried the prince. “What can you do in
this dark, gloomy mystery? Let her alone, and I’ll use all my power to
prevent her writing you any more letters.”

“If so, you are a heartless man!” cried Aglaya. “As if you can’t see that
it is not myself she loves, but you, you, and only you! Surely you have
not remarked everything else in her, and only not _this?_ Do you know what
these letters mean? They mean jealousy, sir--nothing but pure jealousy!
She--do you think she will ever really marry this Rogojin, as she says
here she will? She would take her own life the day after you and I were
married.”

The prince shuddered; his heart seemed to freeze within him. He gazed
at Aglaya in wonderment; it was difficult for him to realize that this
child was also a woman.

“God knows, Aglaya, that to restore her peace of mind and make her happy
I would willingly give up my life. But I cannot love her, and she knows
that.”

“Oh, make a sacrifice of yourself! That sort of thing becomes you well,
you know. Why not do it? And don’t call me ‘Aglaya’; you have done it
several times lately. You are bound, it is your _duty_ to ‘raise’ her; you
must go off somewhere again to soothe and pacify her. Why, you love her,
you know!”

“I cannot sacrifice myself so, though I admit I did wish to do so once.
Who knows, perhaps I still wish to! But I know for _certain_, that if she
married me it would be her ruin; I know this and therefore I leave her
alone. I ought to go to see her today; now I shall probably not go. She
is proud, she would never forgive me the nature of the love I bear her,
and we should both be ruined. This may be unnatural, I don’t know; but
everything seems unnatural. You say she loves me, as if this were _love!_
As if she could love _me_, after what I have been through! No, no, it is
not love.”

“How pale you have grown!” cried Aglaya in alarm.

“Oh, it’s nothing. I haven’t slept, that’s all, and I’m rather tired.
I--we certainly did talk about you, Aglaya.”

“Oh, indeed, it is true then! _You could actually talk about me with her_;
and--and how could you have been fond of me when you had only seen me
once?”

“I don’t know. Perhaps it was that I seemed to come upon light in the
midst of my gloom. I told you the truth when I said I did not know why I
thought of you before all others. Of course it was all a sort of dream,
a dream amidst the horrors of reality. Afterwards I began to work. I did
not intend to come back here for two or three years--”

“Then you came for her sake?” Aglaya’s voice trembled.

“Yes, I came for her sake.”

There was a moment or two of gloomy silence. Aglaya rose from her seat.

“If you say,” she began in shaky tones, “if you say that this woman
of yours is mad--at all events I have nothing to do with her insane
fancies. Kindly take these three letters, Lef Nicolaievitch, and throw
them back to her, from me. And if she dares,” cried Aglaya suddenly,
much louder than before, “if she dares so much as write me one word
again, tell her I shall tell my father, and that she shall be taken to a
lunatic asylum.”

The prince jumped up in alarm at Aglaya’s sudden wrath, and a mist
seemed to come before his eyes.

