observed the prince’s solitude and silence, and was anxious to draw him
into the conversation, and so introduce him again to the notice of some
of the important personages.

“Lef Nicolaievitch was a ward of Nicolai Andreevitch Pavlicheff, after
the death of his own parents,” he remarked, meeting Ivan Petrovitch’s
eye.

“Very happy to meet him, I’m sure,” remarked the latter. “I remember
Lef Nicolaievitch well. When General Epanchin introduced us just now,
I recognized you at once, prince. You are very little changed, though
I saw you last as a child of some ten or eleven years old. There was
something in your features, I suppose, that--”

“You saw me as a child!” exclaimed the prince, with surprise.

“Oh! yes, long ago,” continued Ivan Petrovitch, “while you were living
with my cousin at Zlatoverhoff. You don’t remember me? No, I dare
say you don’t; you had some malady at the time, I remember. It was so
serious that I was surprised--”

“No; I remember nothing!” said the prince. A few more words of
explanation followed, words which were spoken without the smallest
excitement by his companion, but which evoked the greatest agitation in
the prince; and it was discovered that two old ladies to whose care the
prince had been left by Pavlicheff, and who lived at Zlatoverhoff, were
also relations of Ivan Petrovitch.

The latter had no idea and could give no information as to why
Pavlicheff had taken so great an interest in the little prince, his
ward.

“In point of fact I don’t think I thought much about it,” said the old
fellow. He seemed to have a wonderfully good memory, however, for he
told the prince all about the two old ladies, Pavlicheff’s cousins, who
had taken care of him, and whom, he declared, he had taken to task
for being too severe with the prince as a small sickly boy--the elder
sister, at least; the younger had been kind, he recollected. They
both now lived in another province, on a small estate left to them by
Pavlicheff. The prince listened to all this with eyes sparkling with
emotion and delight.

He declared with unusual warmth that he would never forgive himself for
having travelled about in the central provinces during these last six
months without having hunted up his two old friends.

He declared, further, that he had intended to go every day, but had
always been prevented by circumstances; but that now he would promise
himself the pleasure--however far it was, he would find them out. And so
Ivan Petrovitch _really_ knew Natalia Nikitishna!--what a saintly nature
was hers!--and Martha Nikitishna! Ivan Petrovitch must excuse him,
but really he was not quite fair on dear old Martha. She was severe,
perhaps; but then what else could she be with such a little idiot as he
was then? (Ha, ha.) He really was an idiot then, Ivan Petrovitch must
know, though he might not believe it. (Ha, ha.) So he had really seen
him there! Good heavens! And was he really and truly and actually a
cousin of Pavlicheff’s?

“I assure you of it,” laughed Ivan Petrovitch, gazing amusedly at the
prince.

“Oh! I didn’t say it because I _doubt_ the fact, you know. (Ha, ha.)
How could I doubt such a thing? (Ha, ha, ha.) I made the remark
because--because Nicolai Andreevitch Pavlicheff was such a splendid man,
don’t you see! Such a high-souled man, he really was, I assure you.”

The prince did not exactly pant for breath, but he “seemed almost
to _choke_ out of pure simplicity and goodness of heart,” as Adelaida
expressed it, on talking the party over with her fiance, the Prince S.,
next morning.

“But, my goodness me,” laughed Ivan Petrovitch, “why can’t I be cousin
to even a splendid man?”

“Oh, dear!” cried the prince, confused, trying to hurry his words
out, and growing more and more eager every moment: “I’ve gone and said
another stupid thing. I don’t know what to say. I--I didn’t mean that,
you know--I--I--he really was such a splendid man, wasn’t he?”

The prince trembled all over. Why was he so agitated? Why had he flown
into such transports of delight without any apparent reason? He had far
outshot the measure of joy and emotion consistent with the occasion. Why
this was it would be difficult to say.

He seemed to feel warmly and deeply grateful to someone for something or
other--perhaps to Ivan Petrovitch; but likely enough to all the guests,
individually, and collectively. He was much too happy.

Ivan Petrovitch began to stare at him with some surprise; the dignitary,
too, looked at him with considerable attention; Princess Bielokonski
glared at him angrily, and compressed her lips. Prince N., Evgenie,
Prince S., and the girls, all broke off their own conversations and
listened. Aglaya seemed a little startled; as for Lizabetha Prokofievna,
her heart sank within her.

This was odd of Lizabetha Prokofievna and her daughters. They had
themselves decided that it would be better if the prince did not talk
all the evening. Yet seeing him sitting silent and alone, but perfectly
happy, they had been on the point of exerting themselves to draw him
into one of the groups of talkers around the room. Now that he was in
the midst of a talk they became more than ever anxious and perturbed.

“That he was a splendid man is perfectly true; you are quite right,”
 repeated Ivan Petrovitch, but seriously this time. “He was a fine and a
worthy fellow--worthy, one may say, of the highest respect,” he added,
more and more seriously at each pause; “and it is agreeable to see, on
your part, such--”

“Wasn’t it this same Pavlicheff about whom there was a strange story in
connection with some abbot? I don’t remember who the abbot was, but I
remember at one time everybody was talking about it,” remarked the old
dignitary.

“Yes--Abbot Gurot, a Jesuit,” said Ivan Petrovitch. “Yes, that’s the
sort of thing our best men are apt to do. A man of rank, too, and
rich--a man who, if he had continued to serve, might have done anything;
and then to throw up the service and everything else in order to go over
to Roman Catholicism and turn Jesuit--openly, too--almost triumphantly.
By Jove! it was positively a mercy that he died when he did--it was
indeed--everyone said so at the time.”

The prince was beside himself.

“Pavlicheff?--Pavlicheff turned Roman Catholic? Impossible!” he cried,
in horror.

“H’m! impossible is rather a strong word,” said Ivan Petrovitch. “You
must allow, my dear prince... However, of course you value the memory of
the deceased so very highly; and he certainly was the kindest of men;
to which fact, by the way, I ascribe, more than to anything else, the
success of the abbot in influencing his religious convictions. But you
may ask me, if you please, how much trouble and worry I, personally,
had over that business, and especially with this same Gurot! Would you
believe it,” he continued, addressing the dignitary, “they actually
tried to put in a claim under the deceased’s will, and I had to resort
to the very strongest measures in order to bring them to their senses?
I assure you they knew their cue, did these gentlemen--wonderful! Thank
goodness all this was in Moscow, and I got the Court, you know, to help
me, and we soon brought them to their senses.”

“You wouldn’t believe how you have pained and astonished me,” cried the
prince.

“Very sorry; but in point of fact, you know, it was all nonsense and
would have ended in smoke, as usual--I’m sure of that. Last year,”--he
turned to the old man again,--“Countess K. joined some Roman Convent
abroad. Our people never seem to be able to offer any resistance so soon
as they get into the hands of these--intriguers--especially abroad.”

“That is all thanks to our lassitude, I think,” replied the old man,
