Think where you are.”

“Yes, he’s boasting like a drunkard,” added Nastasia, as though with the
sole intention of goading him.

“I do _not_ boast! You shall have a hundred thousand, this very day.
Ptitsin, get the money, you gay usurer! Take what you like for it, but
get it by the evening! I’ll show that I’m in earnest!” cried Rogojin,
working himself up into a frenzy of excitement.

“Come, come; what’s all this?” cried General Ivolgin, suddenly and
angrily, coming close up to Rogojin. The unexpectedness of this sally on
the part of the hitherto silent old man caused some laughter among the
intruders.

“Halloa! what’s this now?” laughed Rogojin. “You come along with me, old
fellow! You shall have as much to drink as you like.”

“Oh, it’s too horrible!” cried poor Colia, sobbing with shame and
annoyance.

“Surely there must be someone among all of you here who will turn this
shameless creature out of the room?” cried Varia, suddenly. She was
shaking and trembling with rage.

“That’s me, I suppose. I’m the shameless creature!” cried Nastasia
Philipovna, with amused indifference. “Dear me, and I came--like a fool,
as I am--to invite them over to my house for the evening! Look how your
sister treats me, Gavrila Ardalionovitch.”

For some moments Gania stood as if stunned or struck by lightning, after
his sister’s speech. But seeing that Nastasia Philipovna was really
about to leave the room this time, he sprang at Varia and seized her by
the arm like a madman.

“What have you done?” he hissed, glaring at her as though he would like
to annihilate her on the spot. He was quite beside himself, and could
hardly articulate his words for rage.

“What have I done? Where are you dragging me to?”

“Do you wish me to beg pardon of this creature because she has come here
to insult our mother and disgrace the whole household, you low, base
wretch?” cried Varia, looking back at her brother with proud defiance.

A few moments passed as they stood there face to face, Gania still
holding her wrist tightly. Varia struggled once--twice--to get free;
then could restrain herself no longer, and spat in his face.

“There’s a girl for you!” cried Nastasia Philipovna. “Mr. Ptitsin, I
congratulate you on your choice.”

Gania lost his head. Forgetful of everything he aimed a blow at Varia,
which would inevitably have laid her low, but suddenly another hand
caught his. Between him and Varia stood the prince.

“Enough--enough!” said the latter, with insistence, but all of a tremble
with excitement.

“Are you going to cross my path for ever, damn you!” cried Gania; and,
loosening his hold on Varia, he slapped the prince’s face with all his
force.

Exclamations of horror arose on all sides. The prince grew pale as
death; he gazed into Gania’s eyes with a strange, wild, reproachful
look; his lips trembled and vainly endeavoured to form some words; then
his mouth twisted into an incongruous smile.

“Very well--never mind about me; but I shall not allow you to strike
her!” he said, at last, quietly. Then, suddenly, he could bear it no
longer, and covering his face with his hands, turned to the wall, and
murmured in broken accents:

“Oh! how ashamed you will be of this afterwards!”

Gania certainly did look dreadfully abashed. Colia rushed up to comfort
the prince, and after him crowded Varia, Rogojin and all, even the
general.

“It’s nothing, it’s nothing!” said the prince, and again he wore the
smile which was so inconsistent with the circumstances.

“Yes, he will be ashamed!” cried Rogojin. “You will be properly ashamed
of yourself for having injured such a--such a sheep” (he could not find
a better word). “Prince, my dear fellow, leave this and come away with
me. I’ll show you how Rogojin shows his affection for his friends.”

Nastasia Philipovna was also much impressed, both with Gania’s action
and with the prince’s reply.

Her usually thoughtful, pale face, which all this while had been so
little in harmony with the jests and laughter which she had seemed to
put on for the occasion, was now evidently agitated by new feelings,
though she tried to conceal the fact and to look as though she were as
ready as ever for jesting and irony.

“I really think I must have seen him somewhere!” she murmured seriously
enough.

“Oh, aren’t you ashamed of yourself--aren’t you ashamed? Are you really
the sort of woman you are trying to represent yourself to be? Is
it possible?” The prince was now addressing Nastasia, in a tone of
reproach, which evidently came from his very heart.

Nastasia Philipovna looked surprised, and smiled, but evidently
concealed something beneath her smile and with some confusion and a
glance at Gania she left the room.

However, she had not reached the outer hall when she turned round,
walked quickly up to Nina Alexandrovna, seized her hand and lifted it to
her lips.

“He guessed quite right. I am not that sort of woman,” she whispered
hurriedly, flushing red all over. Then she turned again and left the
room so quickly that no one could imagine what she had come back for.
All they saw was that she said something to Nina Alexandrovna in a
hurried whisper, and seemed to kiss her hand. Varia, however, both saw
and heard all, and watched Nastasia out of the room with an expression
of wonder.

Gania recollected himself in time to rush after her in order to show her
out, but she had gone. He followed her to the stairs.

“Don’t come with me,” she cried, “_Au revoir_, till the evening--do you
hear? _Au revoir!_”

He returned thoughtful and confused; the riddle lay heavier than ever on
his soul. He was troubled about the prince, too, and so bewildered that
he did not even observe Rogojin’s rowdy band crowd past him and step on
his toes, at the door as they went out. They were all talking at once.
Rogojin went ahead of the others, talking to Ptitsin, and apparently
insisting vehemently upon something very important.

“You’ve lost the game, Gania” he cried, as he passed the latter.

Gania gazed after him uneasily, but said nothing.

XI.

The prince now left the room and shut himself up in his own chamber.
Colia followed him almost at once, anxious to do what he could to
console him. The poor boy seemed to be already so attached to him that
he could hardly leave him.

“You were quite right to go away!” he said. “The row will rage there
worse than ever now; and it’s like this every day with us--and all
through that Nastasia Philipovna.”

“You have so many sources of trouble here, Colia,” said the prince.

