Pafnute signed this’ for me. Well, _au revoir!_”

“Stop a minute; where are you off to? Who is this abbot?” cried Mrs.
Epanchin to her retreating husband in a tone of excited annoyance.

“Yes, my dear, it was an old abbot of that name--I must be off to see the
count, he’s waiting for me, I’m late--Good-bye! _Au revoir_, prince!”--and
the general bolted at full speed.

“Oh, yes--I know what count you’re going to see!” remarked his wife in
a cutting manner, as she turned her angry eyes on the prince. “Now
then, what’s all this about?--What abbot--Who’s Pafnute?” she added,
brusquely.

“Mamma!” said Alexandra, shocked at her rudeness.

Aglaya stamped her foot.

“Nonsense! Let me alone!” said the angry mother. “Now then, prince, sit
down here, no, nearer, come nearer the light! I want to have a good look
at you. So, now then, who is this abbot?”

“Abbot Pafnute,” said our friend, seriously and with deference.

“Pafnute, yes. And who was he?”

Mrs. Epanchin put these questions hastily and brusquely, and when the
prince answered she nodded her head sagely at each word he said.

“The Abbot Pafnute lived in the fourteenth century,” began the prince;
“he was in charge of one of the monasteries on the Volga, about where
our present Kostroma government lies. He went to Oreol and helped in the
great matters then going on in the religious world; he signed an edict
there, and I have seen a print of his signature; it struck me, so I
copied it. When the general asked me, in his study, to write something
for him, to show my handwriting, I wrote ‘The Abbot Pafnute signed
this,’ in the exact handwriting of the abbot. The general liked it very
much, and that’s why he recalled it just now.”

“Aglaya, make a note of ‘Pafnute,’ or we shall forget him. H’m! and
where is this signature?”

“I think it was left on the general’s table.”

“Let it be sent for at once!”

“Oh, I’ll write you a new one in half a minute,” said the prince, “if
you like!”

“Of course, mamma!” said Alexandra. “But let’s have lunch now, we are
all hungry!”

“Yes; come along, prince,” said the mother, “are you very hungry?”

“Yes; I must say that I am pretty hungry, thanks very much.”

“H’m! I like to see that you know your manners; and you are by no means
such a person as the general thought fit to describe you. Come along;
you sit here, opposite to me,” she continued, “I wish to be able to see
your face. Alexandra, Adelaida, look after the prince! He doesn’t seem
so very ill, does he? I don’t think he requires a napkin under his chin,
after all; are you accustomed to having one on, prince?”

“Formerly, when I was seven years old or so. I believe I wore one; but
now I usually hold my napkin on my knee when I eat.”

“Of course, of course! And about your fits?”

“Fits?” asked the prince, slightly surprised. “I very seldom have fits
nowadays. I don’t know how it may be here, though; they say the climate
may be bad for me.”

“He talks very well, you know!” said Mrs. Epanchin, who still continued
to nod at each word the prince spoke. “I really did not expect it at
all; in fact, I suppose it was all stuff and nonsense on the general’s
part, as usual. Eat away, prince, and tell me where you were born, and
where you were brought up. I wish to know all about you, you interest me
very much!”

The prince expressed his thanks once more, and eating heartily the
while, recommenced the narrative of his life in Switzerland, all of
which we have heard before. Mrs. Epanchin became more and more pleased
with her guest; the girls, too, listened with considerable attention. In
talking over the question of relationship it turned out that the prince
was very well up in the matter and knew his pedigree off by heart. It
was found that scarcely any connection existed between himself and Mrs.
Epanchin, but the talk, and the opportunity of conversing about her
family tree, gratified the latter exceedingly, and she rose from the
table in great good humour.

“Let’s all go to my boudoir,” she said, “and they shall bring some
coffee in there. That’s the room where we all assemble and busy
ourselves as we like best,” she explained. “Alexandra, my eldest,
here, plays the piano, or reads or sews; Adelaida paints landscapes and
portraits (but never finishes any); and Aglaya sits and does nothing.
I don’t work too much, either. Here we are, now; sit down, prince, near
the fire and talk to us. I want to hear you relate something. I wish
to make sure of you first and then tell my old friend, Princess
Bielokonski, about you. I wish you to know all the good people and to
interest them. Now then, begin!”

“Mamma, it’s rather a strange order, that!” said Adelaida, who was
fussing among her paints and paint-brushes at the easel. Aglaya and
Alexandra had settled themselves with folded hands on a sofa, evidently
meaning to be listeners. The prince felt that the general attention was
concentrated upon himself.

“I should refuse to say a word if _I_ were ordered to tell a story like
that!” observed Aglaya.

“Why? what’s there strange about it? He has a tongue. Why shouldn’t he
tell us something? I want to judge whether he is a good story-teller;
anything you like, prince--how you liked Switzerland, what was your first
impression, anything. You’ll see, he’ll begin directly and tell us all
about it beautifully.”

“The impression was forcible--” the prince began.

“There, you see, girls,” said the impatient lady, “he _has_ begun, you
see.”

“Well, then, _let_ him talk, mamma,” said Alexandra. “This prince is a
great humbug and by no means an idiot,” she whispered to Aglaya.

“Oh, I saw that at once,” replied the latter. “I don’t think it at all
nice of him to play a part. What does he wish to gain by it, I wonder?”

“My first impression was a very strong one,” repeated the prince. “When
they took me away from Russia, I remember I passed through many German
towns and looked out of the windows, but did not trouble so much as to
ask questions about them. This was after a long series of fits. I always
used to fall into a sort of torpid condition after such a series, and
lost my memory almost entirely; and though I was not altogether without
reason at such times, yet I had no logical power of thought. This would
continue for three or four days, and then I would recover myself again.
I remember my melancholy was intolerable; I felt inclined to cry; I
sat and wondered and wondered uncomfortably; the consciousness that
everything was strange weighed terribly upon me; I could understand that
it was all foreign and strange. I recollect I awoke from this state for
the first time at Basle, one evening; the bray of a donkey aroused me,
a donkey in the town market. I saw the donkey and was extremely pleased
with it, and from that moment my head seemed to clear.”

“A donkey? How strange! Yet it is not strange. Anyone of us might fall
in love with a donkey! It happened in mythological times,” said Madame
Epanchin, looking wrathfully at her daughters, who had begun to laugh.
“Go on, prince.”

“Since that evening I have been specially fond of donkeys. I began to
ask questions about them, for I had never seen one before; and I at
