noticing, “and I have seen a lot! Fancy! he suspects his daughter, that
angel, that orphan, my cousin--he suspects her, and every evening he
searches her room, to see if she has a lover hidden in it! He comes
here too on tiptoe, creeping softly--oh, so softly--and looks under the
sofa--my bed, you know. He is mad with suspicion, and sees a thief in
every corner. He runs about all night long; he was up at least seven
times last night, to satisfy himself that the windows and doors were
barred, and to peep into the oven. That man who appears in court for
scoundrels, rushes in here in the night and prays, lying prostrate,
banging his head on the ground by the half-hour--and for whom do you
think he prays? Who are the sinners figuring in his drunken petitions?
I have heard him with my own ears praying for the repose of the soul
of the Countess du Barry! Colia heard it too. He is as mad as a March
hare!”

“You hear how he slanders me, prince,” said Lebedeff, almost beside
himself with rage. “I may be a drunkard, an evil-doer, a thief, but at
least I can say one thing for myself. He does not know--how should he,
mocker that he is?--that when he came into the world it was I who washed
him, and dressed him in his swathing-bands, for my sister Anisia had
lost her husband, and was in great poverty. I was very little better
off than she, but I sat up night after night with her, and nursed both
mother and child; I used to go downstairs and steal wood for them from
the house-porter. How often did I sing him to sleep when I was half dead
with hunger! In short, I was more than a father to him, and now--now he
jeers at me! Even if I did cross myself, and pray for the repose of the
soul of the Comtesse du Barry, what does it matter? Three days ago,
for the first time in my life, I read her biography in an historical
dictionary. Do you know who she was? You there!” addressing his nephew.
“Speak! do you know?”

“Of course no one knows anything about her but you,” muttered the young
man in a would-be jeering tone.

“She was a Countess who rose from shame to reign like a Queen. An
Empress wrote to her, with her own hand, as ‘_Ma chère cousine_.’ At
a _lever-du-roi_ one morning (do you know what a _lever-du-roi_ was?)--a
Cardinal, a Papal legate, offered to put on her stockings; a high and
holy person like that looked on it as an honour! Did you know this? I
see by your expression that you did not! Well, how did she die? Answer!”

“Oh! do stop--you are too absurd!”

“This is how she died. After all this honour and glory, after having
been almost a Queen, she was guillotined by that butcher, Samson. She
was quite innocent, but it had to be done, for the satisfaction of the
fishwives of Paris. She was so terrified, that she did not understand
what was happening. But when Samson seized her head, and pushed her
under the knife with his foot, she cried out: ‘Wait a moment! wait a
moment, monsieur!’ Well, because of that moment of bitter suffering,
perhaps the Saviour will pardon her other faults, for one cannot imagine
a greater agony. As I read the story my heart bled for her. And what
does it matter to you, little worm, if I implored the Divine mercy for
her, great sinner as she was, as I said my evening prayer? I might have
done it because I doubted if anyone had ever crossed himself for her
sake before. It may be that in the other world she will rejoice to think
that a sinner like herself has cried to heaven for the salvation of her
soul. Why are you laughing? You believe nothing, atheist! And your story
was not even correct! If you had listened to what I was saying, you
would have heard that I did not only pray for the Comtesse du Barry. I
said, ‘Oh Lord! give rest to the soul of that great sinner, the Comtesse
du Barry, and to all unhappy ones like her.’ You see that is quite a
different thing, for how many sinners there are, how many women, who
have passed through the trials of this life, are now suffering and
groaning in purgatory! I prayed for you, too, in spite of your insolence
and impudence, also for your fellows, as it seems that you claim to know
how I pray...”

“Oh! that’s enough in all conscience! Pray for whom you choose, and the
devil take them and you! We have a scholar here; you did not know that,
prince?” he continued, with a sneer. “He reads all sorts of books and
memoirs now.”

“At any rate, your uncle has a kind heart,” remarked the prince, who
really had to force himself to speak to the nephew, so much did he
dislike him.

“Oh, now you are going to praise him! He will be set up! He puts his
hand on his heart, and he is delighted! I never said he was a man
without heart, but he is a rascal--that’s the pity of it. And then, he
is addicted to drink, and his mind is unhinged, like that of most
people who have taken more than is good for them for years. He loves his
children--oh, I know that well enough! He respected my aunt, his late
wife... and he even has a sort of affection for me. He has remembered me
in his will.”

“I shall leave you nothing!” exclaimed his uncle angrily.

“Listen to me, Lebedeff,” said the prince in a decided voice, turning
his back on the young man. “I know by experience that when you choose,
you can be business-like... I have very little time to spare, and
if you... By the way--excuse me--what is your Christian name? I have
forgotten it.”

“Ti-Ti-Timofey.”

“And?”

“Lukianovitch.”

Everyone in the room began to laugh.

“He is telling lies!” cried the nephew. “Even now he cannot speak
the truth. He is not called Timofey Lukianovitch, prince, but Lukian
Timofeyovitch. Now do tell us why you must needs lie about it? Lukian or
Timofey, it is all the same to you, and what difference can it make to
the prince? He tells lies without the least necessity, simply by force
of habit, I assure you.”

“Is that true?” said the prince impatiently.

“My name really is Lukian Timofeyovitch,” acknowledged Lebedeff,
lowering his eyes, and putting his hand on his heart.

“Well, for God’s sake, what made you say the other?”

“To humble myself,” murmured Lebedeff.

“What on earth do you mean? Oh I if only I knew where Colia was at this
moment!” cried the prince, standing up, as if to go.

“I can tell you all about Colia,” said the young man

“Oh! no, no!” said Lebedeff, hurriedly.

“Colia spent the night here, and this morning went after his father,
whom you let out of prison by paying his debts--Heaven only knows why!
Yesterday the general promised to come and lodge here, but he did not
appear. Most probably he slept at the hotel close by. No doubt Colia
is there, unless he has gone to Pavlofsk to see the Epanchins. He had a
little money, and was intending to go there yesterday. He must be either
at the hotel or at Pavlofsk.”

“At Pavlofsk! He is at Pavlofsk, undoubtedly!” interrupted Lebedeff....
“But come--let us go into the garden--we will have coffee there....” And
Lebedeff seized the prince’s arm, and led him from the room. They went
across the yard, and found themselves in a delightful little garden
with the trees already in their summer dress of green, thanks to the
unusually fine weather. Lebedeff invited his guest to sit down on a
green seat before a table of the same colour fixed in the earth, and
took a seat facing him. In a few minutes the coffee appeared, and the
prince did not refuse it. The host kept his eyes fixed on Muishkin, with
an expression of passionate servility.

“I knew nothing about your home before,” said the prince absently, as if
he were thinking of something else.

“Poor orphans,” began Lebedeff, his face assuming a mournful air, but he
stopped short, for the other looked at him inattentively, as if he had
already forgotten his own remark. They waited a few minutes in silence,
