
But the real upshot of the business was that the number of riddles to
be solved was augmented. The two girls, though rather irritated at their
mother’s exaggerated alarm and haste to depart from the scene, had been
unwilling to worry her at first with questions.

Besides, they could not help thinking that their sister Aglaya probably
knew more about the whole matter than both they and their mother put
together.

Prince S. looked as black as night, and was silent and moody. Mrs.
Epanchin did not say a word to him all the way home, and he did not seem
to observe the fact. Adelaida tried to pump him a little by asking, “who
was the uncle they were talking about, and what was it that had happened
in Petersburg?” But he had merely muttered something disconnected about
“making inquiries,” and that “of course it was all nonsense.” “Oh, of
course,” replied Adelaida, and asked no more questions. Aglaya, too, was
very quiet; and the only remark she made on the way home was that they
were “walking much too fast to be pleasant.”

Once she turned and observed the prince hurrying after them. Noticing
his anxiety to catch them up, she smiled ironically, and then looked
back no more. At length, just as they neared the house, General Epanchin
came out and met them; he had only just arrived from town.

His first word was to inquire after Evgenie Pavlovitch. But Lizabetha
stalked past him, and neither looked at him nor answered his question.

He immediately judged from the faces of his daughters and Prince S. that
there was a thunderstorm brewing, and he himself already bore evidences
of unusual perturbation of mind.

He immediately button-holed Prince S., and standing at the front door,
engaged in a whispered conversation with him. By the troubled aspect of
both of them, when they entered the house, and approached Mrs. Epanchin,
it was evident that they had been discussing very disturbing news.

Little by little the family gathered together upstairs in Lizabetha
Prokofievna’s apartments, and Prince Muishkin found himself alone on
the verandah when he arrived. He settled himself in a corner and sat
waiting, though he knew not what he expected. It never struck him that
he had better go away, with all this disturbance in the house. He seemed
to have forgotten all the world, and to be ready to sit on where he was
for years on end. From upstairs he caught sounds of excited conversation
every now and then.

He could not say how long he sat there. It grew late and became quite
dark.

Suddenly Aglaya entered the verandah. She seemed to be quite calm,
though a little pale.

Observing the prince, whom she evidently did not expect to see there,
alone in the corner, she smiled, and approached him:

“What are you doing there?” she asked.

The prince muttered something, blushed, and jumped up; but Aglaya
immediately sat down beside him; so he reseated himself.

She looked suddenly, but attentively into his face, then at the window,
as though thinking of something else, and then again at him.

“Perhaps she wants to laugh at me,” thought the prince, “but no; for if
she did she certainly would do so.”

“Would you like some tea? I’ll order some,” she said, after a minute or
two of silence.

“N-no thanks, I don’t know--”

“Don’t know! How can you not know? By-the-by, look here--if someone
were to challenge you to a duel, what should you do? I wished to ask you
this--some time ago--”

“Why? Nobody would ever challenge me to a duel!”

“But if they were to, would you be dreadfully frightened?”

“I dare say I should be--much alarmed!”

“Seriously? Then are you a coward?”

“N-no!--I don’t think so. A coward is a man who is afraid and runs away;
the man who is frightened but does not run away, is not quite a coward,”
 said the prince with a smile, after a moment’s thought.

“And you wouldn’t run away?”

“No--I don’t think I should run away,” replied the prince, laughing
outright at last at Aglaya’s questions.

“Though I am a woman, I should certainly not run away for anything,”
 said Aglaya, in a slightly pained voice. “However, I see you are
laughing at me and twisting your face up as usual in order to make
yourself look more interesting. Now tell me, they generally shoot at
twenty paces, don’t they? At ten, sometimes? I suppose if at ten they
must be either wounded or killed, mustn’t they?”

“I don’t think they often kill each other at duels.”

“They killed Pushkin that way.”

“That may have been an accident.”

“Not a bit of it; it was a duel to the death, and he was killed.”

“The bullet struck so low down that probably his antagonist would never
have aimed at that part of him--people never do; he would have aimed at
his chest or head; so that probably the bullet hit him accidentally. I
have been told this by competent authorities.”

“Well, a soldier once told me that they were always ordered to aim at
the middle of the body. So you see they don’t aim at the chest or head;
they aim lower on purpose. I asked some officer about this afterwards,
and he said it was perfectly true.”

“That is probably when they fire from a long distance.”

“Can you shoot at all?”

“No, I have never shot in my life.”

“Can’t you even load a pistol?”

“No! That is, I understand how it’s done, of course, but I have never
done it.”

“Then, you don’t know how, for it is a matter that needs practice. Now
listen and learn; in the first place buy good powder, not damp (they say
it mustn’t be at all damp, but very dry), some fine kind it is--you must
ask for _pistol_ powder, not the stuff they load cannons with. They say
one makes the bullets oneself, somehow or other. Have you got a pistol?”

“No--and I don’t want one,” said the prince, laughing.

“Oh, what _nonsense!_ You must buy one. French or English are the best,
they say. Then take a little powder, about a thimbleful, or perhaps two,
and pour it into the barrel. Better put plenty. Then push in a bit of
felt (it _must_ be felt, for some reason or other); you can easily get
a bit off some old mattress, or off a door; it’s used to keep the cold
out. Well, when you have pushed the felt down, put the bullet in; do you
hear now? The bullet last and the powder first, not the other way, or
the pistol won’t shoot. What are you laughing at? I wish you to buy
a pistol and practise every day, and you must learn to hit a mark for
_certain_; will you?”

The prince only laughed. Aglaya stamped her foot with annoyance.

Her serious air, however, during this conversation had surprised him
