
“I am not exactly thanking you, I am only feeling a growing admiration
for you--it makes me happy to look at you. I dare say I am speaking very
foolishly, but I must speak--I must explain, if it be out of nothing
better than self-respect.”

All he said and did was abrupt, confused, feverish--very likely the
words he spoke, as often as not, were not those he wished to say. He
seemed to inquire whether he _might_ speak. His eyes lighted on Princess
Bielokonski.

“All right, my friend, talk away, talk away!” she remarked. “Only don’t
lose your breath; you were in such a hurry when you began, and look what
you’ve come to now! Don’t be afraid of speaking--all these ladies
and gentlemen have seen far stranger people than yourself; you don’t
astonish _them_. You are nothing out-of-the-way remarkable, you know.
You’ve done nothing but break a vase, and give us all a fright.”

The prince listened, smiling.

“Wasn’t it you,” he said, suddenly turning to the old gentleman, “who
saved the student Porkunoff and a clerk called Shoabrin from being sent
to Siberia, two or three months since?”

The old dignitary blushed a little, and murmured that the prince had
better not excite himself further.

“And I have heard of _you_,” continued the prince, addressing Ivan
Petrovitch, “that when some of your villagers were burned out you gave
them wood to build up their houses again, though they were no longer
your serfs and had behaved badly towards you.”

“Oh, come, come! You are exaggerating,” said Ivan Petrovitch, beaming
with satisfaction, all the same. He was right, however, in this
instance, for the report had reached the prince’s ears in an incorrect
form.

“And you, princess,” he went on, addressing Princess Bielokonski, “was
it not you who received me in Moscow, six months since, as kindly as
though I had been your own son, in response to a letter from Lizabetha
Prokofievna; and gave me one piece of advice, again as to your own son,
which I shall never forget? Do you remember?”

“What are you making such a fuss about?” said the old lady, with
annoyance. “You are a good fellow, but very silly. One gives you a
halfpenny, and you are as grateful as though one had saved your life.
You think this is praiseworthy on your part, but it is not--it is not,
indeed.”

She seemed to be very angry, but suddenly burst out laughing, quite
good-humouredly.

Lizabetha Prokofievna’s face brightened up, too; so did that of General
Epanchin.

“I told you Lef Nicolaievitch was a man--a man--if only he would not
be in such a hurry, as the princess remarked,” said the latter, with
delight.

Aglaya alone seemed sad and depressed; her face was flushed, perhaps
with indignation.

“He really is very charming,” whispered the old dignitary to Ivan
Petrovitch.

“I came into this room with anguish in my heart,” continued the prince,
with ever-growing agitation, speaking quicker and quicker, and with
increasing strangeness. “I--I was afraid of you all, and afraid of
myself. I was most afraid of myself. When I returned to Petersburg, I
promised myself to make a point of seeing our greatest men, and members
of our oldest families--the old families like my own. I am now among
princes like myself, am I not? I wished to know you, and it was
necessary, very, very necessary. I had always heard so much that was
evil said of you all--more evil than good; as to how small and petty
were your interests, how absurd your habits, how shallow your education,
and so on. There is so much written and said about you! I came here
today with anxious curiosity; I wished to see for myself and form my
own convictions as to whether it were true that the whole of this upper
stratum of Russian society is _worthless_, has outlived its time, has
existed too long, and is only fit to die--and yet is dying with petty,
spiteful warring against that which is destined to supersede it and take
its place--hindering the Coming Men, and knowing not that itself is in
a dying condition. I did not fully believe in this view even before, for
there never was such a class among us--excepting perhaps at court, by
accident--or by uniform; but now there is not even that, is there? It
has vanished, has it not?”

“No, not a bit of it,” said Ivan Petrovitch, with a sarcastic laugh.

“Good Lord, he’s off again!” said Princess Bielokonski, impatiently.

“Laissez-le dire! He is trembling all over,” said the old man, in a
warning whisper.

The prince certainly was beside himself.

“Well? What have I seen?” he continued. “I have seen men of graceful
simplicity of intellect; I have seen an old man who is not above
speaking kindly and even _listening_ to a boy like myself; I see before
me persons who can understand, who can forgive--kind, good Russian
hearts--hearts almost as kind and cordial as I met abroad. Imagine how
delighted I must have been, and how surprised! Oh, let me express
this feeling! I have so often heard, and I have even believed, that
in society there was nothing but empty forms, and that reality had
vanished; but I now see for myself that this can never be the case _here_,
among us--it may be the order elsewhere, but not in Russia. Surely you
are not all Jesuits and deceivers! I heard Prince N.’s story just now.
Was it not simple-minded, spontaneous humour? Could such words come from
the lips of a man who is dead?--a man whose heart and talents are dried
up? Could dead men and women have treated me so kindly as you have all
been treating me to-day? Is there not material for the future in all
this--for hope? Can such people fail to _understand?_ Can such men fall
away from reality?”

“Once more let us beg you to be calm, my dear boy. We’ll talk of all
this another time--I shall do so with the greatest pleasure, for one,”
 said the old dignitary, with a smile.

Ivan Petrovitch grunted and twisted round in his chair. General Epanchin
moved nervously. The latter’s chief had started a conversation with the
wife of the dignitary, and took no notice whatever of the prince, but
the old lady very often glanced at him, and listened to what he was
saying.

“No, I had better speak,” continued the prince, with a new outburst
of feverish emotion, and turning towards the old man with an air of
confidential trustfulness. “Yesterday, Aglaya Ivanovna forbade me
to talk, and even specified the particular subjects I must not touch
upon--she knows well enough that I am odd when I get upon these matters.
I am nearly twenty-seven years old, and yet I know I am little better
than a child. I have no right to express my ideas, and said so long ago.
Only in Moscow, with Rogojin, did I ever speak absolutely freely! He and
I read Pushkin together--all his works. Rogojin knew nothing of Pushkin,
had not even heard his name. I am always afraid of spoiling a great
Thought or Idea by my absurd manner. I have no eloquence, I know. I
always make the wrong gestures--inappropriate gestures--and therefore
I degrade the Thought, and raise a laugh instead of doing my subject
justice. I have no sense of proportion either, and that is the chief
thing. I know it would be much better if I were always to sit still and
say nothing. When I do so, I appear to be quite a sensible sort of a
person, and what’s more, I think about things. But now I must speak; it
is better that I should. I began to speak because you looked so kindly
at me; you have such a beautiful face. I promised Aglaya Ivanovna
yesterday that I would not speak all the evening.”

“Really?” said the old man, smiling.

“But, at times, I can’t help thinking that I am wrong in feeling so
about it, you know. Sincerity is more important than elocution, isn’t
it?”
