
“Unpleasant! Indeed it is. You have found a very appropriate
expression,” said Lebedeff, politely, but with sarcasm.

“But what’s to be done? It’s a serious matter,” said the prince,
thoughtfully. “Don’t you think you may have dropped it out of your
pocket whilst intoxicated?”

“Certainly. Anything is possible when one is intoxicated, as you neatly
express it, prince. But consider--if I, intoxicated or not, dropped an
object out of my pocket on to the ground, that object ought to remain on
the ground. Where is the object, then?”

“Didn’t you put it away in some drawer, perhaps?”

“I’ve looked everywhere, and turned out everything.”

“I confess this disturbs me a good deal. Someone must have picked it up,
then.”

“Or taken it out of my pocket--two alternatives.”

“It is very distressing, because _who_--? That’s the question!”

“Most undoubtedly, excellent prince, you have hit it--that is the very
question. How wonderfully you express the exact situation in a few
words!”

“Come, come, Lebedeff, no sarcasm! It’s a serious--”

“Sarcasm!” cried Lebedeff, wringing his hands. “All right, all right,
I’m not angry. I’m only put out about this. Whom do you suspect?”

“That is a very difficult and complicated question. I cannot suspect the
servant, for she was in the kitchen the whole evening, nor do I suspect
any of my children.”

“I should think not. Go on.”

“Then it must be one of the guests.”

“Is such a thing possible?”

“Absolutely and utterly impossible--and yet, so it must be. But one
thing I am sure of, if it be a theft, it was committed, not in the
evening when we were all together, but either at night or early in the
morning; therefore, by one of those who slept here. Burdovsky and Colia
I except, of course. They did not even come into my room.”

“Yes, or even if they had! But who did sleep with you?”

“Four of us, including myself, in two rooms. The general, myself,
Keller, and Ferdishenko. One of us four it must have been. I don’t
suspect myself, though such cases have been known.”

“Oh! _do_ go on, Lebedeff! Don’t drag it out so.”

“Well, there are three left, then--Keller firstly. He is a drunkard
to begin with, and a liberal (in the sense of other people’s pockets),
otherwise with more of the ancient knight about him than of the modern
liberal. He was with the sick man at first, but came over afterwards
because there was no place to lie down in the room and the floor was so
hard.”

“You suspect him?”

“I _did_ suspect him. When I woke up at half-past seven and tore my hair
in despair for my loss and carelessness, I awoke the general, who was
sleeping the sleep of innocence near me. Taking into consideration the
sudden disappearance of Ferdishenko, which was suspicious in itself, we
decided to search Keller, who was lying there sleeping like a top. Well,
we searched his clothes thoroughly, and not a farthing did we find; in
fact, his pockets all had holes in them. We found a dirty handkerchief,
and a love-letter from some scullery-maid. The general decided that he
was innocent. We awoke him for further inquiries, and had the greatest
difficulty in making him understand what was up. He opened his mouth and
stared--he looked so stupid and so absurdly innocent. It wasn’t Keller.”

“Oh, I’m so glad!” said the prince, joyfully. “I was so afraid.”

“Afraid! Then you had some grounds for supposing he might be the
culprit?” said Lebedeff, frowning.

“Oh no--not a bit! It was foolish of me to say I was afraid! Don’t
repeat it please, Lebedeff, don’t tell anyone I said that!”

“My dear prince! your words lie in the lowest depth of my heart--it is
their tomb!” said Lebedeff, solemnly, pressing his hat to the region of
his heart.

“Thanks; very well. Then I suppose it’s Ferdishenko; that is, I mean,
you suspect Ferdishenko?”

“Whom else?” said Lebedeff, softly, gazing intently into the prince s
face.

“Of course--quite so, whom else? But what are the proofs?”

“We have evidence. In the first place, his mysterious disappearance at
seven o’clock, or even earlier.”

“I know, Colia told me that he had said he was off to--I forget the
name, some friend of his, to finish the night.”

“H’m! then Colia has spoken to you already?”

“Not about the theft.”

“He does not know of it; I have kept it a secret. Very well, Ferdishenko
went off to Wilkin’s. That is not so curious in itself, but here the
evidence opens out further. He left his address, you see, when he went.
Now prince, consider, why did he leave his address? Why do you suppose
he went out of his way to tell Colia that he had gone to Wilkin’s? Who
cared to know that he was going to Wilkin’s? No, no! prince, this is
finesse, thieves’ finesse! This is as good as saying, ‘There, how can I
be a thief when I leave my address? I’m not concealing my movements as a
thief would.’ Do you understand, prince?”

“Oh yes, but that is not enough.”

“Second proof. The scent turns out to be false, and the address given
is a sham. An hour after--that is at about eight, I went to Wilkin’s
myself, and there was no trace of Ferdishenko. The maid did tell me,
certainly, that an hour or so since someone had been hammering at the
door, and had smashed the bell; she said she would not open the door
because she didn’t want to wake her master; probably she was too lazy to
get up herself. Such phenomena are met with occasionally!”

“But is that all your evidence? It is not enough!”

“Well, prince, whom are we to suspect, then? Consider!” said Lebedeff
with almost servile amiability, smiling at the prince. There was a look
of cunning in his eyes, however.

“You should search your room and all the cupboards again,” said the
prince, after a moment or two of silent reflection.

“But I have done so, my dear prince!” said Lebedeff, more sweetly than
ever.

“H’m! why must you needs go up and change your coat like that?” asked
the prince, banging the table with his fist, in annoyance.

“Oh, don’t be so worried on my account, prince! I assure you I am not
worth it! At least, not I alone. But I see you are suffering on behalf
of the criminal too, for wretched Ferdishenko, in fact!”

“Of course you have given me a disagreeable enough thing to think
about,” said the prince, irritably, “but what are you going to do, since
you are so sure it was Ferdishenko?”
