
Hearing these words from her husband, Lizabetha Prokofievna was driven
beside herself.

According to her opinion, the whole thing had been one huge,
fantastical, absurd, unpardonable mistake. “First of all, this prince is
an idiot, and, secondly, he is a fool--knows nothing of the world, and
has no place in it. Whom can he be shown to? Where can you take him to?
What will old Bielokonski say? We never thought of such a husband as
_that_ for our Aglaya!”

Of course, the last argument was the chief one. The maternal heart
trembled with indignation to think of such an absurdity, although in
that heart there rose another voice, which said: “And _why_ is not the
prince such a husband as you would have desired for Aglaya?” It was this
voice which annoyed Lizabetha Prokofievna more than anything else.

For some reason or other, the sisters liked the idea of the prince. They
did not even consider it very strange; in a word, they might be expected
at any moment to range themselves strongly on his side. But both of them
decided to say nothing either way. It had always been noticed in the
family that the stronger Mrs. Epanchin’s opposition was to any project,
the nearer she was, in reality, to giving in.

Alexandra, however, found it difficult to keep absolute silence on
the subject. Long since holding, as she did, the post of “confidential
adviser to mamma,” she was now perpetually called in council, and asked
her opinion, and especially her assistance, in order to recollect “how
on earth all this happened?” Why did no one see it? Why did no one say
anything about it? What did all that wretched “poor knight” joke mean?
Why was she, Lizabetha Prokofievna, driven to think, and foresee, and
worry for everybody, while they all sucked their thumbs, and counted the
crows in the garden, and did nothing? At first, Alexandra had been very
careful, and had merely replied that perhaps her father’s remark was not
so far out: that, in the eyes of the world, probably the choice of the
prince as a husband for one of the Epanchin girls would be considered a
very wise one. Warming up, however, she added that the prince was by no
means a fool, and never had been; and that as to “place in the world,”
 no one knew what the position of a respectable person in Russia would
imply in a few years--whether it would depend on successes in the
government service, on the old system, or what.

To all this her mother replied that Alexandra was a freethinker, and
that all this was due to that “cursed woman’s rights question.”

Half an hour after this conversation, she went off to town, and thence
to the Kammenny Ostrof, [“Stone Island,” a suburb and park of St.
Petersburg] to see Princess Bielokonski, who had just arrived from
Moscow on a short visit. The princess was Aglaya’s godmother.

“Old Bielokonski” listened to all the fevered and despairing lamentations
of Lizabetha Prokofievna without the least emotion; the tears of this
sorrowful mother did not evoke answering sighs--in fact, she laughed at
her. She was a dreadful old despot, this princess; she could not allow
equality in anything, not even in friendship of the oldest standing, and
she insisted on treating Mrs. Epanchin as her _protégée_, as she had been
thirty-five years ago. She could never put up with the independence and
energy of Lizabetha’s character. She observed that, as usual, the whole
family had gone much too far ahead, and had converted a fly into an
elephant; that, so far as she had heard their story, she was persuaded
that nothing of any seriousness had occurred; that it would surely
be better to wait until something _did_ happen; that the prince, in
her opinion, was a very decent young fellow, though perhaps a little
eccentric, through illness, and not quite as weighty in the world as one
could wish. The worst feature was, she said, Nastasia Philipovna.

Lizabetha Prokofievna well understood that the old lady was angry at the
failure of Evgenie Pavlovitch--her own recommendation. She returned
home to Pavlofsk in a worse humour than when she left, and of course
everybody in the house suffered. She pitched into everyone, because, she
declared, they had ‘gone mad.’ Why were things always mismanaged in her
house? Why had everybody been in such a frantic hurry in this matter?
So far as she could see, nothing whatever had happened. Surely they had
better wait and see what was to happen, instead of making mountains out
of molehills.

And so the conclusion of the matter was that it would be far better to
take it quietly, and wait coolly to see what would turn up. But, alas!
peace did not reign for more than ten minutes. The first blow dealt to
its power was in certain news communicated to Lizabetha Prokofievna as
to events which had happened during her trip to see the princess. (This
trip had taken place the day after that on which the prince had turned
up at the Epanchins at nearly one o’clock at night, thinking it was
nine.)

The sisters replied candidly and fully enough to their mother’s
impatient questions on her return. They said, in the first place, that
nothing particular had happened since her departure; that the prince
had been, and that Aglaya had kept him waiting a long while before
she appeared--half an hour, at least; that she had then come in, and
immediately asked the prince to have a game of chess; that the prince
did not know the game, and Aglaya had beaten him easily; that she had
been in a wonderfully merry mood, and had laughed at the prince, and
chaffed him so unmercifully that one was quite sorry to see his wretched
expression.

She had then asked him to play cards--the game called “little fools.”
 At this game the tables were turned completely, for the prince had shown
himself a master at it. Aglaya had cheated and changed cards, and stolen
others, in the most bare-faced way, but, in spite of everything the
prince had beaten her hopelessly five times running, and she had been
left “little fool” each time.

Aglaya then lost her temper, and began to say such awful things to the
prince that he laughed no more, but grew dreadfully pale, especially
when she said that she should not remain in the house with him, and that
he ought to be ashamed of coming to their house at all, especially at
night, “_after all that had happened._”

So saying, she had left the room, banging the door after her, and the
prince went off, looking as though he were on his way to a funeral, in
spite of all their attempts at consolation.

Suddenly, a quarter of an hour after the prince’s departure, Aglaya had
rushed out of her room in such a hurry that she had not even wiped her
eyes, which were full of tears. She came back because Colia had brought
a hedgehog. Everybody came in to see the hedgehog. In answer to their
questions Colia explained that the hedgehog was not his, and that he had
left another boy, Kostia Lebedeff, waiting for him outside. Kostia was
too shy to come in, because he was carrying a hatchet; they had bought
the hedgehog and the hatchet from a peasant whom they had met on the
road. He had offered to sell them the hedgehog, and they had paid fifty
copecks for it; and the hatchet had so taken their fancy that they had
made up their minds to buy it of their own accord. On hearing this,
Aglaya urged Colia to sell her the hedgehog; she even called him “dear
Colia,” in trying to coax him. He refused for a long time, but at last
he could hold out no more, and went to fetch Kostia Lebedeff. The latter
appeared, carrying his hatchet, and covered with confusion. Then it came
out that the hedgehog was not theirs, but the property of a schoolmate,
one Petroff, who had given them some money to buy Schlosser’s History
for him, from another schoolfellow who at that moment was driven to
raising money by the sale of his books. Colia and Kostia were about to
make this purchase for their friend when chance brought the hedgehog
to their notice, and they had succumbed to the temptation of buying it.
They were now taking Petroff the hedgehog and hatchet which they had
bought with his money, instead of Schlosser’s History. But Aglaya so
entreated them that at last they consented to sell her the hedgehog. As
soon as she had got possession of it, she put it in a wicker basket with
Colia’s help, and covered it with a napkin. Then she said to Colia: “Go
and take this hedgehog to the prince from me, and ask him to accept it
as a token of my profound respect.” Colia joyfully promised to do the
errand, but he demanded explanations. “What does the hedgehog mean? What
is the meaning of such a present?” Aglaya replied that it was none of
his business. “I am sure that there is some allegory about it,” Colia
persisted. Aglaya grew angry, and called him “a silly boy.” “If I did
not respect all women in your person,” replied Colia, “and if my own
principles would permit it, I would soon prove to you, that I know how
to answer such an insult!” But, in the end, Colia went off with the
hedgehog in great delight, followed by Kostia Lebedeff. Aglaya’s
annoyance was soon over, and seeing that Colia was swinging the
