
“Upon my word, I didn’t! To this moment I don’t know how it all
happened. I--I ran after Aglaya Ivanovna, but Nastasia Philipovna fell
down in a faint; and since that day they won’t let me see Aglaya--that’s
all I know.”

“It’s all the same; you ought to have run after Aglaya though the other
was fainting.”

“Yes, yes, I ought--but I couldn’t! She would have died--she would
have killed herself. You don’t know her; and I should have told Aglaya
everything afterwards--but I see, Evgenie Pavlovitch, you don’t know
all. Tell me now, why am I not allowed to see Aglaya? I should have
cleared it all up, you know. Neither of them kept to the real point, you
see. I could never explain what I mean to you, but I think I could to
Aglaya. Oh! my God, my God! You spoke just now of Aglaya’s face at the
moment when she ran away. Oh, my God! I remember it! Come along,
come along--quick!” He pulled at Evgenie’s coat-sleeve nervously and
excitedly, and rose from his chair.

“Where to?”

“Come to Aglaya--quick, quick!”

“But I told you she is not at Pavlofsk. And what would be the use if she
were?”

“Oh, she’ll understand, she’ll understand!” cried the prince, clasping
his hands. “She would understand that all this is not the point--not a
bit the real point--it is quite foreign to the real question.”

“How can it be foreign? You _are_ going to be married, are you not? Very
well, then you are persisting in your course. _Are_ you going to marry her
or not?”

“Yes, I shall marry her--yes.”

“Then why is it ‘not the point’?”

“Oh, no, it is not the point, not a bit. It makes no difference, my
marrying her--it means nothing.”

“How ‘means nothing’? You are talking nonsense, my friend. You are
marrying the woman you love in order to secure her happiness, and Aglaya
sees and knows it. How can you say that it’s ‘not the point’?”

“Her happiness? Oh, no! I am only marrying her--well, because she wished
it. It means nothing--it’s all the same. She would certainly have
died. I see now that that marriage with Rogojin was an insane idea. I
understand all now that I did not understand before; and, do you know,
when those two stood opposite to one another, I could not bear Nastasia
Philipovna’s face! You must know, Evgenie Pavlovitch, I have never told
anyone before--not even Aglaya--that I cannot bear Nastasia Philipovna’s
face.” (He lowered his voice mysteriously as he said this.) “You
described that evening at Nastasia Philipovna’s (six months since) very
accurately just now; but there is one thing which you did not mention,
and of which you took no account, because you do not know. I mean her
_face_--I looked at her face, you see. Even in the morning when I saw her
portrait, I felt that I could not _bear_ to look at it. Now, there’s Vera
Lebedeff, for instance, her eyes are quite different, you know. I’m
_afraid_ of her face!” he added, with real alarm.

“You are _afraid_ of it?”

“Yes--she’s mad!” he whispered, growing pale.

“Do you know this for certain?” asked Evgenie, with the greatest
curiosity.

“Yes, for certain--quite for certain, now! I have discovered it
_absolutely_ for certain, these last few days.”

“What are you doing, then?” cried Evgenie, in horror. “You must be
marrying her solely out of _fear_, then! I can’t make head or tail of it,
prince. Perhaps you don’t even love her?”

“Oh, no; I love her with all my soul. Why, she is a child! She’s a child
now--a real child. Oh! you know nothing about it at all, I see.”

“And are you assured, at the same time, that you love Aglaya too?”

“Yes--yes--oh; yes!”

“How so? Do you want to make out that you love them _both?_”

“Yes--yes--both! I do!”

“Excuse me, prince, but think what you are saying! Recollect yourself!”

“Without Aglaya--I--I _must_ see Aglaya!--I shall die in my sleep very
soon--I thought I was dying in my sleep last night. Oh! if Aglaya only
knew all--I mean really, _really_ all! Because she must know _all_--that’s
the first condition towards understanding. Why cannot we ever know all
about another, especially when that other has been guilty? But I
don’t know what I’m talking about--I’m so confused. You pained me so
dreadfully. Surely--surely Aglaya has not the same expression now as
she had at the moment when she ran away? Oh, yes! I am guilty and I
know it--I know it! Probably I am in fault all round--I don’t quite know
how--but I am in fault, no doubt. There is something else, but I cannot
explain it to you, Evgenie Pavlovitch. I have no words; but Aglaya will
understand. I have always believed Aglaya will understand--I am assured
she will.”

“No, prince, she will not. Aglaya loved like a woman, like a human
being, not like an abstract spirit. Do you know what, my poor prince?
The most probable explanation of the matter is that you never loved
either the one or the other in reality.”

“I don’t know--perhaps you are right in much that you have said, Evgenie
Pavlovitch. You are very wise, Evgenie Pavlovitch--oh! how my head is
beginning to ache again! Come to her, quick--for God’s sake, come!”

“But I tell you she is not in Pavlofsk! She’s in Colmina.”

“Oh, come to Colmina, then! Come--let us go at once!”

“No--no, impossible!” said Evgenie, rising.

“Look here--I’ll write a letter--take a letter for me!”

“No--no, prince; you must forgive me, but I can’t undertake any such
commissions! I really can’t.”

And so they parted.

Evgenie Pavlovitch left the house with strange convictions. He, too,
felt that the prince must be out of his mind.

“And what did he mean by that _face_--a face which he so fears, and yet
so loves? And meanwhile he really may die, as he says, without seeing
Aglaya, and she will never know how devotedly he loves her! Ha, ha, ha!
How does the fellow manage to love two of them? Two different kinds of
love, I suppose! This is very interesting--poor idiot! What on earth
will become of him now?”

X.

The prince did not die before his wedding--either by day or night, as
he had foretold that he might. Very probably he passed disturbed nights,
and was afflicted with bad dreams; but, during the daytime, among his
fellow-men, he seemed as kind as ever, and even contented; only a little
thoughtful when alone.

The wedding was hurried on. The day was fixed for exactly a week after
Evgenie’s visit to the prince. In the face of such haste as this,
even the prince’s best friends (if he had had any) would have felt the
hopelessness of any attempt to save “the poor madman.” Rumour said that
in the visit of Evgenie Pavlovitch was to be discerned the influence of
Lizabetha Prokofievna and her husband... But if those good souls, in
the boundless kindness of their hearts, were desirous of saving the
