
“I must state that I only revised the first part of the article,”
 interposed Lebedeff with feverish impatience, while laughter rose from
all around him; “but we fell out in the middle over one idea, so I never
corrected the second part. Therefore I cannot be held responsible for
the numerous grammatical blunders in it.”

“That is all he thinks of!” cried Lizabetha Prokofievna.

“May I ask when this article was revised?” said Evgenie Pavlovitch to
Keller.

“Yesterday morning,” he replied, “we had an interview which we all gave
our word of honour to keep secret.”

“The very time when he was cringing before you and making protestations
of devotion! Oh, the mean wretches! I will have nothing to do with your
Pushkin, and your daughter shall not set foot in my house!”

Lizabetha Prokofievna was about to rise, when she saw Hippolyte
laughing, and turned upon him with irritation.

“Well, sir, I suppose you wanted to make me look ridiculous?”

“Heaven forbid!” he answered, with a forced smile. “But I am more than
ever struck by your eccentricity, Lizabetha Prokofievna. I admit that I
told you of Lebedeff’s duplicity, on purpose. I knew the effect it would
have on you,--on you alone, for the prince will forgive him. He has
probably forgiven him already, and is racking his brains to find some
excuse for him--is not that the truth, prince?”

He gasped as he spoke, and his strange agitation seemed to increase.

“Well?” said Mrs. Epanchin angrily, surprised at his tone; “well, what
more?”

“I have heard many things of the kind about you...they delighted me... I
have learned to hold you in the highest esteem,” continued Hippolyte.

His words seemed tinged with a kind of sarcastic mockery, yet he was
extremely agitated, casting suspicious glances around him, growing
confused, and constantly losing the thread of his ideas. All this,
together with his consumptive appearance, and the frenzied expression of
his blazing eyes, naturally attracted the attention of everyone present.

“I might have been surprised (though I admit I know nothing of the
world), not only that you should have stayed on just now in the company
of such people as myself and my friends, who are not of your class, but
that you should let these... young ladies listen to such a scandalous
affair, though no doubt novel-reading has taught them all there is to
know. I may be mistaken; I hardly know what I am saying; but surely
no one but you would have stayed to please a whippersnapper (yes,
a whippersnapper; I admit it) to spend the evening and take part in
everything--only to be ashamed of it tomorrow. (I know I express myself
badly.) I admire and appreciate it all extremely, though the expression
on the face of his excellency, your husband, shows that he thinks it
very improper. He-he!” He burst out laughing, and was seized with a
fit of coughing which lasted for two minutes and prevented him from
speaking.

“He has lost his breath now!” said Lizabetha Prokofievna coldly, looking
at him with more curiosity than pity: “Come, my dear boy, that is quite
enough--let us make an end of this.”

Ivan Fedorovitch, now quite out of patience, interrupted suddenly. “Let
me remark in my turn, sir,” he said in tones of deep annoyance, “that
my wife is here as the guest of Prince Lef Nicolaievitch, our friend and
neighbour, and that in any case, young man, it is not for you to pass
judgment on the conduct of Lizabetha Prokofievna, or to make remarks
aloud in my presence concerning what feelings you think may be read
in my face. Yes, my wife stayed here,” continued the general, with
increasing irritation, “more out of amazement than anything else.
Everyone can understand that a collection of such strange young men
would attract the attention of a person interested in contemporary life.
I stayed myself, just as I sometimes stop to look on in the street when
I see something that may be regarded as-as-as-”

“As a curiosity,” suggested Evgenie Pavlovitch, seeing his excellency
involved in a comparison which he could not complete.

“That is exactly the word I wanted,” said the general with
satisfaction--“a curiosity. However, the most astonishing and, if I may
so express myself, the most painful, thing in this matter, is that you
cannot even understand, young man, that Lizabetha Prokofievna, only
stayed with you because you are ill,--if you really are dying--moved
by the pity awakened by your plaintive appeal, and that her
name, character, and social position place her above all risk of
contamination. Lizabetha Prokofievna!” he continued, now crimson with
rage, “if you are coming, we will say goodnight to the prince, and--”

“Thank you for the lesson, general,” said Hippolyte, with unexpected
gravity, regarding him thoughtfully.

“Two minutes more, if you please, dear Ivan Fedorovitch,” said Lizabetha
Prokofievna to her husband; “it seems to me that he is in a fever
and delirious; you can see by his eyes what a state he is in; it is
impossible to let him go back to Petersburg tonight. Can you put him
up, Lef Nicolaievitch? I hope you are not bored, dear prince,” she
added suddenly to Prince S. “Alexandra, my dear, come here! Your hair is
coming down.”

She arranged her daughter’s hair, which was not in the least disordered,
and gave her a kiss. This was all that she had called her for.

“I thought you were capable of development,” said Hippolyte, coming out
of his fit of abstraction. “Yes, that is what I meant to say,” he added,
with the satisfaction of one who suddenly remembers something he had
forgotten. “Here is Burdovsky, sincerely anxious to protect his mother;
is not that so? And he himself is the cause of her disgrace. The prince
is anxious to help Burdovsky and offers him friendship and a large sum
of money, in the sincerity of his heart. And here they stand like two
sworn enemies--ha, ha, ha! You all hate Burdovsky because his behaviour
with regard to his mother is shocking and repugnant to you; do you not?
Is not that true? Is it not true? You all have a passion for beauty and
distinction in outward forms; that is all you care for, isn’t it? I have
suspected for a long time that you cared for nothing else! Well, let me
tell you that perhaps there is not one of you who loved your mother as
Burdovsky loved his. As to you, prince, I know that you have sent money
secretly to Burdovsky’s mother through Gania. Well, I bet now,” he
continued with an hysterical laugh, “that Burdovsky will accuse you of
indelicacy, and reproach you with a want of respect for his mother! Yes,
that is quite certain! Ha, ha, ha!”

He caught his breath, and began to cough once more.

“Come, that is enough! That is all now; you have no more to say? Now
go to bed; you are burning with fever,” said Lizabetha Prokofievna
impatiently. Her anxious eyes had never left the invalid. “Good heavens,
he is going to begin again!”

“You are laughing, I think? Why do you keep laughing at me?” said
Hippolyte irritably to Evgenie Pavlovitch, who certainly was laughing.

“I only want to know, Mr. Hippolyte--excuse me, I forget your surname.”

“Mr. Terentieff,” said the prince.

“Oh yes, Mr. Terentieff. Thank you prince. I heard it just now, but had
forgotten it. I want to know, Mr. Terentieff, if what I have heard about
you is true. It seems you are convinced that if you could speak to the
people from a window for a quarter of an hour, you could make them all
adopt your views and follow you?”

“I may have said so,” answered Hippolyte, as if trying to remember.
“Yes, I certainly said so,” he continued with sudden animation, fixing
an unflinching glance on his questioner. “What of it?”

“Nothing. I was only seeking further information, to put the finishing
touch.”

