When I asked him about you, he told me that he had long since ceased to
love you, that the very recollection of you was a torture to him, but
that he was sorry for you; and that when he thought of you his heart was
pierced. I ought to tell you that I never in my life met a man anything
like him for noble simplicity of mind and for boundless trustfulness.
I guessed that anyone who liked could deceive him, and that he would
immediately forgive anyone who did deceive him; and it was for this that
I grew to love him--”

Aglaya paused for a moment, as though suddenly brought up in
astonishment that she could have said these words, but at the same time
a great pride shone in her eyes, like a defiant assertion that it would
not matter to her if “this woman” laughed in her face for the admission
just made.

“I have told you all now, and of course you understand what I wish of
you.”

“Perhaps I do; but tell me yourself,” said Nastasia Philipovna, quietly.

Aglaya flushed up angrily.

“I wished to find out from you,” she said, firmly, “by what right you
dare to meddle with his feelings for me? By what right you dared send me
those letters? By what right do you continually remind both me and him
that you love him, after you yourself threw him over and ran away from
him in so insulting and shameful a way?”

“I never told either him or you that I loved him!” replied Nastasia
Philipovna, with an effort. “And--and I did run away from him--you are
right there,” she added, scarcely audibly.

“Never told either him or me?” cried Aglaya. “How about your letters?
Who asked you to try to persuade me to marry him? Was not that a
declaration from you? Why do you force yourself upon us in this way? I
confess I thought at first that you were anxious to arouse an aversion
for him in my heart by your meddling, in order that I might give him up;
and it was only afterwards that I guessed the truth. You imagined that
you were doing an heroic action! How could you spare any love for him,
when you love your own vanity to such an extent? Why could you not
simply go away from here, instead of writing me those absurd letters?
Why do you not _now_ marry that generous man who loves you, and has done
you the honour of offering you his hand? It is plain enough why; if you
marry Rogojin you lose your grievance; you will have nothing more to
complain of. You will be receiving too much honour. Evgenie Pavlovitch
was saying the other day that you had read too many poems and are too
well educated for--your position; and that you live in idleness. Add to
this your vanity, and, there you have reason enough--”

“And do you not live in idleness?”

Things had come to this unexpected point too quickly. Unexpected because
Nastasia Philipovna, on her way to Pavlofsk, had thought and considered
a good deal, and had expected something different, though perhaps not
altogether good, from this interview; but Aglaya had been carried away
by her own outburst, just as a rolling stone gathers impetus as it
careers downhill, and could not restrain herself in the satisfaction of
revenge.

It was strange, Nastasia Philipovna felt, to see Aglaya like this. She
gazed at her, and could hardly believe her eyes and ears for a moment or
two.

Whether she were a woman who had read too many poems, as Evgenie
Pavlovitch supposed, or whether she were mad, as the prince had
assured Aglaya, at all events, this was a woman who, in spite of her
occasionally cynical and audacious manner, was far more refined and
trustful and sensitive than appeared. There was a certain amount of
romantic dreaminess and caprice in her, but with the fantastic was
mingled much that was strong and deep.

The prince realized this, and great suffering expressed itself in his
face.

Aglaya observed it, and trembled with anger.

“How dare you speak so to me?” she said, with a haughtiness which was
quite indescribable, replying to Nastasia’s last remark.

“You must have misunderstood what I said,” said Nastasia, in some
surprise.

“If you wished to preserve your good name, why did you not give up
your--your ‘guardian,’ Totski, without all that theatrical posturing?”
 said Aglaya, suddenly a propos of nothing.

“What do you know of my position, that you dare to judge me?” cried
Nastasia, quivering with rage, and growing terribly white.

“I know this much, that you did not go out to honest work, but went away
with a rich man, Rogojin, in order to pose as a fallen angel. I don’t
wonder that Totski was nearly driven to suicide by such a fallen angel.”

“Silence!” cried Nastasia Philipovna. “You are about as fit to
understand me as the housemaid here, who bore witness against her lover
in court the other day. She would understand me better than you do.”

“Probably an honest girl living by her own toil. Why do you speak of a
housemaid so contemptuously?”

“I do not despise toil; I despise you when you speak of toil.”

“If you had cared to be an honest woman, you would have gone out as a
laundress.”

Both had risen, and were gazing at one another with pallid faces.

“Aglaya, don’t! This is unfair,” cried the prince, deeply distressed.

Rogojin was not smiling now; he sat and listened with folded arms, and
lips tight compressed.

“There, look at her,” cried Nastasia, trembling with passion. “Look at
this young lady! And I imagined her an angel! Did you come to me without
your governess, Aglaya Ivanovna? Oh, fie, now shall I just tell you why
you came here today? Shall I tell you without any embellishments? You
came because you were afraid of me!”

“Afraid of _you?_” asked Aglaya, beside herself with naive amazement that
the other should dare talk to her like this.

“Yes, me, of course! Of course you were afraid of me, or you would not
have decided to come. You cannot despise one you fear. And to think that
I have actually esteemed you up to this very moment! Do you know why
you are afraid of me, and what is your object now? You wished to satisfy
yourself with your own eyes as to which he loves best, myself or you,
because you are fearfully jealous.”

“He has told me already that he hates you,” murmured Aglaya, scarcely
audibly.

“Perhaps, perhaps! I am not worthy of him, I know. But I think you are
lying, all the same. He cannot hate me, and he cannot have said so. I am
ready to forgive you, in consideration of your position; but I confess
I thought better of you. I thought you were wiser, and more beautiful,
too; I did, indeed! Well, take your treasure! See, he is gazing at you,
he can’t recollect himself. Take him, but on one condition; go away at
once, this instant!”

She fell back into a chair, and burst into tears. But suddenly some new
expression blazed in her eyes. She stared fixedly at Aglaya, and rose
from her seat.

“Or would you like me to bid him, _bid him_, do you hear, _command him_,
now, at once, to throw you up, and remain mine for ever? Shall I? He
will stay, and he will marry me too, and you shall trot home all alone.
Shall I?--shall I say the word?” she screamed like a madwoman, scarcely
believing herself that she could really pronounce such wild words.

Aglaya had made for the door in terror, but she stopped at the
