the ear every moment for his indiscretion.

XVI.

“It’s good business,” said Ptitsin, at last, folding the letter and
handing it back to the prince. “You will receive, without the slightest
trouble, by the last will and testament of your aunt, a very large sum
of money indeed.”

“Impossible!” cried the general, starting up as if he had been shot.

Ptitsin explained, for the benefit of the company, that the prince’s
aunt had died five months since. He had never known her, but she was his
mother’s own sister, the daughter of a Moscow merchant, one Paparchin,
who had died a bankrupt. But the elder brother of this same Paparchin,
had been an eminent and very rich merchant. A year since it had so
happened that his only two sons had both died within the same month.
This sad event had so affected the old man that he, too, had died very
shortly after. He was a widower, and had no relations left, excepting
the prince’s aunt, a poor woman living on charity, who was herself at
the point of death from dropsy; but who had time, before she died,
to set Salaskin to work to find her nephew, and to make her will
bequeathing her newly-acquired fortune to him.

It appeared that neither the prince, nor the doctor with whom he lived
in Switzerland, had thought of waiting for further communications;
but the prince had started straight away with Salaskin’s letter in his
pocket.

“One thing I may tell you, for certain,” concluded Ptitsin, addressing
the prince, “that there is no question about the authenticity of this
matter. Anything that Salaskin writes you as regards your unquestionable
right to this inheritance, you may look upon as so much money in your
pocket. I congratulate you, prince; you may receive a million and a half
of roubles, perhaps more; I don’t know. All I _do_ know is that Paparchin
was a very rich merchant indeed.”

“Hurrah!” cried Lebedeff, in a drunken voice. “Hurrah for the last of
the Muishkins!”

“My goodness me! and I gave him twenty-five roubles this morning as
though he were a beggar,” blurted out the general, half senseless with
amazement. “Well, I congratulate you, I congratulate you!” And the
general rose from his seat and solemnly embraced the prince. All came
forward with congratulations; even those of Rogojin’s party who had
retreated into the next room, now crept softly back to look on. For the
moment even Nastasia Philipovna was forgotten.

But gradually the consciousness crept back into the minds of each one
present that the prince had just made her an offer of marriage. The
situation had, therefore, become three times as fantastic as before.

Totski sat and shrugged his shoulders, bewildered. He was the only guest
left sitting at this time; the others had thronged round the table in
disorder, and were all talking at once.

It was generally agreed, afterwards, in recalling that evening, that
from this moment Nastasia Philipovna seemed entirely to lose her senses.
She continued to sit still in her place, looking around at her guests
with a strange, bewildered expression, as though she were trying to
collect her thoughts, and could not. Then she suddenly turned to the
prince, and glared at him with frowning brows; but this only lasted one
moment. Perhaps it suddenly struck her that all this was a jest, but his
face seemed to reassure her. She reflected, and smiled again, vaguely.

“So I am really a princess,” she whispered to herself, ironically,
and glancing accidentally at Daria Alexeyevna’s face, she burst out
laughing.

“Ha, ha, ha!” she cried, “this is an unexpected climax, after all. I
didn’t expect this. What are you all standing up for, gentlemen? Sit
down; congratulate me and the prince! Ferdishenko, just step out and
order some more champagne, will you? Katia, Pasha,” she added suddenly,
seeing the servants at the door, “come here! I’m going to be married,
did you hear? To the prince. He has a million and a half of roubles; he
is Prince Muishkin, and has asked me to marry him. Here, prince, come
and sit by me; and here comes the wine. Now then, ladies and gentlemen,
where are your congratulations?”

“Hurrah!” cried a number of voices. A rush was made for the wine by
Rogojin’s followers, though, even among them, there seemed some sort of
realization that the situation had changed. Rogojin stood and looked on,
with an incredulous smile, screwing up one side of his mouth.

“Prince, my dear fellow, do remember what you are about,” said the
general, approaching Muishkin, and pulling him by the coat sleeve.

Nastasia Philipovna overheard the remark, and burst out laughing.

“No, no, general!” she cried. “You had better look out! I am the
princess now, you know. The prince won’t let you insult me. Afanasy
Ivanovitch, why don’t you congratulate me? I shall be able to sit at
table with your new wife, now. Aha! you see what I gain by marrying
a prince! A million and a half, and a prince, and an idiot into the
bargain, they say. What better could I wish for? Life is only just about
to commence for me in earnest. Rogojin, you are a little too late. Away
with your paper parcel! I’m going to marry the prince; I’m richer than
you are now.”

But Rogojin understood how things were tending, at last. An
inexpressibly painful expression came over his face. He wrung his hands;
a groan made its way up from the depths of his soul.

“Surrender her, for God’s sake!” he said to the prince.

All around burst out laughing.

“What? Surrender her to _you?_” cried Daria Alexeyevna. “To a fellow who
comes and bargains for a wife like a moujik! The prince wishes to marry
her, and you--”

“So do I, so do I! This moment, if I could! I’d give every farthing I
have to do it.”

“You drunken moujik,” said Daria Alexeyevna, once more. “You ought to be
kicked out of the place.”

The laughter became louder than ever.

“Do you hear, prince?” said Nastasia Philipovna. “Do you hear how this
moujik of a fellow goes on bargaining for your bride?”

“He is drunk,” said the prince, quietly, “and he loves you very much.”

“Won’t you be ashamed, afterwards, to reflect that your wife very nearly
ran away with Rogojin?”

“Oh, you were raving, you were in a fever; you are still half
delirious.”

“And won’t you be ashamed when they tell you, afterwards, that your wife
lived at Totski’s expense so many years?”

“No; I shall not be ashamed of that. You did not so live by your own
will.”

“And you’ll never reproach me with it?”

“Never.”

“Take care, don’t commit yourself for a whole lifetime.”

“Nastasia Philipovna.” said the prince, quietly, and with deep emotion,
“I said before that I shall esteem your consent to be my wife as a great
honour to myself, and shall consider that it is you who will honour
me, not I you, by our marriage. You laughed at these words, and others
around us laughed as well; I heard them. Very likely I expressed myself
funnily, and I may have looked funny, but, for all that, I believe I
understand where honour lies, and what I said was but the literal truth.
You were about to ruin yourself just now, irrevocably; you would
