corner. He became much excited when they approached the table once more.
He was disturbed in his mind, it seemed; perspiration stood in large
drops on his forehead; in his gleaming eyes it was easy to read
impatience and agitation; his gaze wandered from face to face of those
present, and from object to object in the room, apparently without aim.
He had taken a part, and an animated one, in the noisy conversation of
the company; but his animation was clearly the outcome of fever. His
talk was almost incoherent; he would break off in the middle of a
sentence which he had begun with great interest, and forget what he had
been saying. The prince discovered to his dismay that Hippolyte had been
allowed to drink two large glasses of champagne; the one now standing by
him being the third. All this he found out afterwards; at the moment he
did not notice anything, very particularly.

“Do you know I am specially glad that today is your birthday!” cried
Hippolyte.

“Why?”

“You’ll soon see. D’you know I had a feeling that there would be a lot
of people here tonight? It’s not the first time that my presentiments
have been fulfilled. I wish I had known it was your birthday, I’d have
brought you a present--perhaps I have got a present for you! Who knows?
Ha, ha! How long is it now before daylight?”

“Not a couple of hours,” said Ptitsin, looking at his watch. “What’s the
good of daylight now? One can read all night in the open air without
it,” said someone.

“The good of it! Well, I want just to see a ray of the sun,” said
Hippolyte. “Can one drink to the sun’s health, do you think, prince?”

“Oh, I dare say one can; but you had better be calm and lie down,
Hippolyte--that’s much more important.”

“You are always preaching about resting; you are a regular nurse to me,
prince. As soon as the sun begins to ‘resound’ in the sky--what poet
said that? ‘The sun resounded in the sky.’ It is beautiful, though
there’s no sense in it!--then we will go to bed. Lebedeff, tell me, is
the sun the source of life? What does the source, or ‘spring,’ of life
really mean in the Apocalypse? You have heard of the ‘Star that is
called Wormwood,’ prince?”

“I have heard that Lebedeff explains it as the railroads that cover
Europe like a net.”

Everybody laughed, and Lebedeff got up abruptly.

“No! Allow me, that is not what we are discussing!” he cried, waving
his hand to impose silence. “Allow me! With these gentlemen... all
these gentlemen,” he added, suddenly addressing the prince, “on certain
points... that is...” He thumped the table repeatedly, and the laughter
increased. Lebedeff was in his usual evening condition, and had just
ended a long and scientific argument, which had left him excited and
irritable. On such occasions he was apt to evince a supreme contempt for
his opponents.

“It is not right! Half an hour ago, prince, it was agreed among us that
no one should interrupt, no one should laugh, that each person was to
express his thoughts freely; and then at the end, when everyone had
spoken, objections might be made, even by the atheists. We chose the
general as president. Now without some such rule and order, anyone might
be shouted down, even in the loftiest and most profound thought....”

“Go on! Go on! Nobody is going to interrupt you!” cried several voices.

“Speak, but keep to the point!”

“What is this ‘star’?” asked another.

“I have no idea,” replied General Ivolgin, who presided with much
gravity.

“I love these arguments, prince,” said Keller, also more than half
intoxicated, moving restlessly in his chair. “Scientific and political.”
 Then, turning suddenly towards Evgenie Pavlovitch, who was seated near
him: “Do you know, I simply adore reading the accounts of the debates in
the English parliament. Not that the discussions themselves interest
me; I am not a politician, you know; but it delights me to see how they
address each other ‘the noble lord who agrees with me,’ ‘my honourable
opponent who astonished Europe with his proposal,’ ‘the noble viscount
sitting opposite’--all these expressions, all this parliamentarism of
a free people, has an enormous attraction for me. It fascinates me,
prince. I have always been an artist in the depths of my soul, I assure
you, Evgenie Pavlovitch.”

“Do you mean to say,” cried Gania, from the other corner, “do you mean
to say that railways are accursed inventions, that they are a source of
ruin to humanity, a poison poured upon the earth to corrupt the springs
of life?”

Gavrila Ardalionovitch was in high spirits that evening, and it seemed
to the prince that his gaiety was mingled with triumph. Of course he was
only joking with Lebedeff, meaning to egg him on, but he grew excited
himself at the same time.

“Not the railways, oh dear, no!” replied Lebedeff, with a mixture of
violent anger and extreme enjoyment. “Considered alone, the railways
will not pollute the springs of life, but as a whole they are accursed.
The whole tendency of our latest centuries, in its scientific and
materialistic aspect, is most probably accursed.”

“Is it certainly accursed?... or do you only mean it might be? That is
an important point,” said Evgenie Pavlovitch.

“It is accursed, certainly accursed!” replied the clerk, vehemently.

“Don’t go so fast, Lebedeff; you are much milder in the morning,” said
Ptitsin, smiling.

“But, on the other hand, more frank in the evening! In the evening
sincere and frank,” repeated Lebedeff, earnestly. “More candid, more
exact, more honest, more honourable, and... although I may show you my
weak side, I challenge you all; you atheists, for instance! How are you
going to save the world? How find a straight road of progress, you men
of science, of industry, of cooperation, of trades unions, and all the
rest? How are you going to save it, I say? By what? By credit? What is
credit? To what will credit lead you?”

“You are too inquisitive,” remarked Evgenie Pavlovitch.

“Well, anyone who does not interest himself in questions such as this
is, in my opinion, a mere fashionable dummy.”

“But it will lead at least to solidarity, and balance of interests,”
 said Ptitsin.

“You will reach that with nothing to help you but credit? Without
recourse to any moral principle, having for your foundation only
individual selfishness, and the satisfaction of material desires?
Universal peace, and the happiness of mankind as a whole, being the
result! Is it really so that I may understand you, sir?”

“But the universal necessity of living, of drinking, of eating--in
short, the whole scientific conviction that this necessity can only be
satisfied by universal co-operation and the solidarity of interests--is,
it seems to me, a strong enough idea to serve as a basis, so to speak,
and a ‘spring of life,’ for humanity in future centuries,” said Gavrila
Ardalionovitch, now thoroughly roused.

“The necessity of eating and drinking, that is to say, solely the
instinct of self-preservation...”

“Is not that enough? The instinct of self-preservation is the normal law
of humanity...”

“Who told you that?” broke in Evgenie Pavlovitch.

“It is a law, doubtless, but a law neither more nor less normal than
that of destruction, even self-destruction. Is it possible that
