standing back in the doorway, waiting to come out or go upstairs; but
the prince felt an irresistible conviction that he knew this man, and
that it was Rogojin. The man moved on up the stairs; a moment later the
prince passed up them, too. His heart froze within him. “In a minute or
two I shall know all,” he thought.

The staircase led to the first and second corridors of the hotel, along
which lay the guests’ bedrooms. As is often the case in Petersburg
houses, it was narrow and very dark, and turned around a massive stone
column.

On the first landing, which was as small as the necessary turn of the
stairs allowed, there was a niche in the column, about half a yard wide,
and in this niche the prince felt convinced that a man stood concealed.
He thought he could distinguish a figure standing there. He would pass
by quickly and not look. He took a step forward, but could bear the
uncertainty no longer and turned his head.

The eyes--the same two eyes--met his! The man concealed in the niche had
also taken a step forward. For one second they stood face to face.

Suddenly the prince caught the man by the shoulder and twisted him round
towards the light, so that he might see his face more clearly.

Rogojin’s eyes flashed, and a smile of insanity distorted his
countenance. His right hand was raised, and something glittered in it.
The prince did not think of trying to stop it. All he could remember
afterwards was that he seemed to have called out:

“Parfen! I won’t believe it.”

Next moment something appeared to burst open before him: a wonderful
inner light illuminated his soul. This lasted perhaps half a second, yet
he distinctly remembered hearing the beginning of the wail, the strange,
dreadful wail, which burst from his lips of its own accord, and which no
effort of will on his part could suppress.

Next moment he was absolutely unconscious; black darkness blotted out
everything.

He had fallen in an epileptic fit.


*****


As is well known, these fits occur instantaneously. The face, especially
the eyes, become terribly disfigured, convulsions seize the limbs, a
terrible cry breaks from the sufferer, a wail from which everything
human seems to be blotted out, so that it is impossible to believe that
the man who has just fallen is the same who emitted the dreadful cry.
It seems more as though some other being, inside the stricken one,
had cried. Many people have borne witness to this impression; and many
cannot behold an epileptic fit without a feeling of mysterious terror
and dread.

Such a feeling, we must suppose, overtook Rogojin at this moment, and
saved the prince’s life. Not knowing that it was a fit, and seeing
his victim disappear head foremost into the darkness, hearing his head
strike the stone steps below with a crash, Rogojin rushed downstairs,
skirting the body, and flung himself headlong out of the hotel, like a
raving madman.

The prince’s body slipped convulsively down the steps till it rested at
the bottom. Very soon, in five minutes or so, he was discovered, and a
crowd collected around him.

A pool of blood on the steps near his head gave rise to grave fears. Was
it a case of accident, or had there been a crime? It was, however, soon
recognized as a case of epilepsy, and identification and proper measures
for restoration followed one another, owing to a fortunate circumstance.
Colia Ivolgin had come back to his hotel about seven o’clock, owing to
a sudden impulse which made him refuse to dine at the Epanchins’,
and, finding a note from the prince awaiting him, had sped away to the
latter’s address. Arrived there, he ordered a cup of tea and sat sipping
it in the coffee-room. While there he heard excited whispers of someone
just found at the bottom of the stairs in a fit; upon which he had
hurried to the spot, with a presentiment of evil, and at once recognized
the prince.

The sufferer was immediately taken to his room, and though he partially
regained consciousness, he lay long in a semi-dazed condition.

The doctor stated that there was no danger to be apprehended from the
wound on the head, and as soon as the prince could understand what
was going on around him, Colia hired a carriage and took him away
to Lebedeff’s. There he was received with much cordiality, and the
departure to the country was hastened on his account. Three days later
they were all at Pavlofsk.

VI.

Lebedeff’s country-house was not large, but it was pretty and
convenient, especially the part which was let to the prince.

A row of orange and lemon trees and jasmines, planted in green tubs,
stood on the fairly wide terrace. According to Lebedeff, these trees
gave the house a most delightful aspect. Some were there when he bought
it, and he was so charmed with the effect that he promptly added to
their number. When the tubs containing these plants arrived at the villa
and were set in their places, Lebedeff kept running into the street to
enjoy the view of the house, and every time he did so the rent to be
demanded from the future tenant went up with a bound.

This country villa pleased the prince very much in his state of physical
and mental exhaustion. On the day that they left for Pavlofsk, that is
the day after his attack, he appeared almost well, though in reality he
felt very far from it. The faces of those around him for the last three
days had made a pleasant impression. He was pleased to see, not only
Colia, who had become his inseparable companion, but Lebedeff himself
and all the family, except the nephew, who had left the house. He was
also glad to receive a visit from General Ivolgin, before leaving St.
Petersburg.

It was getting late when the party arrived at Pavlofsk, but several
people called to see the prince, and assembled in the verandah. Gania
was the first to arrive. He had grown so pale and thin that the prince
could hardly recognize him. Then came Varia and Ptitsin, who were
rusticating in the neighbourhood. As to General Ivolgin, he scarcely
budged from Lebedeff’s house, and seemed to have moved to Pavlofsk with
him. Lebedeff did his best to keep Ardalion Alexandrovitch by him, and
to prevent him from invading the prince’s quarters. He chatted with
him confidentially, so that they might have been taken for old friends.
During those three days the prince had noticed that they frequently held
long conversations; he often heard their voices raised in argument on
deep and learned subjects, which evidently pleased Lebedeff. He seemed
as if he could not do without the general. But it was not only Ardalion
Alexandrovitch whom Lebedeff kept out of the prince’s way. Since they
had come to the villa, he treated his own family the same. Upon the
pretext that his tenant needed quiet, he kept him almost in isolation,
and Muishkin protested in vain against this excess of zeal. Lebedeff
stamped his feet at his daughters and drove them away if they attempted
to join the prince on the terrace; not even Vera was excepted.

“They will lose all respect if they are allowed to be so free and easy;
besides it is not proper for them,” he declared at last, in answer to a
direct question from the prince.

“Why on earth not?” asked the latter. “Really, you know, you are making
yourself a nuisance, by keeping guard over me like this. I get bored
all by myself; I have told you so over and over again, and you get on
my nerves more than ever by waving your hands and creeping in and out in
the mysterious way you do.”

It was a fact that Lebedeff, though he was so anxious to keep everyone
else from disturbing the patient, was continually in and out of the
prince’s room himself. He invariably began by opening the door a crack
and peering in to see if the prince was there, or if he had escaped;
then he would creep softly up to the arm-chair, sometimes making
Muishkin jump by his sudden appearance. He always asked if the patient
