
“But it’s not I alone,” cried Colia. “They all talked about it, and they
do still. Why, just now Prince S. and Adelaida Ivanovna declared that
they upheld ‘the poor knight’; so evidently there does exist a ‘poor
knight’; and if it were not for Adelaida Ivanovna, we should have known
long ago who the ‘poor knight’ was.”

“Why, how am I to blame?” asked Adelaida, smiling.

“You wouldn’t draw his portrait for us, that’s why you are to blame!
Aglaya Ivanovna asked you to draw his portrait, and gave you the whole
subject of the picture. She invented it herself; and you wouldn’t.”

“What was I to draw? According to the lines she quoted:

  “‘From his face he never lifted
    That eternal mask of steel.’”

“What sort of a face was I to draw? I couldn’t draw a mask.”

“I don’t know what you are driving at; what mask do you mean?” said
Mrs. Epanchin, irritably. She began to see pretty clearly though what
it meant, and whom they referred to by the generally accepted title of
“poor knight.” But what specially annoyed her was that the prince was
looking so uncomfortable, and blushing like a ten-year-old child.

“Well, have you finished your silly joke?” she added, “and am I to be
told what this ‘poor knight’ means, or is it a solemn secret which
cannot be approached lightly?”

But they all laughed on.

“It’s simply that there is a Russian poem,” began Prince S., evidently
anxious to change the conversation, “a strange thing, without beginning
or end, and all about a ‘poor knight.’ A month or so ago, we were all
talking and laughing, and looking up a subject for one of Adelaida’s
pictures--you know it is the principal business of this family to find
subjects for Adelaida’s pictures. Well, we happened upon this ‘poor
knight.’ I don’t remember who thought of it first--”

“Oh! Aglaya Ivanovna did,” said Colia.

“Very likely--I don’t recollect,” continued Prince S.

“Some of us laughed at the subject; some liked it; but she declared
that, in order to make a picture of the gentleman, she must first see
his face. We then began to think over all our friends’ faces to see
if any of them would do, and none suited us, and so the matter stood;
that’s all. I don’t know why Nicolai Ardalionovitch has brought up
the joke now. What was appropriate and funny then, has quite lost all
interest by this time.”

“Probably there’s some new silliness about it,” said Mrs. Epanchin,
sarcastically.

“There is no silliness about it at all--only the profoundest respect,”
 said Aglaya, very seriously. She had quite recovered her temper; in
fact, from certain signs, it was fair to conclude that she was delighted
to see this joke going so far; and a careful observer might have
remarked that her satisfaction dated from the moment when the fact of
the prince’s confusion became apparent to all.

“‘Profoundest respect!’ What nonsense! First, insane giggling, and then,
all of a sudden, a display of ‘profoundest respect.’ Why respect? Tell
me at once, why have you suddenly developed this ‘profound respect,’
eh?”

“Because,” replied Aglaya gravely, “in the poem the knight is described
as a man capable of living up to an ideal all his life. That sort of
thing is not to be found every day among the men of our times. In the
poem it is not stated exactly what the ideal was, but it was evidently
some vision, some revelation of pure Beauty, and the knight wore round
his neck, instead of a scarf, a rosary. A device--A. N. B.--the meaning
of which is not explained, was inscribed on his shield--”

“No, A. N. D.,” corrected Colia.

“I say A. N. B., and so it shall be!” cried Aglaya, irritably. “Anyway,
the ‘poor knight’ did not care what his lady was, or what she did. He
had chosen his ideal, and he was bound to serve her, and break lances
for her, and acknowledge her as the ideal of pure Beauty, whatever she
might say or do afterwards. If she had taken to stealing, he would have
championed her just the same. I think the poet desired to embody in this
one picture the whole spirit of medieval chivalry and the platonic love
of a pure and high-souled knight. Of course it’s all an ideal, and in
the ‘poor knight’ that spirit reached the utmost limit of asceticism. He
is a Don Quixote, only serious and not comical. I used not to understand
him, and laughed at him, but now I love the ‘poor knight,’ and respect
his actions.”

So ended Aglaya; and, to look at her, it was difficult, indeed, to judge
whether she was joking or in earnest.

“Pooh! he was a fool, and his actions were the actions of a fool,” said
Mrs. Epanchin; “and as for you, young woman, you ought to know better.
At all events, you are not to talk like that again. What poem is it?
Recite it! I want to hear this poem! I have hated poetry all my life.
Prince, you must excuse this nonsense. We neither of us like this sort
of thing! Be patient!”

They certainly were put out, both of them.

The prince tried to say something, but he was too confused, and could
not get his words out. Aglaya, who had taken such liberties in her
little speech, was the only person present, perhaps, who was not in the
least embarrassed. She seemed, in fact, quite pleased.

She now rose solemnly from her seat, walked to the centre of the
terrace, and stood in front of the prince’s chair. All looked on with
some surprise, and Prince S. and her sisters with feelings of decided
alarm, to see what new frolic she was up to; it had gone quite far
enough already, they thought. But Aglaya evidently thoroughly enjoyed
the affectation and ceremony with which she was introducing her
recitation of the poem.

Mrs. Epanchin was just wondering whether she would not forbid the
performance after all, when, at the very moment that Aglaya commenced
her declamation, two new guests, both talking loudly, entered from the
street. The new arrivals were General Epanchin and a young man.

Their entrance caused some slight commotion.

VII.

The young fellow accompanying the general was about twenty-eight, tall,
and well built, with a handsome and clever face, and bright black eyes,
full of fun and intelligence.

Aglaya did not so much as glance at the new arrivals, but went on with
her recitation, gazing at the prince the while in an affected manner,
and at him alone. It was clear to him that she was doing all this with
some special object.

But the new guests at least somewhat eased his strained and
uncomfortable position. Seeing them approaching, he rose from his chair,
and nodding amicably to the general, signed to him not to interrupt the
recitation. He then got behind his chair, and stood there with his left
hand resting on the back of it. Thanks to this change of position,
he was able to listen to the ballad with far less embarrassment than
before. Mrs. Epanchin had also twice motioned to the new arrivals to be
quiet, and stay where they were.

The prince was much interested in the young man who had just entered. He
easily concluded that this was Evgenie Pavlovitch Radomski, of whom he
had already heard mention several times. He was puzzled, however, by the
young man’s plain clothes, for he had always heard of Evgenie Pavlovitch
as a military man. An ironical smile played on Evgenie’s lips all the
while the recitation was proceeding, which showed that he, too, was
probably in the secret of the ‘poor knight’ joke. But it had become
quite a different matter with Aglaya. All the affectation of manner
