least degree alarmed about Aglaya writing such a letter; he could trust
her. What he did not like about it was that he could not trust Gania.

However, he made up his mind that he would himself take the note and
deliver it. Indeed, he went so far as to leave the house and walk up the
road, but changed his mind when he had nearly reached Ptitsin’s door.
However, he there luckily met Colia, and commissioned him to deliver the
letter to his brother as if direct from Aglaya. Colia asked no questions
but simply delivered it, and Gania consequently had no suspicion that it
had passed through so many hands.

Arrived home again, the prince sent for Vera Lebedeff and told her as
much as was necessary, in order to relieve her mind, for she had been in
a dreadful state of anxiety since she had missed the letter. She heard
with horror that her father had taken it. Muishkin learned from her that
she had on several occasions performed secret missions both for Aglaya
and for Rogojin, without, however, having had the slightest idea that in
so doing she might injure the prince in any way.

The latter, with one thing and another, was now so disturbed and
confused, that when, a couple of hours or so later, a message came from
Colia that the general was ill, he could hardly take the news in.

However, when he did master the fact, it acted upon him as a tonic
by completely distracting his attention. He went at once to Nina
Alexandrovna’s, whither the general had been carried, and stayed there
until the evening. He could do no good, but there are people whom
to have near one is a blessing at such times. Colia was in an almost
hysterical state; he cried continuously, but was running about all day,
all the same; fetching doctors, of whom he collected three; going to the
chemist’s, and so on.

The general was brought round to some extent, but the doctors
declared that he could not be said to be out of danger. Varia and Nina
Alexandrovna never left the sick man’s bedside; Gania was excited and
distressed, but would not go upstairs, and seemed afraid to look at the
patient. He wrung his hands when the prince spoke to him, and said that
“such a misfortune at such a moment” was terrible.

The prince thought he knew what Gania meant by “such a moment.”

Hippolyte was not in the house. Lebedeff turned up late in the
afternoon; he had been asleep ever since his interview with the prince
in the morning. He was quite sober now, and cried with real sincerity
over the sick general--mourning for him as though he were his own
brother. He blamed himself aloud, but did not explain why. He repeated
over and over again to Nina Alexandrovna that he alone was to blame--no
one else--but that he had acted out of “pure amiable curiosity,” and
that “the deceased,” as he insisted upon calling the still living
general, had been the greatest of geniuses.

He laid much stress on the genius of the sufferer, as if this idea must
be one of immense solace in the present crisis.

Nina Alexandrovna--seeing his sincerity of feeling--said at last,
and without the faintest suspicion of reproach in her voice: “Come,
come--don’t cry! God will forgive you!”

Lebedeff was so impressed by these words, and the tone in which
they were spoken, that he could not leave Nina Alexandrovna all the
evening--in fact, for several days. Till the general’s death, indeed, he
spent almost all his time at his side.

Twice during the day a messenger came to Nina Alexandrovna from the
Epanchins to inquire after the invalid.

When--late in the evening--the prince made his appearance in Lizabetha
Prokofievna’s drawing-room, he found it full of guests. Mrs. Epanchin
questioned him very fully about the general as soon as he appeared; and
when old Princess Bielokonski wished to know “who this general was, and
who was Nina Alexandrovna,” she proceeded to explain in a manner which
pleased the prince very much.

He himself, when relating the circumstances of the general’s illness to
Lizabetha Prokofievna, “spoke beautifully,” as Aglaya’s sisters declared
afterwards--“modestly, quietly, without gestures or too many words, and
with great dignity.” He had entered the room with propriety and grace,
and he was perfectly dressed; he not only did not “fall down on the
slippery floor,” as he had expressed it, but evidently made a very
favourable impression upon the assembled guests.

As for his own impression on entering the room and taking his seat,
he instantly remarked that the company was not in the least such
as Aglaya’s words had led him to fear, and as he had dreamed of--in
nightmare form--all night.

This was the first time in his life that he had seen a little corner of
what was generally known by the terrible name of “society.” He had long
thirsted, for reasons of his own, to penetrate the mysteries of the
magic circle, and, therefore, this assemblage was of the greatest
possible interest to him.

His first impression was one of fascination. Somehow or other he felt
that all these people must have been born on purpose to be together! It
seemed to him that the Epanchins were not having a party at all; that
these people must have been here always, and that he himself was one
of them--returned among them after a long absence, but one of them,
naturally and indisputably.

It never struck him that all this refined simplicity and nobility and
wit and personal dignity might possibly be no more than an exquisite
artistic polish. The majority of the guests--who were somewhat
empty-headed, after all, in spite of their aristocratic bearing--never
guessed, in their self-satisfied composure, that much of their
superiority was mere veneer, which indeed they had adopted unconsciously
and by inheritance.

The prince would never so much as suspect such a thing in the delight of
his first impression.

He saw, for instance, that one important dignitary, old enough to be his
grandfather, broke off his own conversation in order to listen to _him_--a
young and inexperienced man; and not only listened, but seemed to
attach value to his opinion, and was kind and amiable, and yet they
were strangers and had never seen each other before. Perhaps what most
appealed to the prince’s impressionability was the refinement of the old
man’s courtesy towards him. Perhaps the soil of his susceptible nature
was really predisposed to receive a pleasant impression.

Meanwhile all these people--though friends of the family and of each
other to a certain extent--were very far from being such intimate
friends of the family and of each other as the prince concluded. There
were some present who never would think of considering the Epanchins
their equals. There were even some who hated one another cordially. For
instance, old Princess Bielokonski had all her life despised the wife
of the “dignitary,” while the latter was very far from loving Lizabetha
Prokofievna. The dignitary himself had been General Epanchin’s protector
from his youth up; and the general considered him so majestic a
personage that he would have felt a hearty contempt for himself if
he had even for one moment allowed himself to pose as the great man’s
equal, or to think of him--in his fear and reverence--as anything less
than an Olympic God! There were others present who had not met for
years, and who had no feeling whatever for each other, unless it were
dislike; and yet they met tonight as though they had seen each other but
yesterday in some friendly and intimate assembly of kindred spirits.

It was not a large party, however. Besides Princess Bielokonski and the
old dignitary (who was really a great man) and his wife, there was an
old military general--a count or baron with a German name, a man reputed
to possess great knowledge and administrative ability. He was one
of those Olympian administrators who know everything except Russia,
pronounce a word of extraordinary wisdom, admired by all, about once in
five years, and, after being an eternity in the service, generally die
full of honour and riches, though they have never done anything great,
and have even been hostile to all greatness. This general was Ivan
Fedorovitch’s immediate superior in the service; and it pleased the
latter to look upon him also as a patron. On the other hand, the great
man did not at all consider himself Epanchin’s patron. He was always
very cool to him, while taking advantage of his ready services, and
would instantly have put another in his place if there had been the
