need make such a proposition,” said the prince, looking confused.

“What did you suppose, then? Why did you think I invited you out here? I
suppose you think me a ‘little fool,’ as they all call me at home?”

“I didn’t know they called you a fool. I certainly don’t think you one.”

“You don’t think me one! Oh, dear me!--that’s very clever of you; you
put it so neatly, too.”

“In my opinion, you are far from a fool sometimes--in fact, you are very
intelligent. You said a very clever thing just now about my being unjust
because I had _only_ justice. I shall remember that, and think about it.”

Aglaya blushed with pleasure. All these changes in her expression came
about so naturally and so rapidly--they delighted the prince; he watched
her, and laughed.

“Listen,” she began again; “I have long waited to tell you all this,
ever since the time when you sent me that letter--even before that.
Half of what I have to say you heard yesterday. I consider you the most
honest and upright of men--more honest and upright than any other
man; and if anybody says that your mind is--is sometimes affected, you
know--it is unfair. I always say so and uphold it, because even if your
surface mind be a little affected (of course you will not feel angry
with me for talking so--I am speaking from a higher point of view) yet
your real mind is far better than all theirs put together. Such a
mind as they have never even _dreamed_ of; because really, there are
_two_ minds--the kind that matters, and the kind that doesn’t matter.
Isn’t it so?”

“May be! may be so!” said the prince, faintly; his heart was beating
painfully.

“I knew you would not misunderstand me,” she said, triumphantly. “Prince
S. and Evgenie Pavlovitch and Alexandra don’t understand anything about
these two kinds of mind, but, just fancy, mamma does!”

“You are very like Lizabetha Prokofievna.”

“What! surely not?” said Aglaya.

“Yes, you are, indeed.”

“Thank you; I am glad to be like mamma,” she said, thoughtfully. “You
respect her very much, don’t you?” she added, quite unconscious of the
naiveness of the question.

“_Very_ much; and I am so glad that you have realized the fact.”

“I am very glad, too, because she is often laughed at by people. But
listen to the chief point. I have long thought over the matter, and at
last I have chosen you. I don’t wish people to laugh at me; I don’t wish
people to think me a ‘little fool.’ I don’t want to be chaffed. I felt
all this of a sudden, and I refused Evgenie Pavlovitch flatly, because
I am not going to be forever thrown at people’s heads to be married. I
want--I want--well, I’ll tell you, I wish to run away from home, and I
have chosen you to help me.”

“Run away from home?” cried the prince.

“Yes--yes--yes! Run away from home!” she repeated, in a transport of
rage. “I won’t, I won’t be made to blush every minute by them all! I
don’t want to blush before Prince S. or Evgenie Pavlovitch, or
anyone, and therefore I have chosen you. I shall tell you everything,
_everything_, even the most important things of all, whenever I like,
and you are to hide nothing from me on your side. I want to speak to at
least one person, as I would to myself. They have suddenly begun to say
that I am waiting for you, and in love with you. They began this before
you arrived here, and so I didn’t show them the letter, and now they all
say it, every one of them. I want to be brave, and be afraid of nobody.
I don’t want to go to their balls and things--I want to do good. I have
long desired to run away, for I have been kept shut up for twenty years,
and they are always trying to marry me off. I wanted to run away when I
was fourteen years old--I was a little fool then, I know--but now I have
worked it all out, and I have waited for you to tell me about foreign
countries. I have never seen a single Gothic cathedral. I must go to
Rome; I must see all the museums; I must study in Paris. All this last
year I have been preparing and reading forbidden books. Alexandra and
Adelaida are allowed to read anything they like, but I mayn’t. I don’t
want to quarrel with my sisters, but I told my parents long ago that I
wish to change my social position. I have decided to take up teaching,
and I count on you because you said you loved children. Can we go in for
education together--if not at once, then afterwards? We could do good
together. I won’t be a general’s daughter any more! Tell me, are you a
very learned man?”

“Oh no; not at all.”

“Oh-h-h! I’m sorry for that. I thought you were. I wonder why I always
thought so--but at all events you’ll help me, won’t you? Because I’ve
chosen you, you know.”

“Aglaya Ivanovna, it’s absurd.”

“But I will, I _will_ run away!” she cried--and her eyes flashed again
with anger--“and if you don’t agree I shall go and marry Gavrila
Ardalionovitch! I won’t be considered a horrible girl, and accused of
goodness knows what.”

“Are you out of your mind?” cried the prince, almost starting from his
seat. “What do they accuse you of? Who accuses you?”

“At home, everybody, mother, my sisters, Prince S., even that detestable
Colia! If they don’t say it, they think it. I told them all so to their
faces. I told mother and father and everybody. Mamma was ill all the
day after it, and next day father and Alexandra told me that I didn’t
understand what nonsense I was talking. I informed them that they
little knew me--I was not a small child--I understood every word in the
language--that I had read a couple of Paul de Kok’s novels two years
since on purpose, so as to know all about everything. No sooner did
mamma hear me say this than she nearly fainted!”

A strange thought passed through the prince’s brain; he gazed intently
at Aglaya and smiled.

He could not believe that this was the same haughty young girl who had
once so proudly shown him Gania’s letter. He could not understand how
that proud and austere beauty could show herself to be such an utter
child--a child who probably did not even now understand some words.

“Have you always lived at home, Aglaya Ivanovna?” he asked. “I mean,
have you never been to school, or college, or anything?”

“No--never--nowhere! I’ve been at home all my life, corked up in a
bottle; and they expect me to be married straight out of it. What are
you laughing at again? I observe that you, too, have taken to laughing
at me, and range yourself on their side against me,” she added, frowning
angrily. “Don’t irritate me--I’m bad enough without that--I don’t know
what I am doing sometimes. I am persuaded that you came here today in
the full belief that I am in love with you, and that I arranged this
meeting because of that,” she cried, with annoyance.

“I admit I was afraid that that was the case, yesterday,” blundered the
prince (he was rather confused), “but today I am quite convinced that--”

“How?” cried Aglaya--and her lower lip trembled violently. “You were
_afraid_ that I--you dared to think that I--good gracious! you suspected,
perhaps, that I sent for you to come here in order to catch you in a
trap, so that they should find us here together, and make you marry
me--”

“Aglaya Ivanovna, aren’t you ashamed of saying such a thing? How could
such a horrible idea enter your sweet, innocent heart? I am certain you
don’t believe a word of what you say, and probably you don’t even know
what you are talking about.”

Aglaya sat with her eyes on the ground; she seemed to have alarmed even
herself by what she had said.

