“Why, he knows everything--Lebedeff knows everything! I was a month or
two with Lihachof after his father died, your excellency, and while he
was knocking about--he’s in the debtor’s prison now--I was with him,
and he couldn’t do a thing without Lebedeff; and I got to know Nastasia
Philipovna and several people at that time.”

“Nastasia Philipovna? Why, you don’t mean to say that she and
Lihachof--” cried Rogojin, turning quite pale.

“No, no, no, no, no! Nothing of the sort, I assure you!” said Lebedeff,
hastily. “Oh dear no, not for the world! Totski’s the only man with any
chance there. Oh, no! He takes her to his box at the opera at the French
theatre of an evening, and the officers and people all look at her and
say, ‘By Jove, there’s the famous Nastasia Philipovna!’ but no one ever
gets any further than that, for there is nothing more to say.”

“Yes, it’s quite true,” said Rogojin, frowning gloomily; “so Zaleshoff
told me. I was walking about the Nefsky one fine day, prince, in my
father’s old coat, when she suddenly came out of a shop and stepped
into her carriage. I swear I was all of a blaze at once. Then I met
Zaleshoff--looking like a hair-dresser’s assistant, got up as fine as I
don’t know who, while I looked like a tinker. ‘Don’t flatter yourself,
my boy,’ said he; ‘she’s not for such as you; she’s a princess, she
is, and her name is Nastasia Philipovna Barashkoff, and she lives
with Totski, who wishes to get rid of her because he’s growing rather
old--fifty-five or so--and wants to marry a certain beauty, the
loveliest woman in all Petersburg.’ And then he told me that I could
see Nastasia Philipovna at the opera-house that evening, if I liked, and
described which was her box. Well, I’d like to see my father allowing
any of us to go to the theatre; he’d sooner have killed us, any day.
However, I went for an hour or so and saw Nastasia Philipovna, and I
never slept a wink all night after. Next morning my father happened to
give me two government loan bonds to sell, worth nearly five thousand
roubles each. ‘Sell them,’ said he, ‘and then take seven thousand five
hundred roubles to the office, give them to the cashier, and bring me
back the rest of the ten thousand, without looking in anywhere on the
way; look sharp, I shall be waiting for you.’ Well, I sold the bonds,
but I didn’t take the seven thousand roubles to the office; I went
straight to the English shop and chose a pair of earrings, with a
diamond the size of a nut in each. They cost four hundred roubles more
than I had, so I gave my name, and they trusted me. With the earrings
I went at once to Zaleshoff’s. ‘Come on!’ I said, ‘come on to Nastasia
Philipovna’s,’ and off we went without more ado. I tell you I hadn’t a
notion of what was about me or before me or below my feet all the way;
I saw nothing whatever. We went straight into her drawing-room, and then
she came out to us.

“I didn’t say right out who I was, but Zaleshoff said: ‘From Parfen
Rogojin, in memory of his first meeting with you yesterday; be so kind
as to accept these!’

“She opened the parcel, looked at the earrings, and laughed.

“‘Thank your friend Mr. Rogojin for his kind attention,’ says she, and
bowed and went off. Why didn’t I die there on the spot? The worst of it
all was, though, that the beast Zaleshoff got all the credit of it! I
was short and abominably dressed, and stood and stared in her face and
never said a word, because I was shy, like an ass! And there was he all
in the fashion, pomaded and dressed out, with a smart tie on, bowing and
scraping; and I bet anything she took him for me all the while!

“‘Look here now,’ I said, when we came out, ‘none of your interference
here after this--do you understand?’ He laughed: ‘And how are you going
to settle up with your father?’ says he. I thought I might as well jump
into the Neva at once without going home first; but it struck me that I
wouldn’t, after all, and I went home feeling like one of the damned.”

“My goodness!” shivered the clerk. “And his father,” he added, for the
prince’s instruction, “and his father would have given a man a ticket to
the other world for ten roubles any day--not to speak of ten thousand!”

The prince observed Rogojin with great curiosity; he seemed paler than
ever at this moment.

“What do you know about it?” cried the latter. “Well, my father learned
the whole story at once, and Zaleshoff blabbed it all over the town
besides. So he took me upstairs and locked me up, and swore at me for an
hour. ‘This is only a foretaste,’ says he; ‘wait a bit till night comes,
and I’ll come back and talk to you again.’

“Well, what do you think? The old fellow went straight off to Nastasia
Philipovna, touched the floor with his forehead, and began blubbering
and beseeching her on his knees to give him back the diamonds. So after
awhile she brought the box and flew out at him. ‘There,’ she says,
‘take your earrings, you wretched old miser; although they are ten times
dearer than their value to me now that I know what it must have cost
Parfen to get them! Give Parfen my compliments,’ she says, ‘and thank
him very much!’ Well, I meanwhile had borrowed twenty-five roubles from
a friend, and off I went to Pskoff to my aunt’s. The old woman there
lectured me so that I left the house and went on a drinking tour round
the public-houses of the place. I was in a high fever when I got to
Pskoff, and by nightfall I was lying delirious in the streets somewhere
or other!”

“Oho! we’ll make Nastasia Philipovna sing another song now!” giggled
Lebedeff, rubbing his hands with glee. “Hey, my boy, we’ll get her some
proper earrings now! We’ll get her such earrings that--”

“Look here,” cried Rogojin, seizing him fiercely by the arm, “look here,
if you so much as name Nastasia Philipovna again, I’ll tan your hide as
sure as you sit there!”

“Aha! do--by all means! if you tan my hide you won’t turn me away from
your society. You’ll bind me to you, with your lash, for ever. Ha, ha!
here we are at the station, though.”

Sure enough, the train was just steaming in as he spoke.

Though Rogojin had declared that he left Pskoff secretly, a large
collection of friends had assembled to greet him, and did so with
profuse waving of hats and shouting.

“Why, there’s Zaleshoff here, too!” he muttered, gazing at the scene
with a sort of triumphant but unpleasant smile. Then he suddenly turned
to the prince: “Prince, I don’t know why I have taken a fancy to you;
perhaps because I met you just when I did. But no, it can’t be that, for
I met this fellow” (nodding at Lebedeff) “too, and I have not taken a
fancy to him by any means. Come to see me, prince; we’ll take off those
gaiters of yours and dress you up in a smart fur coat, the best we
can buy. You shall have a dress coat, best quality, white waistcoat,
anything you like, and your pocket shall be full of money. Come, and
you shall go with me to Nastasia Philipovna’s. Now then will you come or
no?”

“Accept, accept, Prince Lef Nicolaievitch” said Lebedef solemnly; “don’t
let it slip! Accept, quick!”

Prince Muishkin rose and stretched out his hand courteously, while he
replied with some cordiality:

“I will come with the greatest pleasure, and thank you very much for
taking a fancy to me. I dare say I may even come today if I have time,
for I tell you frankly that I like you very much too. I liked you
especially when you told us about the diamond earrings; but I liked you
before that as well, though you have such a dark-clouded sort of face.
Thanks very much for the offer of clothes and a fur coat; I certainly
shall require both clothes and coat very soon. As for money, I have
hardly a copeck about me at this moment.”

“You shall have lots of money; by the evening I shall have plenty; so
come along!”

“That’s true enough, he’ll have lots before evening!” put in Lebedeff.

“But, look here, are you a great hand with the ladies? Let’s know that
first?” asked Rogojin.

“Oh no, oh no!” said the prince; “I couldn’t, you know--my illness--I
hardly ever saw a soul.”

