criminal kisses it, and knows and sees and understands everything.
The cross and the head--there’s your picture; the priest and the
executioner, with his two assistants, and a few heads and eyes below.
Those might come in as subordinate accessories--a sort of mist. There’s
a picture for you.” The prince paused, and looked around.

“Certainly that isn’t much like quietism,” murmured Alexandra, half to
herself.

“Now tell us about your love affairs,” said Adelaida, after a moment’s
pause.

The prince gazed at her in amazement.

“You know,” Adelaida continued, “you owe us a description of the Basle
picture; but first I wish to hear how you fell in love. Don’t deny the
fact, for you did, of course. Besides, you stop philosophizing when you
are telling about anything.”

“Why are you ashamed of your stories the moment after you have told
them?” asked Aglaya, suddenly.

“How silly you are!” said Mrs. Epanchin, looking indignantly towards the
last speaker.

“Yes, that wasn’t a clever remark,” said Alexandra.

“Don’t listen to her, prince,” said Mrs. Epanchin; “she says that sort
of thing out of mischief. Don’t think anything of their nonsense, it
means nothing. They love to chaff, but they like you. I can see it in
their faces--I know their faces.”

“I know their faces, too,” said the prince, with a peculiar stress on
the words.

“How so?” asked Adelaida, with curiosity.

“What do _you_ know about our faces?” exclaimed the other two, in chorus.

But the prince was silent and serious. All awaited his reply.

“I’ll tell you afterwards,” he said quietly.

“Ah, you want to arouse our curiosity!” said Aglaya. “And how terribly
solemn you are about it!”

“Very well,” interrupted Adelaida, “then if you can read faces so well,
you _must_ have been in love. Come now; I’ve guessed--let’s have the
secret!”

“I have not been in love,” said the prince, as quietly and seriously as
before. “I have been happy in another way.”

“How, how?”

“Well, I’ll tell you,” said the prince, apparently in a deep reverie.

VI.

“Here you all are,” began the prince, “settling yourselves down to
listen to me with so much curiosity, that if I do not satisfy you you
will probably be angry with me. No, no! I’m only joking!” he added,
hastily, with a smile.

“Well, then--they were all children there, and I was always among
children and only with children. They were the children of the village
in which I lived, and they went to the school there--all of them. I did
not teach them, oh no; there was a master for that, one Jules Thibaut.
I may have taught them some things, but I was among them just as an
outsider, and I passed all four years of my life there among them.
I wished for nothing better; I used to tell them everything and hid
nothing from them. Their fathers and relations were very angry with me,
because the children could do nothing without me at last, and used to
throng after me at all times. The schoolmaster was my greatest enemy
in the end! I had many enemies, and all because of the children. Even
Schneider reproached me. What were they afraid of? One can tell a child
everything, anything. I have often been struck by the fact that parents
know their children so little. They should not conceal so much from
them. How well even little children understand that their parents
conceal things from them, because they consider them too young to
understand! Children are capable of giving advice in the most important
matters. How can one deceive these dear little birds, when they look
at one so sweetly and confidingly? I call them birds because there is
nothing in the world better than birds!

“However, most of the people were angry with me about one and the same
thing; but Thibaut simply was jealous of me. At first he had wagged his
head and wondered how it was that the children understood what I told
them so well, and could not learn from him; and he laughed like anything
when I replied that neither he nor I could teach them very much, but
that _they_ might teach us a good deal.

“How he could hate me and tell scandalous stories about me, living among
children as he did, is what I cannot understand. Children soothe and
heal the wounded heart. I remember there was one poor fellow at our
professor’s who was being treated for madness, and you have no idea what
those children did for him, eventually. I don’t think he was mad, but
only terribly unhappy. But I’ll tell you all about him another day. Now
I must get on with this story.

“The children did not love me at first; I was such a sickly, awkward
kind of a fellow then--and I know I am ugly. Besides, I was a foreigner.
The children used to laugh at me, at first; and they even went so far
as to throw stones at me, when they saw me kiss Marie. I only kissed her
once in my life--no, no, don’t laugh!” The prince hastened to suppress
the smiles of his audience at this point. “It was not a matter of _love_
at all! If only you knew what a miserable creature she was, you would
have pitied her, just as I did. She belonged to our village. Her mother
was an old, old woman, and they used to sell string and thread, and soap
and tobacco, out of the window of their little house, and lived on the
pittance they gained by this trade. The old woman was ill and very old,
and could hardly move. Marie was her daughter, a girl of twenty, weak
and thin and consumptive; but still she did heavy work at the houses
around, day by day. Well, one fine day a commercial traveller betrayed
her and carried her off; and a week later he deserted her. She came home
dirty, draggled, and shoeless; she had walked for a whole week without
shoes; she had slept in the fields, and caught a terrible cold; her feet
were swollen and sore, and her hands torn and scratched all over. She
never had been pretty even before; but her eyes were quiet, innocent,
kind eyes.

“She was very quiet always--and I remember once, when she had suddenly
begun singing at her work, everyone said, ‘Marie tried to sing today!’
and she got so chaffed that she was silent for ever after. She had been
treated kindly in the place before; but when she came back now--ill and
shunned and miserable--not one of them all had the slightest sympathy
for her. Cruel people! Oh, what hazy understandings they have on such
matters! Her mother was the first to show the way. She received her
wrathfully, unkindly, and with contempt. ‘You have disgraced me,’ she
said. She was the first to cast her into ignominy; but when they all
heard that Marie had returned to the village, they ran out to see
her and crowded into the little cottage--old men, children, women,
girls--such a hurrying, stamping, greedy crowd. Marie was lying on
the floor at the old woman’s feet, hungry, torn, draggled, crying,
miserable.

“When everyone crowded into the room she hid her face in her dishevelled
hair and lay cowering on the floor. Everyone looked at her as though she
were a piece of dirt off the road. The old men scolded and condemned,
and the young ones laughed at her. The women condemned her too, and
looked at her contemptuously, just as though she were some loathsome
insect.

“Her mother allowed all this to go on, and nodded her head and
encouraged them. The old woman was very ill at that time, and knew she
was dying (she really did die a couple of months later), and though she
felt the end approaching she never thought of forgiving her daughter, to
the very day of her death. She would not even speak to her. She made
her sleep on straw in a shed, and hardly gave her food enough to support
life.
