It was declared that he believed in no classes or anything else,
excepting “the woman question.”

All this looked likely enough, and was accepted as fact by most of the
inhabitants of the place, especially as it was borne out, more or less,
by daily occurrences.

Of course much was said that could not be determined absolutely. For
instance, it was reported that the poor girl had so loved her future
husband that she had followed him to the house of the other woman, the
day after she had been thrown over; others said that he had insisted on
her coming, himself, in order to shame and insult her by his taunts and
Nihilistic confessions when she reached the house. However all
these things might be, the public interest in the matter grew
daily, especially as it became clear that the scandalous wedding was
undoubtedly to take place.

So that if our readers were to ask an explanation, not of the wild
reports about the prince’s Nihilistic opinions, but simply as to how
such a marriage could possibly satisfy his real aspirations, or as to
the spiritual condition of our hero at this time, we confess that we
should have great difficulty in giving the required information.

All we know is, that the marriage really was arranged, and that the
prince had commissioned Lebedeff and Keller to look after all the
necessary business connected with it; that he had requested them to
spare no expense; that Nastasia herself was hurrying on the wedding;
that Keller was to be the prince’s best man, at his own earnest request;
and that Burdovsky was to give Nastasia away, to his great delight. The
wedding was to take place before the middle of July.

But, besides the above, we are cognizant of certain other undoubted
facts, which puzzle us a good deal because they seem flatly to
contradict the foregoing.

We suspect, for instance, that having commissioned Lebedeff and the
others, as above, the prince immediately forgot all about masters of
ceremonies and even the ceremony itself; and we feel quite certain that
in making these arrangements he did so in order that he might absolutely
escape all thought of the wedding, and even forget its approach if he
could, by detailing all business concerning it to others.

What did he think of all this time, then? What did he wish for? There is
no doubt that he was a perfectly free agent all through, and that as
far as Nastasia was concerned, there was no force of any kind brought
to bear on him. Nastasia wished for a speedy marriage, true!--but the
prince agreed at once to her proposals; he agreed, in fact, so casually
that anyone might suppose he was but acceding to the most simple and
ordinary suggestion.

There are many strange circumstances such as this before us; but in
our opinion they do but deepen the mystery, and do not in the smallest
degree help us to understand the case.

However, let us take one more example. Thus, we know for a fact that
during the whole of this fortnight the prince spent all his days and
evenings with Nastasia; he walked with her, drove with her; he began to
be restless whenever he passed an hour without seeing her--in fact,
to all appearances, he sincerely loved her. He would listen to her for
hours at a time with a quiet smile on his face, scarcely saying a word
himself. And yet we know, equally certainly, that during this period he
several times set off, suddenly, to the Epanchins’, not concealing
the fact from Nastasia Philipovna, and driving the latter to absolute
despair. We know also that he was not received at the Epanchins’ so long
as they remained at Pavlofsk, and that he was not allowed an interview
with Aglaya;--but next day he would set off once more on the same
errand, apparently quite oblivious of the fact of yesterday’s visit
having been a failure,--and, of course, meeting with another refusal.
We know, too, that exactly an hour after Aglaya had fled from Nastasia
Philipovna’s house on that fateful evening, the prince was at the
Epanchins’,--and that his appearance there had been the cause of the
greatest consternation and dismay; for Aglaya had not been home, and the
family only discovered then, for the first time, that the two of them
had been to Nastasia’s house together.

It was said that Elizabetha Prokofievna and her daughters had there and
then denounced the prince in the strongest terms, and had refused
any further acquaintance and friendship with him; their rage and
denunciations being redoubled when Varia Ardalionovna suddenly arrived
and stated that Aglaya had been at her house in a terrible state of mind
for the last hour, and that she refused to come home.

This last item of news, which disturbed Lizabetha Prokofievna more than
anything else, was perfectly true. On leaving Nastasia’s, Aglaya had
felt that she would rather die than face her people, and had therefore
gone straight to Nina Alexandrovna’s. On receiving the news, Lizabetha
and her daughters and the general all rushed off to Aglaya, followed
by Prince Lef Nicolaievitch--undeterred by his recent dismissal; but
through Varia he was refused a sight of Aglaya here also. The end of the
episode was that when Aglaya saw her mother and sisters crying over her
and not uttering a word of reproach, she had flung herself into their
arms and gone straight home with them.

It was said that Gania managed to make a fool of himself even on this
occasion; for, finding himself alone with Aglaya for a minute or two
when Varia had gone to the Epanchins’, he had thought it a fitting
opportunity to make a declaration of his love, and on hearing this
Aglaya, in spite of her state of mind at the time, had suddenly burst
out laughing, and had put a strange question to him. She asked him
whether he would consent to hold his finger to a lighted candle in proof
of his devotion! Gania--it was said--looked so comically bewildered that
Aglaya had almost laughed herself into hysterics, and had rushed out of
the room and upstairs,--where her parents had found her.

Hippolyte told the prince this last story, sending for him on purpose.
When Muishkin heard about the candle and Gania’s finger he had laughed
so that he had quite astonished Hippolyte,--and then shuddered and burst
into tears. The prince’s condition during those days was strange and
perturbed. Hippolyte plainly declared that he thought he was out of his
mind;--this, however, was hardly to be relied upon.

Offering all these facts to our readers and refusing to explain them,
we do not for a moment desire to justify our hero’s conduct. On the
contrary, we are quite prepared to feel our share of the indignation
which his behaviour aroused in the hearts of his friends. Even Vera
Lebedeff was angry with him for a while; so was Colia; so was Keller,
until he was selected for best man; so was Lebedeff himself,--who began
to intrigue against him out of pure irritation;--but of this anon. In
fact we are in full accord with certain forcible words spoken to the
prince by Evgenie Pavlovitch, quite unceremoniously, during the course
of a friendly conversation, six or seven days after the events at
Nastasia Philipovna’s house.

We may remark here that not only the Epanchins themselves, but all who
had anything to do with them, thought it right to break with the prince
in consequence of his conduct. Prince S. even went so far as to turn
away and cut him dead in the street. But Evgenie Pavlovitch was not
afraid to compromise himself by paying the prince a visit, and did so,
in spite of the fact that he had recommenced to visit at the Epanchins’,
where he was received with redoubled hospitality and kindness after the
temporary estrangement.

Evgenie called upon the prince the day after that on which the Epanchins
left Pavlofsk. He knew of all the current rumours,--in fact, he had
probably contributed to them himself. The prince was delighted to see
him, and immediately began to speak of the Epanchins;--which simple and
straightforward opening quite took Evgenie’s fancy, so that he melted at
once, and plunged in medias res without ceremony.

The prince did not know, up to this, that the Epanchins had left the
place. He grew very pale on hearing the news; but a moment later he
nodded his head, and said thoughtfully:

“I knew it was bound to be so.” Then he added quickly:

“Where have they gone to?”

Evgenie meanwhile observed him attentively, and the rapidity of the
questions, their simplicity, the prince’s candour, and at the same
time, his evident perplexity and mental agitation, surprised him
