the same, without that excuse. My position at home was solitary enough.
Five months ago I separated myself entirely from the family, and no one
dared enter my room except at stated times, to clean and tidy it, and so
on, and to bring me my meals. My mother dared not disobey me; she kept
the children quiet, for my sake, and beat them if they dared to make any
noise and disturb me. I so often complained of them that I should think
they must be very fond, indeed, of me by this time. I think I must have
tormented ‘my faithful Colia’ (as I called him) a good deal too. He
tormented me of late; I could see that he always bore my tempers as
though he had determined to ‘spare the poor invalid.’ This annoyed
me, naturally. He seemed to have taken it into his head to imitate the
prince in Christian meekness! Surikoff, who lived above us, annoyed me,
too. He was so miserably poor, and I used to prove to him that he had no
one to blame but himself for his poverty. I used to be so angry that I
think I frightened him eventually, for he stopped coming to see me. He
was a most meek and humble fellow, was Surikoff. (N.B.--They say that
meekness is a great power. I must ask the prince about this, for the
expression is his.) But I remember one day in March, when I went up to
his lodgings to see whether it was true that one of his children had
been starved and frozen to death, I began to hold forth to him about
his poverty being his own fault, and, in the course of my remarks, I
accidentally smiled at the corpse of his child. Well, the poor wretch’s
lips began to tremble, and he caught me by the shoulder, and pushed me
to the door. ‘Go out,’ he said, in a whisper. I went out, of course, and
I declare I _liked_ it. I liked it at the very moment when I was
turned out. But his words filled me with a strange sort of feeling of
disdainful pity for him whenever I thought of them--a feeling which
I did not in the least desire to entertain. At the very moment of the
insult (for I admit that I did insult him, though I did not mean to),
this man could not lose his temper. His lips had trembled, but I swear
it was not with rage. He had taken me by the arm, and said, ‘Go out,’
without the least anger. There was dignity, a great deal of dignity,
about him, and it was so inconsistent with the look of him that, I
assure you, it was quite comical. But there was no anger. Perhaps he
merely began to despise me at that moment.

“Since that time he has always taken off his hat to me on the stairs,
whenever I met him, which is a thing he never did before; but he always
gets away from me as quickly as he can, as though he felt confused. If
he did despise me, he despised me ‘meekly,’ after his own fashion.

“I dare say he only took his hat off out of fear, as it were, to the son
of his creditor; for he always owed my mother money. I thought of having
an explanation with him, but I knew that if I did, he would begin to
apologize in a minute or two, so I decided to let him alone.

“Just about that time, that is, the middle of March, I suddenly felt
very much better; this continued for a couple of weeks. I used to go
out at dusk. I like the dusk, especially in March, when the night frost
begins to harden the day’s puddles, and the gas is burning.

“Well, one night in the Shestilavochnaya, a man passed me with a paper
parcel under his arm. I did not take stock of him very carefully, but he
seemed to be dressed in some shabby summer dust-coat, much too light for
the season. When he was opposite the lamp-post, some ten yards away, I
observed something fall out of his pocket. I hurried forward to pick it
up, just in time, for an old wretch in a long kaftan rushed up too.
He did not dispute the matter, but glanced at what was in my hand and
disappeared.

“It was a large old-fashioned pocket-book, stuffed full; but I guessed,
at a glance, that it had anything in the world inside it, except money.

“The owner was now some forty yards ahead of me, and was very soon lost
in the crowd. I ran after him, and began calling out; but as I knew
nothing to say excepting ‘hey!’ he did not turn round. Suddenly he
turned into the gate of a house to the left; and when I darted in after
him, the gateway was so dark that I could see nothing whatever. It was
one of those large houses built in small tenements, of which there must
have been at least a hundred.

“When I entered the yard I thought I saw a man going along on the far
side of it; but it was so dark I could not make out his figure.

“I crossed to that corner and found a dirty dark staircase. I heard a
man mounting up above me, some way higher than I was, and thinking I
should catch him before his door would be opened to him, I rushed after
him. I heard a door open and shut on the fifth storey, as I panted
along; the stairs were narrow, and the steps innumerable, but at last I
reached the door I thought the right one. Some moments passed before I
found the bell and got it to ring.

“An old peasant woman opened the door; she was busy lighting the
‘samovar’ in a tiny kitchen. She listened silently to my questions, did
not understand a word, of course, and opened another door leading into
a little bit of a room, low and scarcely furnished at all, but with
a large, wide bed in it, hung with curtains. On this bed lay one
Terentich, as the woman called him, drunk, it appeared to me. On the
table was an end of candle in an iron candlestick, and a half-bottle of
vodka, nearly finished. Terentich muttered something to me, and signed
towards the next room. The old woman had disappeared, so there was
nothing for me to do but to open the door indicated. I did so, and
entered the next room.

“This was still smaller than the other, so cramped that I could scarcely
turn round; a narrow single bed at one side took up nearly all the room.
Besides the bed there were only three common chairs, and a wretched old
kitchen-table standing before a small sofa. One could hardly squeeze
through between the table and the bed.

“On the table, as in the other room, burned a tallow candle-end in an
iron candlestick; and on the bed there whined a baby of scarcely three
weeks old. A pale-looking woman was dressing the child, probably the
mother; she looked as though she had not as yet got over the trouble of
childbirth, she seemed so weak and was so carelessly dressed. Another
child, a little girl of about three years old, lay on the sofa, covered
over with what looked like a man’s old dress-coat.

“At the table stood a man in his shirt sleeves; he had thrown off his
coat; it lay upon the bed; and he was unfolding a blue paper parcel in
which were a couple of pounds of bread, and some little sausages.

“On the table along with these things were a few old bits of black
bread, and some tea in a pot. From under the bed there protruded an
open portmanteau full of bundles of rags. In a word, the confusion and
untidiness of the room were indescribable.

“It appeared to me, at the first glance, that both the man and the woman
were respectable people, but brought to that pitch of poverty where
untidiness seems to get the better of every effort to cope with it, till
at last they take a sort of bitter satisfaction in it. When I entered
the room, the man, who had entered but a moment before me, and was still
unpacking his parcels, was saying something to his wife in an excited
manner. The news was apparently bad, as usual, for the woman began
whimpering. The man’s face seemed to me to be refined and even pleasant.
He was dark-complexioned, and about twenty-eight years of age; he wore
black whiskers, and his lip and chin were shaved. He looked morose, but
with a sort of pride of expression. A curious scene followed.

“There are people who find satisfaction in their own touchy feelings,
especially when they have just taken the deepest offence; at such
moments they feel that they would rather be offended than not. These
easily-ignited natures, if they are wise, are always full of remorse
afterwards, when they reflect that they have been ten times as angry as
they need have been.

“The gentleman before me gazed at me for some seconds in amazement,
and his wife in terror; as though there was something alarmingly
extraordinary in the fact that anyone could come to see them. But
suddenly he fell upon me almost with fury; I had had no time to mutter
more than a couple of words; but he had doubtless observed that I was
decently dressed and, therefore, took deep offence because I had dared
enter his den so unceremoniously, and spy out the squalor and untidiness
of it.

“Of course he was delighted to get hold of someone upon whom to vent his
rage against things in general.

“For a moment I thought he would assault me; he grew so pale that he
looked like a woman about to have hysterics; his wife was dreadfully
