you--some good qualities, otherwise the thing would not be. What you
have just said confirms my words. You say yourself that she found it
possible to speak to you quite differently from her usual manner. You
are suspicious, you know, and jealous, therefore when anything annoying
happens to you, you exaggerate its significance. Of course, of course,
she does not think so ill of you as you say. Why, if she did, she would
simply be walking to death by drowning or by the knife, with her eyes
wide open, when she married you. It is impossible! As if anybody would
go to their death deliberately!”

Rogojin listened to the prince’s excited words with a bitter smile. His
conviction was, apparently, unalterable.

“How dreadfully you look at me, Parfen!” said the prince, with a feeling
of dread.

“Water or the knife?” said the latter, at last. “Ha, ha--that’s exactly
why she is going to marry me, because she knows for certain that the
knife awaits her. Prince, can it be that you don’t even yet see what’s
at the root of it all?”

“I don’t understand you.”

“Perhaps he really doesn’t understand me! They do say that you are
a--you know what! She loves another--there, you can understand that
much! Just as I love her, exactly so she loves another man. And that
other man is--do you know who? It’s you. There--you didn’t know that,
eh?”

“I?”

“You, you! She has loved you ever since that day, her birthday! Only
she thinks she cannot marry you, because it would be the ruin of you.
‘Everybody knows what sort of a woman I am,’ she says. She told me all
this herself, to my very face! She’s afraid of disgracing and ruining
you, she says, but it doesn’t matter about me. She can marry me all
right! Notice how much consideration she shows for me!”

“But why did she run away to me, and then again from me to--”

“From you to me? Ha, ha! that’s nothing! Why, she always acts as though
she were in a delirium now-a-days! Either she says, ‘Come on, I’ll marry
you! Let’s have the wedding quickly!’ and fixes the day, and seems in a
hurry for it, and when it begins to come near she feels frightened; or
else some other idea gets into her head--goodness knows! you’ve seen
her--you know how she goes on--laughing and crying and raving! There’s
nothing extraordinary about her having run away from you! She ran away
because she found out how dearly she loved you. She could not bear to be
near you. You said just now that I had found her at Moscow, when she ran
away from you. I didn’t do anything of the sort; she came to me herself,
straight from you. ‘Name the day--I’m ready!’ she said. ‘Let’s have
some champagne, and go and hear the gipsies sing!’ I tell you she’d
have thrown herself into the water long ago if it were not for me! She
doesn’t do it because I am, perhaps, even more dreadful to her than the
water! She’s marrying me out of spite; if she marries me, I tell you, it
will be for spite!”

“But how do you, how can you--” began the prince, gazing with dread and
horror at Rogojin.

“Why don’t you finish your sentence? Shall I tell you what you were
thinking to yourself just then? You were thinking, ‘How can she marry
him after this? How can it possibly be permitted?’ Oh, I know what you
were thinking about!”

“I didn’t come here for that purpose, Parfen. That was not in my mind--”

“That may be! Perhaps you didn’t _come_ with the idea, but the idea is
certainly there _now!_ Ha, ha! well, that’s enough! What are you upset
about? Didn’t you really know it all before? You astonish me!”

“All this is mere jealousy--it is some malady of yours, Parfen! You
exaggerate everything,” said the prince, excessively agitated. “What are
you doing?”

“Let go of it!” said Parfen, seizing from the prince’s hand a knife
which the latter had at that moment taken up from the table, where it
lay beside the history. Parfen replaced it where it had been.

“I seemed to know it--I felt it, when I was coming back to Petersburg,”
 continued the prince, “I did not want to come, I wished to forget all
this, to uproot it from my memory altogether! Well, good-bye--what is
the matter?”

He had absently taken up the knife a second time, and again Rogojin
snatched it from his hand, and threw it down on the table. It was a
plain looking knife, with a bone handle, a blade about eight inches long,
and broad in proportion, it did not clasp.

Seeing that the prince was considerably struck by the fact that he had
twice seized this knife out of his hand, Rogojin caught it up with
some irritation, put it inside the book, and threw the latter across to
another table.

“Do you cut your pages with it, or what?” asked Muishkin, still rather
absently, as though unable to throw off a deep preoccupation into which
the conversation had thrown him.

“Yes.”

“It’s a garden knife, isn’t it?”

“Yes. Can’t one cut pages with a garden knife?”

“It’s quite new.”

“Well, what of that? Can’t I buy a new knife if I like?” shouted Rogojin
furiously, his irritation growing with every word.

The prince shuddered, and gazed fixedly at Parfen. Suddenly he burst out
laughing.

“Why, what an idea!” he said. “I didn’t mean to ask you any of these
questions; I was thinking of something quite different! But my head is
heavy, and I seem so absent-minded nowadays! Well, good-bye--I can’t
remember what I wanted to say--good-bye!”

“Not that way,” said Rogojin.

“There, I’ve forgotten that too!”

“This way--come along--I’ll show you.”

IV.

They passed through the same rooms which the prince had traversed on his
arrival. In the largest there were pictures on the walls, portraits and
landscapes of little interest. Over the door, however, there was one of
strange and rather striking shape; it was six or seven feet in length,
and not more than a foot in height. It represented the Saviour just
taken from the cross.

The prince glanced at it, but took no further notice. He moved on
hastily, as though anxious to get out of the house. But Rogojin suddenly
stopped underneath the picture.

“My father picked up all these pictures very cheap at auctions, and so
on,” he said; “they are all rubbish, except the one over the door, and
that is valuable. A man offered five hundred roubles for it last week.”

“Yes--that’s a copy of a Holbein,” said the prince, looking at it again,
“and a good copy, too, so far as I am able to judge. I saw the picture
abroad, and could not forget it--what’s the matter?”

Rogojin had dropped the subject of the picture and walked on. Of course
his strange frame of mind was sufficient to account for his conduct;
but, still, it seemed queer to the prince that he should so abruptly
drop a conversation commenced by himself. Rogojin did not take any
notice of his question.

