the death of your benefactor. She told me with tears of gratitude how
you had supported her; she expects much of you, and believes fervently
in your future success...”

“Oh, this is unbearable!” said Lebedeff’s nephew impatiently. “What is
the good of all this romancing?”

“It is revolting and unseemly!” cried Hippolyte, jumping up in a fury.

Burdovsky alone sat silent and motionless.

“What is the good of it?” repeated Gavrila Ardalionovitch, with
pretended surprise. “Well, firstly, because now perhaps Mr. Burdovsky
is quite convinced that Mr. Pavlicheff’s love for him came simply from
generosity of soul, and not from paternal duty. It was most necessary
to impress this fact upon his mind, considering that he approved of the
article written by Mr. Keller. I speak thus because I look on you, Mr.
Burdovsky, as an honourable man. Secondly, it appears that there was no
intention of cheating in this case, even on the part of Tchebaroff. I
wish to say this quite plainly, because the prince hinted a while
ago that I too thought it an attempt at robbery and extortion. On the
contrary, everyone has been quite sincere in the matter, and although
Tchebaroff may be somewhat of a rogue, in this business he has acted
simply as any sharp lawyer would do under the circumstances. He looked
at it as a case that might bring him in a lot of money, and he did not
calculate badly; because on the one hand he speculated on the generosity
of the prince, and his gratitude to the late Mr. Pavlicheff, and on
the other to his chivalrous ideas as to the obligations of honour and
conscience. As to Mr. Burdovsky, allowing for his principles, we may
acknowledge that he engaged in the business with very little personal
aim in view. At the instigation of Tchebaroff and his other friends,
he decided to make the attempt in the service of truth, progress, and
humanity. In short, the conclusion may be drawn that, in spite of all
appearances, Mr. Burdovsky is a man of irreproachable character, and
thus the prince can all the more readily offer him his friendship, and
the assistance of which he spoke just now...”

“Hush! hush! Gavrila Ardalionovitch!” cried Muishkin in dismay, but it
was too late.

“I said, and I have repeated it over and over again,” shouted Burdovsky
furiously, “that I did not want the money. I will not take it... why...I
will not... I am going away!”

He was rushing hurriedly from the terrace, when Lebedeff’s nephew seized
his arms, and said something to him in a low voice. Burdovsky turned
quickly, and drawing an addressed but unsealed envelope from his pocket,
he threw it down on a little table beside the prince.

“There’s the money!... How dare you?... The money!”

“Those are the two hundred and fifty roubles you dared to send him as a
charity, by the hands of Tchebaroff,” explained Doktorenko.

“The article in the newspaper put it at fifty!” cried Colia.

“I beg your pardon,” said the prince, going up to Burdovsky. “I have
done you a great wrong, but I did not send you that money as a charity,
believe me. And now I am again to blame. I offended you just now.” (The
prince was much distressed; he seemed worn out with fatigue, and spoke
almost incoherently.) “I spoke of swindling... but I did not apply that
to you. I was deceived .... I said you were... afflicted... like me...
But you are not like me... you give lessons... you support your mother.
I said you had dishonoured your mother, but you love her. She says so
herself... I did not know... Gavrila Ardalionovitch did not tell me
that... Forgive me! I dared to offer you ten thousand roubles, but I was
wrong. I ought to have done it differently, and now... there is no way
of doing it, for you despise me...”

“I declare, this is a lunatic asylum!” cried Lizabetha Prokofievna.

“Of course it is a lunatic asylum!” repeated Aglaya sharply, but her
words were overpowered by other voices. Everybody was talking loudly,
making remarks and comments; some discussed the affair gravely, others
laughed. Ivan Fedorovitch Epanchin was extremely indignant. He stood
waiting for his wife with an air of offended dignity. Lebedeff’s nephew
took up the word again.

“Well, prince, to do you justice, you certainly know how to make the
most of your--let us call it infirmity, for the sake of politeness; you
have set about offering your money and friendship in such a way that
no self-respecting man could possibly accept them. This is an excess of
ingenuousness or of malice--you ought to know better than anyone which
word best fits the case.”

“Allow me, gentlemen,” said Gavrila Ardalionovitch, who had just
examined the contents of the envelope, “there are only a hundred roubles
here, not two hundred and fifty. I point this out, prince, to prevent
misunderstanding.”

“Never mind, never mind,” said the prince, signing to him to keep quiet.

“But we do mind,” said Lebedeff’s nephew vehemently. “Prince, your
‘never mind’ is an insult to us. We have nothing to hide; our actions
can bear daylight. It is true that there are only a hundred roubles
instead of two hundred and fifty, but it is all the same.”

“Why, no, it is hardly the same,” remarked Gavrila Ardalionovitch, with
an air of ingenuous surprise.

“Don’t interrupt, we are not such fools as you think, Mr. Lawyer,” cried
Lebedeff’s nephew angrily. “Of course there is a difference between
a hundred roubles and two hundred and fifty, but in this case the
principle is the main point, and that a hundred and fifty roubles
are missing is only a side issue. The point to be emphasized is that
Burdovsky will not accept your highness’s charity; he flings it back in
your face, and it scarcely matters if there are a hundred roubles or two
hundred and fifty. Burdovsky has refused ten thousand roubles; you
heard him. He would not have returned even a hundred roubles if he was
dishonest! The hundred and fifty roubles were paid to Tchebaroff for
his travelling expenses. You may jeer at our stupidity and at our
inexperience in business matters; you have done all you could already to
make us look ridiculous; but do not dare to call us dishonest. The
four of us will club together every day to repay the hundred and fifty
roubles to the prince, if we have to pay it in instalments of a rouble
at a time, but we will repay it, with interest. Burdovsky is poor, he
has no millions. After his journey to see the prince Tchebaroff sent in
his bill. We counted on winning... Who would not have done the same in
such a case?”

“Who indeed?” exclaimed Prince S.

“I shall certainly go mad, if I stay here!” cried Lizabetha Prokofievna.

“It reminds me,” said Evgenie Pavlovitch, laughing, “of the famous plea
of a certain lawyer who lately defended a man for murdering six people
in order to rob them. He excused his client on the score of poverty.
‘It is quite natural,’ he said in conclusion, ‘considering the state
of misery he was in, that he should have thought of murdering these six
people; which of you, gentlemen, would not have done the same in his
place?’”

“Enough,” cried Lizabetha Prokofievna abruptly, trembling with anger,
“we have had enough of this balderdash!”

In a state of terrible excitement she threw back her head, with flaming
eyes, casting looks of contempt and defiance upon the whole company,
in which she could no longer distinguish friend from foe. She had
restrained herself so long that she felt forced to vent her rage on
somebody. Those who knew Lizabetha Prokofievna saw at once how it was
with her. “She flies into these rages sometimes,” said Ivan Fedorovitch
to Prince S. the next day, “but she is not often so violent as she was
yesterday; it does not happen more than once in three years.”

“Be quiet, Ivan Fedorovitch! Leave me alone!” cried Mrs. Epanchin. “Why
do you offer me your arm now? You had not sense enough to take me away
before. You are my husband, you are a father, it was your duty to drag
me away by force, if in my folly I refused to obey you and go quietly.
You might at least have thought of your daughters. We can find our
way out now without your help. Here is shame enough for a year! Wait
