They seemed to need each other’s support, morally, before they dared
come in; not one of them would have entered alone but with the rest each
one was brave enough. Even Rogojin entered rather cautiously at the head
of his troop; but he was evidently preoccupied. He appeared to be gloomy
and morose, and had clearly come with some end in view. All the rest
were merely chorus, brought in to support the chief character. Besides
Lebedeff there was the dandy Zalesheff, who came in without his coat
and hat, two or three others followed his example; the rest were
more uncouth. They included a couple of young merchants, a man in
a great-coat, a medical student, a little Pole, a small fat man who
laughed continuously, and an enormously tall stout one who apparently
put great faith in the strength of his fists. A couple of “ladies” of
some sort put their heads in at the front door, but did not dare come
any farther. Colia promptly banged the door in their faces and locked
it.

“Hallo, Gania, you blackguard! You didn’t expect Rogojin, eh?” said the
latter, entering the drawing-room, and stopping before Gania.

But at this moment he saw, seated before him, Nastasia Philipovna.
He had not dreamed of meeting her here, evidently, for her appearance
produced a marvellous effect upon him. He grew pale, and his lips became
actually blue.

“I suppose it is true, then!” he muttered to himself, and his face took
on an expression of despair. “So that’s the end of it! Now you, sir,
will you answer me or not?” he went on suddenly, gazing at Gania with
ineffable malice. “Now then, you--”

He panted, and could hardly speak for agitation. He advanced into the
room mechanically; but perceiving Nina Alexandrovna and Varia he became
more or less embarrassed, in spite of his excitement. His followers
entered after him, and all paused a moment at sight of the ladies. Of
course their modesty was not fated to be long-lived, but for a moment
they were abashed. Once let them begin to shout, however, and nothing on
earth should disconcert them.

“What, you here too, prince?” said Rogojin, absently, but a little
surprised all the same “Still in your gaiters, eh?” He sighed, and
forgot the prince next moment, and his wild eyes wandered over to
Nastasia again, as though attracted in that direction by some magnetic
force.

Nastasia looked at the new arrivals with great curiosity. Gania
recollected himself at last.

“Excuse me, sirs,” he said, loudly, “but what does all this mean?”
 He glared at the advancing crowd generally, but addressed his remarks
especially to their captain, Rogojin. “You are not in a stable,
gentlemen, though you may think it--my mother and sister are present.”

“Yes, I see your mother and sister,” muttered Rogojin, through his
teeth; and Lebedeff seemed to feel himself called upon to second the
statement.

“At all events, I must request you to step into the salon,” said Gania,
his rage rising quite out of proportion to his words, “and then I shall
inquire--”

“What, he doesn’t know me!” said Rogojin, showing his teeth
disagreeably. “He doesn’t recognize Rogojin!” He did not move an inch,
however.

“I have met you somewhere, I believe, but--”

“Met me somewhere, pfu! Why, it’s only three months since I lost two
hundred roubles of my father’s money to you, at cards. The old fellow
died before he found out. Ptitsin knows all about it. Why, I’ve only to
pull out a three-rouble note and show it to you, and you’d crawl on your
hands and knees to the other end of the town for it; that’s the sort of
man you are. Why, I’ve come now, at this moment, to buy you up! Oh, you
needn’t think that because I wear these boots I have no money. I have
lots of money, my beauty,--enough to buy up you and all yours together.
So I shall, if I like to! I’ll buy you up! I will!” he yelled,
apparently growing more and more intoxicated and excited. “Oh, Nastasia
Philipovna! don’t turn me out! Say one word, do! Are you going to marry
this man, or not?”

Rogojin asked his question like a lost soul appealing to some divinity,
with the reckless daring of one appointed to die, who has nothing to
lose.

He awaited the reply in deadly anxiety.

Nastasia Philipovna gazed at him with a haughty, ironical expression of
face; but when she glanced at Nina Alexandrovna and Varia, and from them
to Gania, she changed her tone, all of a sudden.

“Certainly not; what are you thinking of? What could have induced you
to ask such a question?” she replied, quietly and seriously, and even,
apparently, with some astonishment.

“No? No?” shouted Rogojin, almost out of his mind with joy. “You are
not going to, after all? And they told me--oh, Nastasia Philipovna--they
said you had promised to marry him, _him!_ As if you _could_ do
it!--him--pooh! I don’t mind saying it to everyone--I’d buy him off
for a hundred roubles, any day pfu! Give him a thousand, or three if he
likes, poor devil, and he’d cut and run the day before his wedding, and
leave his bride to me! Wouldn’t you, Gania, you blackguard? You’d take
three thousand, wouldn’t you? Here’s the money! Look, I’ve come on
purpose to pay you off and get your receipt, formally. I said I’d buy
you up, and so I will.”

“Get out of this, you drunken beast!” cried Gania, who was red and white
by turns.

Rogojin’s troop, who were only waiting for an excuse, set up a howl at
this. Lebedeff stepped forward and whispered something in Parfen’s ear.

“You’re right, clerk,” said the latter, “you’re right, tipsy
spirit--you’re right!--Nastasia Philipovna,” he added, looking at her
like some lunatic, harmless generally, but suddenly wound up to a pitch
of audacity, “here are eighteen thousand roubles, and--and you shall
have more--.” Here he threw a packet of bank-notes tied up in white
paper, on the table before her, not daring to say all he wished to say.

“No--no--no!” muttered Lebedeff, clutching at his arm. He was clearly
aghast at the largeness of the sum, and thought a far smaller amount
should have been tried first.

“No, you fool--you don’t know whom you are dealing with--and it appears
I am a fool, too!” said Parfen, trembling beneath the flashing glance
of Nastasia. “Oh, curse it all! What a fool I was to listen to you!” he
added, with profound melancholy.

Nastasia Philipovna, observing his woe-begone expression, suddenly burst
out laughing.

“Eighteen thousand roubles, for me? Why, you declare yourself a fool at
once,” she said, with impudent familiarity, as she rose from the sofa
and prepared to go. Gania watched the whole scene with a sinking of the
heart.

“Forty thousand, then--forty thousand roubles instead of eighteen!
Ptitsin and another have promised to find me forty thousand roubles by
seven o’clock tonight. Forty thousand roubles--paid down on the nail!”

The scene was growing more and more disgraceful; but Nastasia Philipovna
continued to laugh and did not go away. Nina Alexandrovna and Varia had
both risen from their places and were waiting, in silent horror, to
see what would happen. Varia’s eyes were all ablaze with anger; but
the scene had a different effect on Nina Alexandrovna. She paled and
trembled, and looked more and more like fainting every moment.

“Very well then, a _hundred_ thousand! a hundred thousand! paid this
very day. Ptitsin! find it for me. A good share shall stick to your
fingers--come!”

“You are mad!” said Ptitsin, coming up quickly and seizing him by the
hand. “You’re drunk--the police will be sent for if you don’t look out.
