it is better for me to die! I should tell some dreadful lie too; nature
would so contrive it! I have corrupted nobody. I wanted to live for the
happiness of all men, to find and spread the truth. I used to look out
of my window at the wall of Meyer’s house, and say to myself that if I
could speak for a quarter of an hour I would convince the whole world,
and now for once in my life I have come into contact with... you--if
not with the others! And what is the result? Nothing! The sole result
is that you despise me! Therefore I must be a fool, I am useless, it is
time I disappeared! And I shall leave not even a memory! Not a sound,
not a trace, not a single deed! I have not spread a single truth!... Do
not laugh at the fool! Forget him! Forget him forever! I beseech you,
do not be so cruel as to remember! Do you know that if I were not
consumptive, I would kill myself?”

Though he seemed to wish to say much more, he became silent. He fell
back into his chair, and, covering his face with his hands, began to sob
like a little child.

“Oh! what on earth are we to do with him?” cried Lizabetha Prokofievna.
She hastened to him and pressed his head against her bosom, while he
sobbed convulsively.

“Come, come, come! There, you must not cry, that will do. You are a good
child! God will forgive you, because you knew no better. Come now, be a
man! You know presently you will be ashamed.”

Hippolyte raised his head with an effort, saying:

“I have little brothers and sisters, over there, poor avid innocent. She
will corrupt them! You are a saint! You are a child yourself--save them!
Snatch them from that... she is... it is shameful! Oh! help them! God
will repay you a hundredfold. For the love of God, for the love of
Christ!”

“Speak, Ivan Fedorovitch! What are we to do?” cried Lizabetha
Prokofievna, irritably. “Please break your majestic silence! I tell you,
if you cannot come to some decision, I will stay here all night myself.
You have tyrannized over me enough, you autocrat!”

She spoke angrily, and in great excitement, and expected an immediate
reply. But in such a case, no matter how many are present, all prefer
to keep silence: no one will take the initiative, but all reserve their
comments till afterwards. There were some present--Varvara Ardalionovna,
for instance--who would have willingly sat there till morning without
saying a word. Varvara had sat apart all the evening without opening her
lips, but she listened to everything with the closest attention; perhaps
she had her reasons for so doing.

“My dear,” said the general, “it seems to me that a sick-nurse would be
of more use here than an excitable person like you. Perhaps it would be
as well to get some sober, reliable man for the night. In any case we
must consult the prince, and leave the patient to rest at once. Tomorrow
we can see what can be done for him.”

“It is nearly midnight; we are going. Will he come with us, or is he to
stay here?” Doktorenko asked crossly of the prince.

“You can stay with him if you like,” said Muishkin.

“There is plenty of room here.”

Suddenly, to the astonishment of all, Keller went quickly up to the
general.

“Excellency,” he said, impulsively, “if you want a reliable man for the
night, I am ready to sacrifice myself for my friend--such a soul as he
has! I have long thought him a great man, excellency! My article showed
my lack of education, but when he criticizes he scatters pearls!”

Ivan Fedorovitch turned from the boxer with a gesture of despair.

“I shall be delighted if he will stay; it would certainly be difficult
for him to get back to Petersburg,” said the prince, in answer to the
eager questions of Lizabetha Prokofievna.

“But you are half asleep, are you not? If you don’t want him, I will
take him back to my house! Why, good gracious! He can hardly stand up
himself! What is it? Are you ill?”

Not finding the prince on his death-bed, Lizabetha Prokofievna had been
misled by his appearance to think him much better than he was. But his
recent illness, the painful memories attached to it, the fatigue of this
evening, the incident with “Pavlicheff’s son,” and now this scene with
Hippolyte, had all so worked on his oversensitive nature that he was now
almost in a fever. Moreover, a new trouble, almost a fear, showed itself
in his eyes; he watched Hippolyte anxiously as if expecting something
further.

Suddenly Hippolyte arose. His face, shockingly pale, was that of a man
overwhelmed with shame and despair. This was shown chiefly in the look
of fear and hatred which he cast upon the assembled company, and in the
wild smile upon his trembling lips. Then he cast down his eyes, and with
the same smile, staggered towards Burdovsky and Doktorenko, who stood at
the entrance to the verandah. He had decided to go with them.

“There! that is what I feared!” cried the prince. “It was inevitable!”

Hippolyte turned upon him, a prey to maniacal rage, which set all the
muscles of his face quivering.

“Ah! that is what you feared! It was inevitable, you say! Well, let me
tell you that if I hate anyone here--I hate you all,” he cried, in a
hoarse, strained voice--“but you, you, with your jesuitical soul, your
soul of sickly sweetness, idiot, beneficent millionaire--I hate you
worse than anything or anyone on earth! I saw through you and hated you
long ago; from the day I first heard of you. I hated you with my whole
heart. You have contrived all this! You have driven me into this state!
You have made a dying man disgrace himself. You, you, you are the cause
of my abject cowardice! I would kill you if I remained alive! I do not
want your benefits; I will accept none from anyone; do you hear? Not
from any one! I want nothing! I was delirious, do not dare to triumph! I
curse every one of you, once for all!”

Breath failed him here, and he was obliged to stop.

“He is ashamed of his tears!” whispered Lebedeff to Lizabetha
Prokofievna. “It was inevitable. Ah! what a wonderful man the prince is!
He read his very soul.”

But Mrs. Epanchin would not deign to look at Lebedeff. Drawn up
haughtily, with her head held high, she gazed at the “riff-raff,”
 with scornful curiosity. When Hippolyte had finished, Ivan Fedorovitch
shrugged his shoulders, and his wife looked him angrily up and down, as
if to demand the meaning of his movement. Then she turned to the prince.

“Thanks, prince, many thanks, eccentric friend of the family, for the
pleasant evening you have provided for us. I am sure you are quite
pleased that you have managed to mix us up with your extraordinary
affairs. It is quite enough, dear family friend; thank you for giving us
an opportunity of getting to know you so well.”

She arranged her cloak with hands that trembled with anger as she waited
for the “riff-raff” to go. The cab which Lebedeff’s son had gone to
fetch a quarter of an hour ago, by Doktorenko’s order, arrived at that
moment. The general thought fit to put in a word after his wife.

“Really, prince, I hardly expected after--after all our friendly
intercourse--and you see, Lizabetha Prokofievna--”

“Papa, how can you?” cried Adelaida, walking quickly up to the prince
and holding out her hand.

He smiled absently at her; then suddenly he felt a burning sensation in
his ear as an angry voice whispered:

“If you do not turn those dreadful people out of the house this very
instant, I shall hate you all my life--all my life!” It was Aglaya. She
seemed almost in a frenzy, but she turned away before the prince could
look at her. However, there was no one left to turn out of the house,
for they had managed meanwhile to get Hippolyte into the cab, and it had
