
“Yes, yes--twenty years and three months. We were educated together; I
went straight into the army, and he--”

“My father went into the army, too. He was a sub-lieutenant in the
Vasiliefsky regiment.”

“No, sir--in the Bielomirsky; he changed into the latter shortly before
his death. I was at his bedside when he died, and gave him my blessing
for eternity. Your mother--” The general paused, as though overcome with
emotion.

“She died a few months later, from a cold,” said the prince.

“Oh, not cold--believe an old man--not from a cold, but from grief for
her prince. Oh--your mother, your mother! heigh-ho! Youth--youth! Your
father and I--old friends as we were--nearly murdered each other for her
sake.”

The prince began to be a little incredulous.

“I was passionately in love with her when she was engaged--engaged to my
friend. The prince noticed the fact and was furious. He came and woke me
at seven o’clock one morning. I rise and dress in amazement; silence on
both sides. I understand it all. He takes a couple of pistols out of his
pocket--across a handkerchief--without witnesses. Why invite witnesses
when both of us would be walking in eternity in a couple of minutes? The
pistols are loaded; we stretch the handkerchief and stand opposite one
another. We aim the pistols at each other’s hearts. Suddenly tears start
to our eyes, our hands shake; we weep, we embrace--the battle is one of
self-sacrifice now! The prince shouts, ‘She is yours;’ I cry, ‘She is
yours--’ in a word, in a word--You’ve come to live with us, hey?”

“Yes--yes--for a while, I think,” stammered the prince.

“Prince, mother begs you to come to her,” said Colia, appearing at the
door.

The prince rose to go, but the general once more laid his hand in a
friendly manner on his shoulder, and dragged him down on to the sofa.

“As the true friend of your father, I wish to say a few words to you,”
 he began. “I have suffered--there was a catastrophe. I suffered without
a trial; I had no trial. Nina Alexandrovna my wife, is an excellent
woman, so is my daughter Varvara. We have to let lodgings because we are
poor--a dreadful, unheard-of come-down for us--for me, who should
have been a governor-general; but we are very glad to have _you_, at all
events. Meanwhile there is a tragedy in the house.”

The prince looked inquiringly at the other.

“Yes, a marriage is being arranged--a marriage between a questionable
woman and a young fellow who might be a flunkey. They wish to bring this
woman into the house where my wife and daughter reside, but while I
live and breathe she shall never enter my doors. I shall lie at the
threshold, and she shall trample me underfoot if she does. I hardly
talk to Gania now, and avoid him as much as I can. I warn you of this
beforehand, but you cannot fail to observe it. But you are the son of my
old friend, and I hope--”

“Prince, be so kind as to come to me for a moment in the drawing-room,”
 said Nina Alexandrovna herself, appearing at the door.

“Imagine, my dear,” cried the general, “it turns out that I have nursed
the prince on my knee in the old days.” His wife looked searchingly at
him, and glanced at the prince, but said nothing. The prince rose and
followed her; but hardly had they reached the drawing-room, and Nina
Alexandrovna had begun to talk hurriedly, when in came the general.
She immediately relapsed into silence. The master of the house may have
observed this, but at all events he did not take any notice of it; he
was in high good humour.

“A son of my old friend, dear,” he cried; “surely you must remember
Prince Nicolai Lvovitch? You saw him at--at Tver.”

“I don’t remember any Nicolai Lvovitch. Was that your father?” she
inquired of the prince.

“Yes, but he died at Elizabethgrad, not at Tver,” said the prince,
rather timidly. “So Pavlicheff told me.”

“No, Tver,” insisted the general; “he removed just before his death. You
were very small and cannot remember; and Pavlicheff, though an excellent
fellow, may have made a mistake.”

“You knew Pavlicheff then?”

“Oh, yes--a wonderful fellow; but I was present myself. I gave him my
blessing.”

“My father was just about to be tried when he died,” said the prince,
“although I never knew of what he was accused. He died in hospital.”

“Oh! it was the Kolpakoff business, and of course he would have been
acquitted.”

“Yes? Do you know that for a fact?” asked the prince, whose curiosity
was aroused by the general’s words.

“I should think so indeed!” cried the latter. “The court-martial came to
no decision. It was a mysterious, an impossible business, one might say!
Captain Larionoff, commander of the company, had died; his command
was handed over to the prince for the moment. Very well. This soldier,
Kolpakoff, stole some leather from one of his comrades, intending to
sell it, and spent the money on drink. Well! The prince--you understand
that what follows took place in the presence of the sergeant-major, and
a corporal--the prince rated Kolpakoff soundly, and threatened to have
him flogged. Well, Kolpakoff went back to the barracks, lay down on
a camp bedstead, and in a quarter of an hour was dead: you quite
understand? It was, as I said, a strange, almost impossible, affair.
In due course Kolpakoff was buried; the prince wrote his report, the
deceased’s name was removed from the roll. All as it should be, is it
not? But exactly three months later at the inspection of the brigade,
the man Kolpakoff was found in the third company of the second battalion
of infantry, Novozemlianski division, just as if nothing had happened!”

“What?” said the prince, much astonished.

“It did not occur--it’s a mistake!” said Nina Alexandrovna quickly,
looking, at the prince rather anxiously. “_Mon mari se trompe_,” she
added, speaking in French.

“My dear, ‘_se trompe_’ is easily said. Do you remember any case at all
like it? Everybody was at their wits’ end. I should be the first to say
‘_qu’on se trompe_,’ but unfortunately I was an eye-witness, and was also
on the commission of inquiry. Everything proved that it was really he,
the very same soldier Kolpakoff who had been given the usual military
funeral to the sound of the drum. It is of course a most curious
case--nearly an impossible one. I recognize that... but--”

“Father, your dinner is ready,” said Varvara at this point, putting her
head in at the door.

“Very glad, I’m particularly hungry. Yes, yes, a strange
coincidence--almost a psychological--”

“Your soup’ll be cold; do come.”

“Coming, coming,” said the general. “Son of my old friend--” he was
heard muttering as he went down the passage.

“You will have to excuse very much in my husband, if you stay with us,”
 said Nina Alexandrovna; “but he will not disturb you often. He dines
alone. Everyone has his little peculiarities, you know, and some people
perhaps have more than those who are most pointed at and laughed at.
One thing I must beg of you--if my husband applies to you for payment
for board and lodging, tell him that you have already paid me. Of course
anything paid by you to the general would be as fully settled as if
paid to me, so far as you are concerned; but I wish it to be so, if you
please, for convenience’ sake. What is it, Varia?”
