wants to!”

He gulped down some water out of a glass standing near, bent over the
table, in order to hide his face from the audience, and recommenced.

“The idea that it is not worth while living for a few weeks took
possession of me a month ago, when I was told that I had four weeks to
live, but only partially so at that time. The idea quite overmastered me
three days since, that evening at Pavlofsk. The first time that I felt
really impressed with this thought was on the terrace at the prince’s,
at the very moment when I had taken it into my head to make a last trial
of life. I wanted to see people and trees (I believe I said so myself),
I got excited, I maintained Burdovsky’s rights, ‘my neighbour!’--I
dreamt that one and all would open their arms, and embrace me, that
there would be an indescribable exchange of forgiveness between us all!
In a word, I behaved like a fool, and then, at that very same instant, I
felt my ‘last conviction.’ I ask myself now how I could have waited six
months for that conviction! I knew that I had a disease that spares
no one, and I really had no illusions; but the more I realized my
condition, the more I clung to life; I wanted to live at any price. I
confess I might well have resented that blind, deaf fate, which, with no
apparent reason, seemed to have decided to crush me like a fly; but why
did I not stop at resentment? Why did I begin to live, knowing that it
was not worthwhile to begin? Why did I attempt to do what I knew to be
an impossibility? And yet I could not even read a book to the end; I
had given up reading. What is the good of reading, what is the good of
learning anything, for just six months? That thought has made me throw
aside a book more than once.

“Yes, that wall of Meyer’s could tell a tale if it liked. There was no
spot on its dirty surface that I did not know by heart. Accursed wall!
and yet it is dearer to me than all the Pavlofsk trees!--That is--it
_would_ be dearer if it were not all the same to me, now!

“I remember now with what hungry interest I began to watch the lives of
other people--interest that I had never felt before! I used to wait for
Colia’s arrival impatiently, for I was so ill myself, then, that I could
not leave the house. I so threw myself into every little detail of news,
and took so much interest in every report and rumour, that I believe I
became a regular gossip! I could not understand, among other things, how
all these people--with so much life in and before them--do not become
_rich_--and I don’t understand it now. I remember being told of a poor
wretch I once knew, who had died of hunger. I was almost beside myself
with rage! I believe if I could have resuscitated him I would have done
so for the sole purpose of murdering him!

“Occasionally I was so much better that I could go out; but the streets
used to put me in such a rage that I would lock myself up for days
rather than go out, even if I were well enough to do so! I could
not bear to see all those preoccupied, anxious-looking creatures
continuously surging along the streets past me! Why are they always
anxious? What is the meaning of their eternal care and worry? It is
their wickedness, their perpetual detestable malice--that’s what it
is--they are all full of malice, malice!

“Whose fault is it that they are all miserable, that they don’t know how
to live, though they have fifty or sixty years of life before them? Why
did that fool allow himself to die of hunger with sixty years of unlived
life before him?

“And everyone of them shows his rags, his toil-worn hands, and yells in
his wrath: ‘Here are we, working like cattle all our lives, and always
as hungry as dogs, and there are others who do not work, and are fat and
rich!’ The eternal refrain! And side by side with them trots along some
wretched fellow who has known better days, doing light porter’s work
from morn to night for a living, always blubbering and saying that
‘his wife died because he had no money to buy medicine with,’ and his
children dying of cold and hunger, and his eldest daughter gone to the
bad, and so on. Oh! I have no pity and no patience for these fools of
people. Why can’t they be Rothschilds? Whose fault is it that a man has
not got millions of money like Rothschild? If he has life, all this must
be in his power! Whose fault is it that he does not know how to live his
life?

“Oh! it’s all the same to me now--_now!_ But at that time I would soak my
pillow at night with tears of mortification, and tear at my blanket in
my rage and fury. Oh, how I longed at that time to be turned out--_me_,
eighteen years old, poor, half-clothed, turned out into the street,
quite alone, without lodging, without work, without a crust of bread,
without relations, without a single acquaintance, in some large
town--hungry, beaten (if you like), but in good health--and _then_ I would
show them--

“What would I show them?

“Oh, don’t think that I have no sense of my own humiliation! I have
suffered already in reading so far. Which of you all does not think me a
fool at this moment--a young fool who knows nothing of life--forgetting
that to live as I have lived these last six months is to live longer
than grey-haired old men. Well, let them laugh, and say it is all
nonsense, if they please. They may say it is all fairy-tales, if they
like; and I have spent whole nights telling myself fairy-tales. I
remember them all. But how can I tell fairy-tales now? The time for them
is over. They amused me when I found that there was not even time for me
to learn the Greek grammar, as I wanted to do. ‘I shall die before I get
to the syntax,’ I thought at the first page--and threw the book under
the table. It is there still, for I forbade anyone to pick it up.

“If this ‘Explanation’ gets into anybody’s hands, and they have patience
to read it through, they may consider me a madman, or a schoolboy, or,
more likely, a man condemned to die, who thought it only natural to
conclude that all men, excepting himself, esteem life far too lightly,
live it far too carelessly and lazily, and are, therefore, one and all,
unworthy of it. Well, I affirm that my reader is wrong again, for my
convictions have nothing to do with my sentence of death. Ask them, ask
any one of them, or all of them, what they mean by happiness! Oh, you
may be perfectly sure that if Columbus was happy, it was not after he
had discovered America, but when he was discovering it! You may be quite
sure that he reached the culminating point of his happiness three days
before he saw the New World with his actual eyes, when his mutinous
sailors wanted to tack about, and return to Europe! What did the New
World matter after all? Columbus had hardly seen it when he died, and
in reality he was entirely ignorant of what he had discovered. The
important thing is life--life and nothing else! What is any ‘discovery’
whatever compared with the incessant, eternal discovery of life?

“But what is the use of talking? I’m afraid all this is so commonplace
that my confession will be taken for a schoolboy exercise--the work of
some ambitious lad writing in the hope of his work ‘seeing the light’;
or perhaps my readers will say that ‘I had perhaps something to say, but
did not know how to express it.’

“Let me add to this that in every idea emanating from genius, or even in
every serious human idea--born in the human brain--there always remains
something--some sediment--which cannot be expressed to others, though
one wrote volumes and lectured upon it for five-and-thirty years. There
is always a something, a remnant, which will never come out from your
brain, but will remain there with you, and you alone, for ever and ever,
and you will die, perhaps, without having imparted what may be the very
essence of your idea to a single living soul.

“So that if I cannot now impart all that has tormented me for the last
six months, at all events you will understand that, having reached my
‘last convictions,’ I must have paid a very dear price for them. That
is what I wished, for reasons of my own, to make a point of in this my
‘Explanation.’

“But let me resume.”

VI.

“I will not deceive you. ‘Reality’ got me so entrapped in its meshes now
and again during the past six months, that I forgot my ‘sentence’ (or
perhaps I did not wish to think of it), and actually busied myself with
affairs.

“A word as to my circumstances. When, eight months since, I became
very ill, I threw up all my old connections and dropped all my old
companions. As I was always a gloomy, morose sort of individual, my
friends easily forgot me; of course, they would have forgotten me all
