more to the champagne.

It was now Totski’s turn, and his story was awaited with great
curiosity--while all eyes turned on Nastasia Philipovna, as though
anticipating that his revelation must be connected somehow with her.
Nastasia, during the whole of his story, pulled at the lace trimming of
her sleeve, and never once glanced at the speaker. Totski was a handsome
man, rather stout, with a very polite and dignified manner. He was
always well dressed, and his linen was exquisite. He had plump white
hands, and wore a magnificent diamond ring on one finger.

“What simplifies the duty before me considerably, in my opinion,” he
began, “is that I am bound to recall and relate the very worst action of
my life. In such circumstances there can, of course, be no doubt. One’s
conscience very soon informs one what is the proper narrative to tell. I
admit, that among the many silly and thoughtless actions of my life, the
memory of one comes prominently forward and reminds me that it lay long
like a stone on my heart. Some twenty years since, I paid a visit to
Platon Ordintzeff at his country-house. He had just been elected marshal
of the nobility, and had come there with his young wife for the winter
holidays. Anfisa Alexeyevna’s birthday came off just then, too, and
there were two balls arranged. At that time Dumas-fils’ beautiful work,
_La Dame aux Camélias_--a novel which I consider imperishable--had just
come into fashion. In the provinces all the ladies were in raptures over
it, those who had read it, at least. Camellias were all the fashion.
Everyone inquired for them, everybody wanted them; and a grand lot of
camellias are to be got in a country town--as you all know--and two
balls to provide for!

“Poor Peter Volhofskoi was desperately in love with Anfisa Alexeyevna.
I don’t know whether there was anything--I mean I don’t know whether
he could possibly have indulged in any hope. The poor fellow was beside
himself to get her a bouquet of camellias. Countess Sotski and Sophia
Bespalova, as everyone knew, were coming with white camellia bouquets.
Anfisa wished for red ones, for effect. Well, her husband Platon was
driven desperate to find some. And the day before the ball, Anfisa’s
rival snapped up the only red camellias to be had in the place, from
under Platon’s nose, and Platon--wretched man--was done for. Now if
Peter had only been able to step in at this moment with a red bouquet,
his little hopes might have made gigantic strides. A woman’s gratitude
under such circumstances would have been boundless--but it was
practically an impossibility.

“The night before the ball I met Peter, looking radiant. ‘What is it?’
I ask. ‘I’ve found them, Eureka!’ ‘No! where, where?’ ‘At Ekshaisk (a
little town fifteen miles off) there’s a rich old merchant, who keeps
a lot of canaries, has no children, and he and his wife are devoted to
flowers. He’s got some camellias.’ ‘And what if he won’t let you have
them?’ ‘I’ll go on my knees and implore till I get them. I won’t go
away.’ ‘When shall you start?’ ‘Tomorrow morning at five o’clock.’ ‘Go
on,’ I said, ‘and good luck to you.’

“I was glad for the poor fellow, and went home. But an idea got hold of
me somehow. I don’t know how. It was nearly two in the morning. I rang
the bell and ordered the coachman to be waked up and sent to me. He
came. I gave him a tip of fifteen roubles, and told him to get the
carriage ready at once. In half an hour it was at the door. I got in and
off we went.

“By five I drew up at the Ekshaisky inn. I waited there till dawn, and
soon after six I was off, and at the old merchant Trepalaf’s.

“‘Camellias!’ I said, ‘father, save me, save me, let me have some
camellias!’ He was a tall, grey old man--a terrible-looking old
gentleman. ‘Not a bit of it,’ he says. ‘I won’t.’ Down I went on my
knees. ‘Don’t say so, don’t--think what you’re doing!’ I cried; ‘it’s a
matter of life and death!’ ‘If that’s the case, take them,’ says he.
So up I get, and cut such a bouquet of red camellias! He had a whole
greenhouse full of them--lovely ones. The old fellow sighs. I pull out a
hundred roubles. ‘No, no!’ says he, ‘don’t insult me that way.’ ‘Oh, if
that’s the case, give it to the village hospital,’ I say. ‘Ah,’ he says,
‘that’s quite a different matter; that’s good of you and generous. I’ll
pay it in there for you with pleasure.’ I liked that old fellow, Russian
to the core, _de la vraie souche_. I went home in raptures, but took
another road in order to avoid Peter. Immediately on arriving I sent up
the bouquet for Anfisa to see when she awoke.

“You may imagine her ecstasy, her gratitude. The wretched Platon, who
had almost died since yesterday of the reproaches showered upon him,
wept on my shoulder. Of course poor Peter had no chance after this.

“I thought he would cut my throat at first, and went about armed ready
to meet him. But he took it differently; he fainted, and had brain fever
and convulsions. A month after, when he had hardly recovered, he went
off to the Crimea, and there he was shot.

“I assure you this business left me no peace for many a long year. Why
did I do it? I was not in love with her myself; I’m afraid it was simply
mischief--pure ‘cussedness’ on my part.

“If I hadn’t seized that bouquet from under his nose he might have been
alive now, and a happy man. He might have been successful in life, and
never have gone to fight the Turks.”

Totski ended his tale with the same dignity that had characterized its
commencement.

Nastasia Philipovna’s eyes were flashing in a most unmistakable way,
now; and her lips were all a-quiver by the time Totski finished his
story.

All present watched both of them with curiosity.

“You were right, Totski,” said Nastasia, “it is a dull game and a stupid
one. I’ll just tell my story, as I promised, and then we’ll play cards.”

“Yes, but let’s have the story first!” cried the general.

“Prince,” said Nastasia Philipovna, unexpectedly turning to Muishkin,
“here are my old friends, Totski and General Epanchin, who wish to marry
me off. Tell me what you think. Shall I marry or not? As you decide, so
shall it be.”

Totski grew white as a sheet. The general was struck dumb. All present
started and listened intently. Gania sat rooted to his chair.

“Marry whom?” asked the prince, faintly.

“Gavrila Ardalionovitch Ivolgin,” said Nastasia, firmly and evenly.

There were a few seconds of dead silence.

The prince tried to speak, but could not form his words; a great weight
seemed to lie upon his breast and suffocate him.

“N-no! don’t marry him!” he whispered at last, drawing his breath with
an effort.

“So be it, then. Gavrila Ardalionovitch,” she spoke solemnly and
forcibly, “you hear the prince’s decision? Take it as my decision; and
let that be the end of the matter for good and all.”

“Nastasia Philipovna!” cried Totski, in a quaking voice.

“Nastasia Philipovna!” said the general, in persuasive but agitated
tones.

Everyone in the room fidgeted in their places, and waited to see what
was coming next.

“Well, gentlemen!” she continued, gazing around in apparent
astonishment; “what do you all look so alarmed about? Why are you so
upset?”

“But--recollect, Nastasia Philipovna,” stammered Totski, “you gave a
promise, quite a free one, and--and you might have spared us this. I am
confused and bewildered, I know; but, in a word, at such a moment, and
before company, and all so-so-irregular, finishing off a game with a
serious matter like this, a matter of honour, and of heart, and--”

