
“You have no right--you have no right!” cried Burdovsky.

“The son is not responsible for the misdeeds of his father; and the
mother is not to blame,” added Hippolyte, with warmth.

“That seems to me all the more reason for sparing her,” said the prince
timidly.

“Prince, you are not only simple, but your simplicity is almost past the
limit,” said Lebedeff’s nephew, with a sarcastic smile.

“But what right had you?” said Hippolyte in a very strange tone.

“None--none whatever,” agreed the prince hastily. “I admit you are right
there, but it was involuntary, and I immediately said to myself that my
personal feelings had nothing to do with it,--that if I thought it right
to satisfy the demands of Mr. Burdovsky, out of respect for the memory
of Pavlicheff, I ought to do so in any case, whether I esteemed Mr.
Burdovsky or not. I only mentioned this, gentlemen, because it seemed so
unnatural to me for a son to betray his mother’s secret in such a way.
In short, that is what convinced me that Tchebaroff must be a rogue, and
that he had induced Mr. Burdovsky to attempt this fraud.”

“But this is intolerable!” cried the visitors, some of them starting to
their feet.

“Gentlemen, I supposed from this that poor Mr. Burdovsky must be a
simple-minded man, quite defenceless, and an easy tool in the hands
of rogues. That is why I thought it my duty to try and help him
as ‘Pavlicheff’s son’; in the first place by rescuing him from the
influence of Tchebaroff, and secondly by making myself his friend. I
have resolved to give him ten thousand roubles; that is about the sum
which I calculate that Pavlicheff must have spent on me.”

“What, only ten thousand!” cried Hippolyte.

“Well, prince, your arithmetic is not up to much, or else you are mighty
clever at it, though you affect the air of a simpleton,” said Lebedeff’s
nephew.

“I will not accept ten thousand roubles,” said Burdovsky.

“Accept, Antip,” whispered the boxer eagerly, leaning past the back of
Hippolyte’s chair to give his friend this piece of advice. “Take it for
the present; we can see about more later on.”

“Look here, Mr. Muishkin,” shouted Hippolyte, “please understand that we
are not fools, nor idiots, as your guests seem to imagine; these ladies
who look upon us with such scorn, and especially this fine gentleman”
 (pointing to Evgenie Pavlovitch) “whom I have not the honour of knowing,
though I think I have heard some talk about him--”

“Really, really, gentlemen,” cried the prince in great agitation, “you
are misunderstanding me again. In the first place, Mr. Keller, you have
greatly overestimated my fortune in your article. I am far from being
a millionaire. I have barely a tenth of what you suppose. Secondly, my
treatment in Switzerland was very far from costing tens of thousands of
roubles. Schneider received six hundred roubles a year, and he was
only paid for the first three years. As to the pretty governesses whom
Pavlicheff is supposed to have brought from Paris, they only exist
in Mr. Keller’s imagination; it is another calumny. According to my
calculations, the sum spent on me was very considerably under ten
thousand roubles, but I decided on that sum, and you must admit that
in paying a debt I could not offer Mr. Burdovsky more, however kindly
disposed I might be towards him; delicacy forbids it; I should seem to
be offering him charity instead of rightful payment. I don’t know how
you cannot see that, gentlemen! Besides, I had no intention of leaving
the matter there. I meant to intervene amicably later on and help to
improve poor Mr. Burdovsky’s position. It is clear that he has been
deceived, or he would never have agreed to anything so vile as the
scandalous revelations about his mother in Mr. Keller’s article. But,
gentlemen, why are you getting angry again? Are we never to come to an
understanding? Well, the event has proved me right! I have just seen
with my own eyes the proof that my conjecture was correct!” he added,
with increasing eagerness.

He meant to calm his hearers, and did not perceive that his words had
only increased their irritation.

“What do you mean? What are you convinced of?” they demanded angrily.

“In the first place, I have had the opportunity of getting a correct
idea of Mr. Burdovsky. I see what he is for myself. He is an innocent
man, deceived by everyone! A defenceless victim, who deserves
indulgence! Secondly, Gavrila Ardalionovitch, in whose hands I had
placed the matter, had his first interview with me barely an hour ago.
I had not heard from him for some time, as I was away, and have been ill
for three days since my return to St. Petersburg. He tells me that he
has exposed the designs of Tchebaroff and has proof that justifies my
opinion of him. I know, gentlemen, that many people think me an idiot.
Counting upon my reputation as a man whose purse-strings are easily
loosened, Tchebaroff thought it would be a simple matter to fleece me,
especially by trading on my gratitude to Pavlicheff. But the main
point is--listen, gentlemen, let me finish!--the main point is that Mr.
Burdovsky is not Pavlicheff’s son at all. Gavrila Ardalionovitch has
just told me of his discovery, and assures me that he has positive
proofs. Well, what do you think of that? It is scarcely credible, even
after all the tricks that have been played upon me. Please note that we
have positive proofs! I can hardly believe it myself, I assure you; I do
not yet believe it; I am still doubtful, because Gavrila Ardalionovitch
has not had time to go into details; but there can be no further doubt
that Tchebaroff is a rogue! He has deceived poor Mr. Burdovsky, and
all of you, gentlemen, who have come forward so nobly to support your
friend--(he evidently needs support, I quite see that!). He has abused
your credulity and involved you all in an attempted fraud, for when all
is said and done this claim is nothing else!”

“What! a fraud? What, he is not Pavlicheff’s son? Impossible!”

These exclamations but feebly expressed the profound bewilderment into
which the prince’s words had plunged Burdovsky’s companions.

“Certainly it is a fraud! Since Mr. Burdovsky is not Pavlicheff’s son,
his claim is neither more nor less than attempted fraud (supposing, of
course, that he had known the truth), but the fact is that he has been
deceived. I insist on this point in order to justify him; I repeat that
his simple-mindedness makes him worthy of pity, and that he cannot stand
alone; otherwise he would have behaved like a scoundrel in this matter.
But I feel certain that he does not understand it! I was just the same
myself before I went to Switzerland; I stammered incoherently; one tries
to express oneself and cannot. I understand that. I am all the better
able to pity Mr. Burdovsky, because I know from experience what it is to
be like that, and so I have a right to speak. Well, though there is no
such person as ‘Pavlicheff’s son,’ and it is all nothing but a humbug,
yet I will keep to my decision, and I am prepared to give up ten
thousand roubles in memory of Pavlicheff. Before Mr. Burdovsky made this
claim, I proposed to found a school with this money, in memory of my
benefactor, but I shall honour his memory quite as well by giving
the ten thousand roubles to Mr. Burdovsky, because, though he was not
Pavlicheff’s son, he was treated almost as though he were. That is
what gave a rogue the opportunity of deceiving him; he really did
think himself Pavlicheff’s son. Listen, gentlemen; this matter must
be settled; keep calm; do not get angry; and sit down! Gavrila
Ardalionovitch will explain everything to you at once, and I confess
that I am very anxious to hear all the details myself. He says that he
has even been to Pskoff to see your mother, Mr. Burdovsky; she is not
dead, as the article which was just read to us makes out. Sit down,
gentlemen, sit down!”

The prince sat down, and at length prevailed upon Burdovsky’s company
to do likewise. During the last ten or twenty minutes, exasperated by
continual interruptions, he had raised his voice, and spoken with
great vehemence. Now, no doubt, he bitterly regretted several words and
expressions which had escaped him in his excitement. If he had not been
driven beyond the limits of endurance, he would not have ventured to
express certain conjectures so openly. He had no sooner sat down than
his heart was torn by sharp remorse. Besides insulting Burdovsky
with the supposition, made in the presence of witnesses, that he was
suffering from the complaint for which he had himself been treated
