general. “She has gone to her mother’s, with Alexandra Michailovna.”

“Alexandra Michailovna out, too! How disappointing! Would you believe
it, I am always so unfortunate! May I most respectfully ask you to
present my compliments to Alexandra Michailovna, and remind her... tell
her, that with my whole heart I wish for her what she wished for herself
on Thursday evening, while she was listening to Chopin’s Ballade. She
will remember. I wish it with all sincerity. General Ivolgin and Prince
Muishkin!”

The woman’s face changed; she lost her suspicious expression.

“I will not fail to deliver your message,” she replied, and bowed them
out.

As they went downstairs the general regretted repeatedly that he had
failed to introduce the prince to his friends.

“You know I am a bit of a poet,” said he. “Have you noticed it? The
poetic soul, you know.” Then he added suddenly--“But after all...
after all I believe we made a mistake this time! I remember that the
Sokolovitch’s live in another house, and what is more, they are just
now in Moscow. Yes, I certainly was at fault. However, it is of no
consequence.”

“Just tell me,” said the prince in reply, “may I count still on your
assistance? Or shall I go on alone to see Nastasia Philipovna?”

“Count on my assistance? Go alone? How can you ask me that question,
when it is a matter on which the fate of my family so largely depends?
You don’t know Ivolgin, my friend. To trust Ivolgin is to trust a rock;
that’s how the first squadron I commanded spoke of me. ‘Depend upon
Ivolgin,’ said they all, ‘he is as steady as a rock.’ But, excuse me,
I must just call at a house on our way, a house where I have found
consolation and help in all my trials for years.”

“You are going home?”

“No... I wish... to visit Madame Terentieff, the widow of Captain
Terentieff, my old subordinate and friend. She helps me to keep up my
courage, and to bear the trials of my domestic life, and as I have an
extra burden on my mind today...”

“It seems to me,” interrupted the prince, “that I was foolish to trouble
you just now. However, at present you... Good-bye!”

“Indeed, you must not go away like that, young man, you must not!” cried
the general. “My friend here is a widow, the mother of a family; her
words come straight from her heart, and find an echo in mine. A visit
to her is merely an affair of a few minutes; I am quite at home in her
house. I will have a wash, and dress, and then we can drive to the Grand
Theatre. Make up your mind to spend the evening with me.... We are
just there--that’s the house... Why, Colia! you here! Well, is Marfa
Borisovna at home or have you only just come?”

“Oh no! I have been here a long while,” replied Colia, who was at the
front door when the general met him. “I am keeping Hippolyte company.
He is worse, and has been in bed all day. I came down to buy some cards.
Marfa Borisovna expects you. But what a state you are in, father!” added
the boy, noticing his father’s unsteady gait. “Well, let us go in.”

On meeting Colia the prince determined to accompany the general, though
he made up his mind to stay as short a time as possible. He wanted
Colia, but firmly resolved to leave the general behind. He could not
forgive himself for being so simple as to imagine that Ivolgin would be
of any use. The three climbed up the long staircase until they reached
the fourth floor where Madame Terentieff lived.

“You intend to introduce the prince?” asked Colia, as they went up.

“Yes, my boy. I wish to present him: General Ivolgin and Prince
Muishkin! But what’s the matter?... what?... How is Marfa Borisovna?”

“You know, father, you would have done much better not to come at all!
She is ready to eat you up! You have not shown yourself since the day
before yesterday and she is expecting the money. Why did you promise her
any? You are always the same! Well, now you will have to get out of it
as best you can.”

They stopped before a somewhat low doorway on the fourth floor. Ardalion
Alexandrovitch, evidently much out of countenance, pushed Muishkin in
front.

“I will wait here,” he stammered. “I should like to surprise her. ....”

Colia entered first, and as the door stood open, the mistress of the
house peeped out. The surprise of the general’s imagination fell very
flat, for she at once began to address him in terms of reproach.

Marfa Borisovna was about forty years of age. She wore a
dressing-jacket, her feet were in slippers, her face painted, and her
hair was in dozens of small plaits. No sooner did she catch sight of
Ardalion Alexandrovitch than she screamed:

“There he is, that wicked, mean wretch! I knew it was he! My heart
misgave me!”

The old man tried to put a good face on the affair.

“Come, let us go in--it’s all right,” he whispered in the prince’s ear.

But it was more serious than he wished to think. As soon as the visitors
had crossed the low dark hall, and entered the narrow reception-room,
furnished with half a dozen cane chairs, and two small card-tables,
Madame Terentieff, in the shrill tones habitual to her, continued her
stream of invectives.

“Are you not ashamed? Are you not ashamed? You barbarian! You tyrant!
You have robbed me of all I possessed--you have sucked my bones to the
marrow. How long shall I be your victim? Shameless, dishonourable man!”

“Marfa Borisovna! Marfa Borisovna! Here is... the Prince Muishkin!
General Ivolgin and Prince Muishkin,” stammered the disconcerted old
man.

“Would you believe,” said the mistress of the house, suddenly addressing
the prince, “would you believe that that man has not even spared my
orphan children? He has stolen everything I possessed, sold everything,
pawned everything; he has left me nothing--nothing! What am I to do with
your IOU’s, you cunning, unscrupulous rogue? Answer, devourer! answer,
heart of stone! How shall I feed my orphans? with what shall I nourish
them? And now he has come, he is drunk! He can scarcely stand. How, oh
how, have I offended the Almighty, that He should bring this curse upon
me! Answer, you worthless villain, answer!”

But this was too much for the general.

“Here are twenty-five roubles, Marfa Borisovna... it is all that I
can give... and I owe even these to the prince’s generosity--my noble
friend. I have been cruelly deceived. Such is... life... Now... Excuse
me, I am very weak,” he continued, standing in the centre of the
room, and bowing to all sides. “I am faint; excuse me! Lenotchka... a
cushion... my dear!”

Lenotchka, a little girl of eight, ran to fetch the cushion at once, and
placed it on the rickety old sofa. The general meant to have said much
more, but as soon as he had stretched himself out, he turned his face to
the wall, and slept the sleep of the just.

With a grave and ceremonious air, Marfa Borisovna motioned the prince to
a chair at one of the card-tables. She seated herself opposite, leaned
her right cheek on her hand, and sat in silence, her eyes fixed on
Muishkin, now and again sighing deeply. The three children, two little
girls and a boy, Lenotchka being the eldest, came and leant on the
table and also stared steadily at him. Presently Colia appeared from the
adjoining room.

“I am very glad indeed to have met you here, Colia,” said the prince.
“Can you do something for me? I must see Nastasia Philipovna, and I
asked Ardalion Alexandrovitch just now to take me to her house, but he
