the last time. You’ve worried me for the last three months--now it’s my
turn. Do you see this packet? It contains a hundred thousand roubles.
Now, I’m going to throw it into the fire, here--before all these
witnesses. As soon as the fire catches hold of it, you put your hands
into the fire and pick it out--without gloves, you know. You must have
bare hands, and you must turn your sleeves up. Pull it out, I say, and
it’s all yours. You may burn your fingers a little, of course; but then
it’s a hundred thousand roubles, remember--it won’t take you long to lay
hold of it and snatch it out. I shall so much admire you if you put your
hands into the fire for my money. All here present may be witnesses that
the whole packet of money is yours if you get it out. If you don’t get
it out, it shall burn. I will let no one else come; away--get away, all
of you--it’s my money! Rogojin has bought me with it. Is it my money,
Rogojin?”

“Yes, my queen; it’s your own money, my joy.”

“Get away then, all of you. I shall do as I like with my own--don’t
meddle! Ferdishenko, make up the fire, quick!”

“Nastasia Philipovna, I can’t; my hands won’t obey me,” said
Ferdishenko, astounded and helpless with bewilderment.

“Nonsense,” cried Nastasia Philipovna, seizing the poker and raking a
couple of logs together. No sooner did a tongue of flame burst out than
she threw the packet of notes upon it.

Everyone gasped; some even crossed themselves.

“She’s mad--she’s mad!” was the cry.

“Oughtn’t-oughtn’t we to secure her?” asked the general of Ptitsin, in
a whisper; “or shall we send for the authorities? Why, she’s mad, isn’t
she--isn’t she, eh?”

“N-no, I hardly think she is actually mad,” whispered Ptitsin, who was
as white as his handkerchief, and trembling like a leaf. He could not
take his eyes off the smouldering packet.

“She’s mad surely, isn’t she?” the general appealed to Totski.

“I told you she wasn’t an ordinary woman,” replied the latter, who was
as pale as anyone.

“Oh, but, positively, you know--a hundred thousand roubles!”

“Goodness gracious! good heavens!” came from all quarters of the room.

All now crowded round the fire and thronged to see what was going on;
everyone lamented and gave vent to exclamations of horror and woe. Some
jumped up on chairs in order to get a better view. Daria Alexeyevna
ran into the next room and whispered excitedly to Katia and Pasha. The
beautiful German disappeared altogether.

“My lady! my sovereign!” lamented Lebedeff, falling on his knees before
Nastasia Philipovna, and stretching out his hands towards the fire;
“it’s a hundred thousand roubles, it is indeed, I packed it up myself,
I saw the money! My queen, let me get into the fire after it--say the
word--I’ll put my whole grey head into the fire for it! I have a poor
lame wife and thirteen children. My father died of starvation last week.
Nastasia Philipovna, Nastasia Philipovna!” The wretched little man wept,
and groaned, and crawled towards the fire.

“Away, out of the way!” cried Nastasia. “Make room, all of you! Gania,
what are you standing there for? Don’t stand on ceremony. Put in your
hand! There’s your whole happiness smouldering away, look! Quick!”

But Gania had borne too much that day, and especially this evening, and
he was not prepared for this last, quite unexpected trial.

The crowd parted on each side of him and he was left face to face with
Nastasia Philipovna, three paces from her. She stood by the fire and
waited, with her intent gaze fixed upon him.

Gania stood before her, in his evening clothes, holding his white gloves
and hat in his hand, speechless and motionless, with arms folded and
eyes fixed on the fire.

A silly, meaningless smile played on his white, death-like lips. He
could not take his eyes off the smouldering packet; but it appeared that
something new had come to birth in his soul--as though he were vowing to
himself that he would bear this trial. He did not move from his place.
In a few seconds it became evident to all that he did not intend to
rescue the money.

“Hey! look at it, it’ll burn in another minute or two!” cried Nastasia
Philipovna. “You’ll hang yourself afterwards, you know, if it does! I’m
not joking.”

The fire, choked between a couple of smouldering pieces of wood, had
died down for the first few moments after the packet was thrown upon it.
But a little tongue of fire now began to lick the paper from below,
and soon, gathering courage, mounted the sides of the parcel, and crept
around it. In another moment, the whole of it burst into flames, and the
exclamations of woe and horror were redoubled.

“Nastasia Philipovna!” lamented Lebedeff again, straining towards the
fireplace; but Rogojin dragged him away, and pushed him to the rear once
more.

The whole of Rogojin’s being was concentrated in one rapturous gaze of
ecstasy. He could not take his eyes off Nastasia. He stood drinking her
in, as it were. He was in the seventh heaven of delight.

“Oh, what a queen she is!” he ejaculated, every other minute, throwing
out the remark for anyone who liked to catch it. “That’s the sort of
woman for me! Which of you would think of doing a thing like that, you
blackguards, eh?” he yelled. He was hopelessly and wildly beside himself
with ecstasy.

The prince watched the whole scene, silent and dejected.

“I’ll pull it out with my teeth for one thousand,” said Ferdishenko.

“So would I,” said another, from behind, “with pleasure. Devil take the
thing!” he added, in a tempest of despair, “it will all be burnt up in a
minute--It’s burning, it’s burning!”

“It’s burning, it’s burning!” cried all, thronging nearer and nearer to
the fire in their excitement.

“Gania, don’t be a fool! I tell you for the last time.”

“Get on, quick!” shrieked Ferdishenko, rushing wildly up to Gania, and
trying to drag him to the fire by the sleeve of his coat. “Get it, you
dummy, it’s burning away fast! Oh--_damn_ the thing!”

Gania hurled Ferdishenko from him; then he turned sharp round and made
for the door. But he had not gone a couple of steps when he tottered and
fell to the ground.

“He’s fainted!” the cry went round.

“And the money’s burning still,” Lebedeff lamented.

“Burning for nothing,” shouted others.

“Katia-Pasha! Bring him some water!” cried Nastasia Philipovna. Then she
took the tongs and fished out the packet.

Nearly the whole of the outer covering was burned away, but it was
soon evident that the contents were hardly touched. The packet had been
wrapped in a threefold covering of newspaper, and the notes were safe.
All breathed more freely.

“Some dirty little thousand or so may be touched,” said Lebedeff,
immensely relieved, “but there’s very little harm done, after all.”

“It’s all his--the whole packet is for him, do you hear--all of you?”
 cried Nastasia Philipovna, placing the packet by the side of Gania.
