married man and the father of a family--addressed such compliments that
she was filled with indignation. They parted friends, and, after leaving
the prince, the doctor said to Lebedeff: “If all such people were put
under restraint, there would be no one left for keepers.” Lebedeff then,
in tragic tones, told of the approaching marriage, whereupon the other
nodded his head and replied that, after all, marriages like that were
not so rare; that he had heard that the lady was very fascinating and of
extraordinary beauty, which was enough to explain the infatuation of a
wealthy man; that, further, thanks to the liberality of Totski and of
Rogojin, she possessed--so he had heard--not only money, but pearls,
diamonds, shawls, and furniture, and consequently she could not be
considered a bad match. In brief, it seemed to the doctor that the
prince’s choice, far from being a sign of foolishness, denoted, on the
contrary, a shrewd, calculating, and practical mind. Lebedeff had been
much struck by this point of view, and he terminated his confession
by assuring the prince that he was ready, if need be, to shed his very
life’s blood for him.

Hippolyte, too, was a source of some distraction to the prince at this
time; he would send for him at any and every hour of the day. They
lived,--Hippolyte and his mother and the children,--in a small house not
far off, and the little ones were happy, if only because they were able
to escape from the invalid into the garden. The prince had enough to do
in keeping the peace between the irritable Hippolyte and his mother, and
eventually the former became so malicious and sarcastic on the subject
of the approaching wedding, that Muishkin took offence at last, and
refused to continue his visits.

A couple of days later, however, Hippolyte’s mother came with tears in
her eyes, and begged the prince to come back, “or _he_ would eat her up
bodily.” She added that Hippolyte had a great secret to disclose. Of
course the prince went. There was no secret, however, unless we reckon
certain pantings and agitated glances around (probably all put on) as
the invalid begged his visitor to “beware of Rogojin.”

“He is the sort of man,” he continued, “who won’t give up his object,
you know; he is not like you and me, prince--he belongs to quite a
different order of beings. If he sets his heart on a thing he won’t be
afraid of anything--” and so on.

Hippolyte was very ill, and looked as though he could not long survive.
He was tearful at first, but grew more and more sarcastic and malicious
as the interview proceeded.

The prince questioned him in detail as to his hints about Rogojin. He
was anxious to seize upon some facts which might confirm Hippolyte’s
vague warnings; but there were none; only Hippolyte’s own private
impressions and feelings.

However, the invalid--to his immense satisfaction--ended by seriously
alarming the prince.

At first Muishkin had not cared to make any reply to his sundry
questions, and only smiled in response to Hippolyte’s advice to “run for
his life--abroad, if necessary. There are Russian priests everywhere,
and one can get married all over the world.”

But it was Hippolyte’s last idea which upset him.

“What I am really alarmed about, though,” he said, “is Aglaya Ivanovna.
Rogojin knows how you love her. Love for love. You took Nastasia
Philipovna from him. He will murder Aglaya Ivanovna; for though she is
not yours, of course, now, still such an act would pain you,--wouldn’t
it?”

He had attained his end. The prince left the house beside himself with
terror.

These warnings about Rogojin were expressed on the day before the
wedding. That evening the prince saw Nastasia Philipovna for the last
time before they were to meet at the altar; but Nastasia was not in a
position to give him any comfort or consolation. On the contrary, she
only added to his mental perturbation as the evening went on. Up to this
time she had invariably done her best to cheer him--she was afraid of
his looking melancholy; she would try singing to him, and telling him
every sort of funny story or reminiscence that she could recall. The
prince nearly always pretended to be amused, whether he were so
actually or no; but often enough he laughed sincerely, delighted by the
brilliancy of her wit when she was carried away by her narrative, as she
very often was. Nastasia would be wild with joy to see the impression
she had made, and to hear his laugh of real amusement; and she would
remain the whole evening in a state of pride and happiness. But this
evening her melancholy and thoughtfulness grew with every hour.

The prince had told Evgenie Pavlovitch with perfect sincerity that he
loved Nastasia Philipovna with all his soul. In his love for her there
was the sort of tenderness one feels for a sick, unhappy child which
cannot be left alone. He never spoke of his feelings for Nastasia
to anyone, not even to herself. When they were together they never
discussed their “feelings,” and there was nothing in their cheerful,
animated conversation which an outsider could not have heard. Daria
Alexeyevna, with whom Nastasia was staying, told afterwards how she had
been filled with joy and delight only to look at them, all this time.

Thanks to the manner in which he regarded Nastasia’s mental and moral
condition, the prince was to some extent freed from other perplexities.
She was now quite different from the woman he had known three months
before. He was not astonished, for instance, to see her now so impatient
to marry him--she who formerly had wept with rage and hurled curses and
reproaches at him if he mentioned marriage! “It shows that she no longer
fears, as she did then, that she would make me unhappy by marrying me,”
 he thought. And he felt sure that so sudden a change could not be a
natural one. This rapid growth of self-confidence could not be due only
to her hatred for Aglaya. To suppose that would be to suspect the depth
of her feelings. Nor could it arise from dread of the fate that awaited
her if she married Rogojin. These causes, indeed, as well as others,
might have played a part in it, but the true reason, Muishkin decided,
was the one he had long suspected--that the poor sick soul had come to
the end of its forces. Yet this was an explanation that did not procure
him any peace of mind. At times he seemed to be making violent efforts
to think of nothing, and one would have said that he looked on his
marriage as an unimportant formality, and on his future happiness as a
thing not worth considering. As to conversations such as the one held
with Evgenie Pavlovitch, he avoided them as far as possible, feeling
that there were certain objections to which he could make no answer.

The prince had observed that Nastasia knew well enough what Aglaya was
to him. He never spoke of it, but he had seen her face when she had
caught him starting off for the Epanchins’ house on several occasions.
When the Epanchins left Pavlofsk, she had beamed with radiance and
happiness. Unsuspicious and unobservant as he was, he had feared at that
time that Nastasia might have some scheme in her mind for a scene or
scandal which would drive Aglaya out of Pavlofsk. She had encouraged
the rumours and excitement among the inhabitants of the place as to her
marriage with the prince, in order to annoy her rival; and, finding
it difficult to meet the Epanchins anywhere, she had, on one occasion,
taken him for a drive past their house. He did not observe what was
happening until they were almost passing the windows, when it was too
late to do anything. He said nothing, but for two days afterwards he was
ill.

Nastasia did not try that particular experiment again. A few days before
that fixed for the wedding, she grew grave and thoughtful. She always
ended by getting the better of her melancholy, and becoming merry and
cheerful again, but not quite so unaffectedly happy as she had been some
days earlier.

The prince redoubled his attentive study of her symptoms. It was a most
curious circumstance, in his opinion, that she never spoke of Rogojin.
But once, about five days before the wedding, when the prince was at
home, a messenger arrived begging him to come at once, as Nastasia
Philipovna was very ill.

He had found her in a condition approaching to absolute madness. She
screamed, and trembled, and cried out that Rogojin was hiding out there
in the garden--that she had seen him herself--and that he would murder
her in the night--that he would cut her throat. She was terribly
agitated all day. But it so happened that the prince called at
Hippolyte’s house later on, and heard from his mother that she had been
in town all day, and had there received a visit from Rogojin, who had
