the least.”

“Allow me to warn you,” interposed General Ivolgin, “that he is the
greatest charlatan on earth.” He had taken the chair next to the girl,
and was impatient to begin talking. “No doubt there are pleasures and
amusements peculiar to the country,” he continued, “and to listen to a
pretended student holding forth on the book of the Revelations may be
as good as any other. It may even be original. But... you seem to
be looking at me with some surprise--may I introduce myself--General
Ivolgin--I carried you in my arms as a baby--”

“Delighted, I’m sure,” said Aglaya; “I am acquainted with Varvara
Ardalionovna and Nina Alexandrovna.” She was trying hard to restrain
herself from laughing.

Mrs. Epanchin flushed up; some accumulation of spleen in her suddenly
needed an outlet. She could not bear this General Ivolgin whom she had
once known, long ago--in society.

“You are deviating from the truth, sir, as usual!” she remarked, boiling
over with indignation; “you never carried her in your life!”

“You have forgotten, mother,” said Aglaya, suddenly. “He really did
carry me about,--in Tver, you know. I was six years old, I remember.
He made me a bow and arrow, and I shot a pigeon. Don’t you remember
shooting a pigeon, you and I, one day?”

“Yes, and he made me a cardboard helmet, and a little wooden sword--I
remember!” said Adelaida.

“Yes, I remember too!” said Alexandra. “You quarrelled about the wounded
pigeon, and Adelaida was put in the corner, and stood there with her
helmet and sword and all.”

The poor general had merely made the remark about having carried Aglaya
in his arms because he always did so begin a conversation with young
people. But it happened that this time he had really hit upon the truth,
though he had himself entirely forgotten the fact. But when Adelaida and
Aglaya recalled the episode of the pigeon, his mind became filled
with memories, and it is impossible to describe how this poor old man,
usually half drunk, was moved by the recollection.

“I remember--I remember it all!” he cried. “I was captain then. You were
such a lovely little thing--Nina Alexandrovna!--Gania, listen! I was
received then by General Epanchin.”

“Yes, and look what you have come to now!” interrupted Mrs. Epanchin.
“However, I see you have not quite drunk your better feelings away. But
you’ve broken your wife’s heart, sir--and instead of looking after
your children, you have spent your time in public-houses and debtors’
prisons! Go away, my friend, stand in some corner and weep, and bemoan
your fallen dignity, and perhaps God will forgive you yet! Go, go! I’m
serious! There’s nothing so favourable for repentance as to think of the
past with feelings of remorse!”

There was no need to repeat that she was serious. The general, like all
drunkards, was extremely emotional and easily touched by recollections
of his better days. He rose and walked quietly to the door, so meekly
that Mrs. Epanchin was instantly sorry for him.

“Ardalion Alexandrovitch,” she cried after him, “wait a moment, we are
all sinners! When you feel that your conscience reproaches you a little
less, come over to me and we’ll have a talk about the past! I dare say I
am fifty times more of a sinner than you are! And now go, go, good-bye,
you had better not stay here!” she added, in alarm, as he turned as
though to come back.

“Don’t go after him just now, Colia, or he’ll be vexed, and the benefit
of this moment will be lost!” said the prince, as the boy was hurrying
out of the room.

“Quite true! Much better to go in half an hour or so,” said Mrs. Epanchin.

“That’s what comes of telling the truth for once in one’s life!” said
Lebedeff. “It reduced him to tears.”

“Come, come! the less _you_ say about it the better--to judge from all I
have heard about you!” replied Mrs. Epanchin.

The prince took the first opportunity of informing the Epanchin ladies
that he had intended to pay them a visit that day, if they had not
themselves come this afternoon, and Lizabetha Prokofievna replied that
she hoped he would still do so.

By this time some of the visitors had disappeared.

Ptitsin had tactfully retreated to Lebedeff’s wing; and Gania soon
followed him.

The latter had behaved modestly, but with dignity, on this occasion
of his first meeting with the Epanchins since the rupture. Twice Mrs.
Epanchin had deliberately examined him from head to foot; but he had
stood fire without flinching. He was certainly much changed, as anyone
could see who had not met him for some time; and this fact seemed to
afford Aglaya a good deal of satisfaction.

“That was Gavrila Ardalionovitch, who just went out, wasn’t it?” she
asked suddenly, interrupting somebody else’s conversation to make the
remark.

“Yes, it was,” said the prince.

“I hardly knew him; he is much changed, and for the better!”

“I am very glad,” said the prince.

“He has been very ill,” added Varia.

“How has he changed for the better?” asked Mrs. Epanchin. “I don’t see
any change for the better! What’s better in him? Where did you get _that_
idea from? _What’s_ better?”

“There’s nothing better than the ‘poor knight’!” said Colia, who was
standing near the last speaker’s chair.

“I quite agree with you there!” said Prince S., laughing.

“So do I,” said Adelaida, solemnly.

“_What_ poor knight?” asked Mrs. Epanchin, looking round at the face of
each of the speakers in turn. Seeing, however, that Aglaya was blushing,
she added, angrily:

“What nonsense you are all talking! What do you mean by poor knight?”

“It’s not the first time this urchin, your favourite, has shown his
impudence by twisting other people’s words,” said Aglaya, haughtily.

Every time that Aglaya showed temper (and this was very often), there
was so much childish pouting, such “school-girlishness,” as it were, in
her apparent wrath, that it was impossible to avoid smiling at her, to
her own unutterable indignation. On these occasions she would say, “How
can they, how _dare_ they laugh at me?”

This time everyone laughed at her, her sisters, Prince S., Prince
Muishkin (though he himself had flushed for some reason), and Colia.
Aglaya was dreadfully indignant, and looked twice as pretty in her
wrath.

“He’s always twisting round what one says,” she cried.

“I am only repeating your own exclamation!” said Colia. “A month ago you
were turning over the pages of your Don Quixote, and suddenly called out
‘there is nothing better than the poor knight.’ I don’t know whom
you were referring to, of course, whether to Don Quixote, or Evgenie
Pavlovitch, or someone else, but you certainly said these words, and
afterwards there was a long conversation...”

“You are inclined to go a little too far, my good boy, with your
guesses,” said Mrs. Epanchin, with some show of annoyance.
