as though he could not make up his mind. Then he drew him along,
murmuring almost inaudibly,

“Come!”

They stopped on the landing, and rang the bell at a door opposite to
Parfen’s own lodging.

An old woman opened to them and bowed low to Parfen, who asked her some
questions hurriedly, but did not wait to hear her answer. He led the
prince on through several dark, cold-looking rooms, spotlessly clean,
with white covers over all the furniture.

Without the ceremony of knocking, Parfen entered a small apartment,
furnished like a drawing-room, but with a polished mahogany partition
dividing one half of it from what was probably a bedroom. In one corner
of this room sat an old woman in an arm-chair, close to the stove. She
did not look very old, and her face was a pleasant, round one; but she
was white-haired and, as one could detect at the first glance, quite
in her second childhood. She wore a black woollen dress, with a black
handkerchief round her neck and shoulders, and a white cap with black
ribbons. Her feet were raised on a footstool. Beside her sat another old
woman, also dressed in mourning, and silently knitting a stocking; this
was evidently a companion. They both looked as though they never broke
the silence. The first old woman, so soon as she saw Rogojin and the
prince, smiled and bowed courteously several times, in token of her
gratification at their visit.

“Mother,” said Rogojin, kissing her hand, “here is my great friend,
Prince Muishkin; we have exchanged crosses; he was like a real brother
to me at Moscow at one time, and did a great deal for me. Bless him,
mother, as you would bless your own son. Wait a moment, let me arrange
your hands for you.”

But the old lady, before Parfen had time to touch her, raised her right
hand, and, with three fingers held up, devoutly made the sign of the
cross three times over the prince. She then nodded her head kindly at
him once more.

“There, come along, Lef Nicolaievitch; that’s all I brought you here
for,” said Rogojin.

When they reached the stairs again he added:

“She understood nothing of what I said to her, and did not know what I
wanted her to do, and yet she blessed you; that shows she wished to do
so herself. Well, goodbye; it’s time you went, and I must go too.”

He opened his own door.

“Well, let me at least embrace you and say goodbye, you strange fellow!”
 cried the prince, looking with gentle reproach at Rogojin, and advancing
towards him. But the latter had hardly raised his arms when he dropped
them again. He could not make up his mind to it; he turned away from the
prince in order to avoid looking at him. He could not embrace him.

“Don’t be afraid,” he muttered, indistinctly, “though I have taken your
cross, I shall not murder you for your watch.” So saying, he laughed
suddenly, and strangely. Then in a moment his face became transfigured;
he grew deadly white, his lips trembled, his eyes burned like fire. He
stretched out his arms and held the prince tightly to him, and said in a
strangled voice:

“Well, take her! It’s Fate! She’s yours. I surrender her.... Remember
Rogojin!” And pushing the prince from him, without looking back at him,
he hurriedly entered his own flat, and banged the door.

V.

It was late now, nearly half-past two, and the prince did not find
General Epanchin at home. He left a card, and determined to look up
Colia, who had a room at a small hotel near. Colia was not in, but he
was informed that he might be back shortly, and had left word that if he
were not in by half-past three it was to be understood that he had gone
to Pavlofsk to General Epanchin’s, and would dine there. The prince
decided to wait till half-past three, and ordered some dinner. At
half-past three there was no sign of Colia. The prince waited until four
o’clock, and then strolled off mechanically wherever his feet should
carry him.

In early summer there are often magnificent days in St.
Petersburg--bright, hot and still. This happened to be such a day.

For some time the prince wandered about without aim or object. He did
not know the town well. He stopped to look about him on bridges, at
street corners. He entered a confectioner’s shop to rest, once. He was
in a state of nervous excitement and perturbation; he noticed nothing
and no one; and he felt a craving for solitude, to be alone with his
thoughts and his emotions, and to give himself up to them passively. He
loathed the idea of trying to answer the questions that would rise up
in his heart and mind. “I am not to blame for all this,” he thought to
himself, half unconsciously.

Towards six o’clock he found himself at the station of the
Tsarsko-Selski railway.

He was tired of solitude now; a new rush of feeling took hold of him,
and a flood of light chased away the gloom, for a moment, from his soul.
He took a ticket to Pavlofsk, and determined to get there as fast as he
could, but something stopped him; a reality, and not a fantasy, as he
was inclined to think it. He was about to take his place in a carriage,
when he suddenly threw away his ticket and came out again, disturbed and
thoughtful. A few moments later, in the street, he recalled something
that had bothered him all the afternoon. He caught himself engaged in
a strange occupation which he now recollected he had taken up at odd
moments for the last few hours--it was looking about all around him for
something, he did not know what. He had forgotten it for a while, half
an hour or so, and now, suddenly, the uneasy search had recommenced.

But he had hardly become conscious of this curious phenomenon, when
another recollection suddenly swam through his brain, interesting him
for the moment, exceedingly. He remembered that the last time he had
been engaged in looking around him for the unknown something, he was
standing before a cutler’s shop, in the window of which were exposed
certain goods for sale. He was extremely anxious now to discover whether
this shop and these goods really existed, or whether the whole thing had
been a hallucination.

He felt in a very curious condition today, a condition similar to that
which had preceded his fits in bygone years.

He remembered that at such times he had been particularly absentminded,
and could not discriminate between objects and persons unless he
concentrated special attention upon them.

He remembered seeing something in the window marked at sixty copecks.
Therefore, if the shop existed and if this object were really in
the window, it would prove that he had been able to concentrate his
attention on this article at a moment when, as a general rule,
his absence of mind would have been too great to admit of any such
concentration; in fact, very shortly after he had left the railway
station in such a state of agitation.

So he walked back looking about him for the shop, and his heart beat
with intolerable impatience. Ah! here was the very shop, and there was
the article marked “ cop.” Of course, it’s sixty copecks, he thought,
and certainly worth no more. This idea amused him and he laughed.

But it was a hysterical laugh; he was feeling terribly oppressed. He
remembered clearly that just here, standing before this window, he had
suddenly turned round, just as earlier in the day he had turned and
found the dreadful eyes of Rogojin fixed upon him. Convinced, therefore,
that in this respect at all events he had been under no delusion, he
left the shop and went on.

This must be thought out; it was clear that there had been no
hallucination at the station then, either; something had actually
happened to him, on both occasions; there was no doubt of it. But again
a loathing for all mental exertion overmastered him; he would not
think it out now, he would put it off and think of something else.
