crimes have only now sprung into existence. That is where your mistake
lies--an extremely natural mistake, I assure you, my dear fellow!” said
Prince S.

“I know that there were just as many, and just as terrible, crimes
before our times. Not long since I visited a convict prison and made
acquaintance with some of the criminals. There were some even more
dreadful criminals than this one we have been speaking of--men who
have murdered a dozen of their fellow-creatures, and feel no remorse
whatever. But what I especially noticed was this, that the very most
hopeless and remorseless murderer--however hardened a criminal he may
be--still _knows that he is a criminal_; that is, he is conscious that
he has acted wickedly, though he may feel no remorse whatever. And they
were all like this. Those of whom Evgenie Pavlovitch has spoken, do not
admit that they are criminals at all; they think they had a right to
do what they did, and that they were even doing a good deed, perhaps.
I consider there is the greatest difference between the two cases.
And recollect--it was a _youth_, at the particular age which is most
helplessly susceptible to the distortion of ideas!”

Prince S. was now no longer smiling; he gazed at the prince in
bewilderment.

Alexandra, who had seemed to wish to put in her word when the prince
began, now sat silent, as though some sudden thought had caused her to
change her mind about speaking.

Evgenie Pavlovitch gazed at him in real surprise, and this time his
expression of face had no mockery in it whatever.

“What are you looking so surprised about, my friend?” asked Mrs.
Epanchin, suddenly. “Did you suppose he was stupider than yourself, and
was incapable of forming his own opinions, or what?”

“No! Oh no! Not at all!” said Evgenie. “But--how is it, prince, that
you--(excuse the question, will you?)--if you are capable of observing
and seeing things as you evidently do, how is it that you saw nothing
distorted or perverted in that claim upon your property, which you
acknowledged a day or two since; and which was full of arguments founded
upon the most distorted views of right and wrong?”

“I’ll tell you what, my friend,” cried Mrs. Epanchin, of a sudden, “here
are we all sitting here and imagining we are very clever, and perhaps
laughing at the prince, some of us, and meanwhile he has received a
letter this very day in which that same claimant renounces his claim,
and begs the prince’s pardon. There! _we_ don’t often get that sort of
letter; and yet we are not ashamed to walk with our noses in the air
before him.”

“And Hippolyte has come down here to stay,” said Colia, suddenly.

“What! has he arrived?” said the prince, starting up.

“Yes, I brought him down from town just after you had left the house.”

“There now! It’s just like him,” cried Lizabetha Prokofievna, boiling
over once more, and entirely oblivious of the fact that she had
just taken the prince’s part. “I dare swear that you went up to town
yesterday on purpose to get the little wretch to do you the great honour
of coming to stay at your house. You did go up to town, you know you
did--you said so yourself! Now then, did you, or did you not, go down on
your knees and beg him to come, confess!”

“No, he didn’t, for I saw it all myself,” said Colia. “On the contrary,
Hippolyte kissed his hand twice and thanked him; and all the prince said
was that he thought Hippolyte might feel better here in the country!”

“Don’t, Colia,--what is the use of saying all that?” cried the prince,
rising and taking his hat.

“Where are you going to now?” cried Mrs. Epanchin.

“Never mind about him now, prince,” said Colia. “He is all right and
taking a nap after the journey. He is very happy to be here; but I think
perhaps it would be better if you let him alone for today,--he is very
sensitive now that he is so ill--and he might be embarrassed if you show
him too much attention at first. He is decidedly better today, and says
he has not felt so well for the last six months, and has coughed much
less, too.”

The prince observed that Aglaya came out of her corner and approached
the table at this point.

He did not dare look at her, but he was conscious, to the very tips of
his fingers, that she was gazing at him, perhaps angrily; and that she
had probably flushed up with a look of fiery indignation in her black
eyes.

“It seems to me, Mr. Colia, that you were very foolish to bring your
young friend down--if he is the same consumptive boy who wept so
profusely, and invited us all to his own funeral,” remarked Evgenie
Pavlovitch. “He talked so eloquently about the blank wall outside his
bedroom window, that I’m sure he will never support life here without
it.”

“I think so too,” said Mrs. Epanchin; “he will quarrel with you, and be
off,” and she drew her workbox towards her with an air of dignity, quite
oblivious of the fact that the family was about to start for a walk in
the park.

“Yes, I remember he boasted about the blank wall in an extraordinary
way,” continued Evgenie, “and I feel that without that blank wall
he will never be able to die eloquently; and he does so long to die
eloquently!”

“Oh, you must forgive him the blank wall,” said the prince, quietly. “He
has come down to see a few trees now, poor fellow.”

“Oh, I forgive him with all my heart; you may tell him so if you like,”
 laughed Evgenie.

“I don’t think you should take it quite like that,” said the prince,
quietly, and without removing his eyes from the carpet. “I think it is
more a case of his forgiving you.”

“Forgiving me! why so? What have I done to need his forgiveness?”

“If you don’t understand, then--but of course, you do understand.
He wished--he wished to bless you all round and to have your
blessing--before he died--that’s all.”

“My dear prince,” began Prince S., hurriedly, exchanging glances with
some of those present, “you will not easily find heaven on earth, and
yet you seem to expect to. Heaven is a difficult thing to find anywhere,
prince; far more difficult than appears to that good heart of yours.
Better stop this conversation, or we shall all be growing quite
disturbed in our minds, and--”

“Let’s go and hear the band, then,” said Lizabetha Prokofievna, angrily
rising from her place.

The rest of the company followed her example.

II.

The prince suddenly approached Evgenie Pavlovitch.

“Evgenie Pavlovitch,” he said, with strange excitement and seizing the
latter’s hand in his own, “be assured that I esteem you as a generous
and honourable man, in spite of everything. Be assured of that.”

Evgenie Pavlovitch fell back a step in astonishment. For one moment it
was all he could do to restrain himself from bursting out laughing; but,
looking closer, he observed that the prince did not seem to be quite
himself; at all events, he was in a very curious state.

“I wouldn’t mind betting, prince,” he cried, “that you did not in the
least mean to say that, and very likely you meant to address someone
else altogether. What is it? Are you feeling unwell or anything?”

