
“Sometimes.”

“I want to explain all to you--everything--everything! I know you think
me Utopian, don’t you--an idealist? Oh, no! I’m not, indeed--my ideas
are all so simple. You don’t believe me? You are smiling. Do you know,
I am sometimes very wicked--for I lose my faith? This evening as I came
here, I thought to myself, ‘What shall I talk about? How am I to begin,
so that they may be able to understand partially, at all events?’ How
afraid I was--dreadfully afraid! And yet, how _could_ I be afraid--was it
not shameful of me? Was I afraid of finding a bottomless abyss of empty
selfishness? Ah! that’s why I am so happy at this moment, because I find
there is no bottomless abyss at all--but good, healthy material, full of
life.

“It is not such a very dreadful circumstance that we are odd people, is
it? For we really are odd, you know--careless, reckless, easily wearied
of anything. We don’t look thoroughly into matters--don’t care to
understand things. We are all like this--you and I, and all of them!
Why, here are you, now--you are not a bit angry with me for calling you
‘odd,’ are you? And, if so, surely there is good material in you? Do you
know, I sometimes think it is a good thing to be odd. We can forgive
one another more easily, and be more humble. No one can begin by being
perfect--there is much one cannot understand in life at first. In order
to attain to perfection, one must begin by failing to understand much.
And if we take in knowledge too quickly, we very likely are not taking
it in at all. I say all this to you--you who by this time understand so
much--and doubtless have failed to understand so much, also. I am not
afraid of you any longer. You are not angry that a mere boy should say
such words to you, are you? Of course not! You know how to forget and to
forgive. You are laughing, Ivan Petrovitch? You think I am a champion
of other classes of people--that I am _their_ advocate, a democrat, and
an orator of Equality?” The prince laughed hysterically; he had several
times burst into these little, short nervous laughs. “Oh, no--it is for
you, for myself, and for all of us together, that I am alarmed. I am a
prince of an old family myself, and I am sitting among my peers; and I
am talking like this in the hope of saving us all; in the hope that our
class will not disappear altogether--into the darkness--unguessing its
danger--blaming everything around it, and losing ground every day. Why
should we disappear and give place to others, when we may still, if
we choose, remain in the front rank and lead the battle? Let us be
servants, that we may become lords in due season!”

He tried to get upon his feet again, but the old man still restrained
him, gazing at him with increasing perturbation as he went on.

“Listen--I know it is best not to speak! It is best simply to give a
good example--simply to begin the work. I have done this--I have
begun, and--and--oh! _can_ anyone be unhappy, really? Oh! what does grief
matter--what does misfortune matter, if one knows how to be happy? Do
you know, I cannot understand how anyone can pass by a green tree, and
not feel happy only to look at it! How anyone can talk to a man and not
feel happy in loving him! Oh, it is my own fault that I cannot express
myself well enough! But there are lovely things at every step I
take--things which even the most miserable man must recognize as
beautiful. Look at a little child--look at God’s day dawn--look at the
grass growing--look at the eyes that love you, as they gaze back into
your eyes!”

He had risen, and was speaking standing up. The old gentleman was
looking at him now in unconcealed alarm. Lizabetha Prokofievna wrung her
hands. “Oh, my God!” she cried. She had guessed the state of the case
before anyone else.

Aglaya rushed quickly up to him, and was just in time to receive him in
her arms, and to hear with dread and horror that awful, wild cry as he
fell writhing to the ground.

There he lay on the carpet, and someone quickly placed a cushion under
his head.

No one had expected this.

In a quarter of an hour or so Prince N. and Evgenie Pavlovitch and the
old dignitary were hard at work endeavouring to restore the harmony
of the evening, but it was of no avail, and very soon after the guests
separated and went their ways.

A great deal of sympathy was expressed; a considerable amount of advice
was volunteered; Ivan Petrovitch expressed his opinion that the young
man was “a Slavophile, or something of that sort”; but that it was not a
dangerous development. The old dignitary said nothing.

True enough, most of the guests, next day and the day after, were not
in very good humour. Ivan Petrovitch was a little offended, but not
seriously so. General Epanchin’s chief was rather cool towards him for
some while after the occurrence. The old dignitary, as patron of the
family, took the opportunity of murmuring some kind of admonition to the
general, and added, in flattering terms, that he was most interested
in Aglaya’s future. He was a man who really did possess a kind heart,
although his interest in the prince, in the earlier part of the evening,
was due, among other reasons, to the latter’s connection with Nastasia
Philipovna, according to popular report. He had heard a good deal of
this story here and there, and was greatly interested in it, so much so
that he longed to ask further questions about it.

Princess Bielokonski, as she drove away on this eventful evening, took
occasion to say to Lizabetha Prokofievna:

“Well--he’s a good match--and a bad one; and if you want my opinion,
more bad than good. You can see for yourself the man is an invalid.”

Lizabetha therefore decided that the prince was impossible as a husband
for Aglaya; and during the ensuing night she made a vow that never while
she lived should he marry Aglaya. With this resolve firmly impressed
upon her mind, she awoke next day; but during the morning, after her
early lunch, she fell into a condition of remarkable inconsistency.

In reply to a very guarded question of her sisters’, Aglaya had answered
coldly, but exceedingly haughtily:

“I have never given him my word at all, nor have I ever counted him as
my future husband--never in my life. He is just as little to me as all
the rest.”

Lizabetha Prokofievna suddenly flared up.

“I did not expect that of you, Aglaya,” she said. “He is an impossible
husband for you,--I know it; and thank God that we agree upon that
point; but I did not expect to hear such words from you. I thought I
should hear a very different tone from you. I would have turned out
everyone who was in the room last night and kept him,--that’s the sort
of man he is, in my opinion!”

Here she suddenly paused, afraid of what she had just said. But she
little knew how unfair she was to her daughter at that moment. It was
all settled in Aglaya’s mind. She was only waiting for the hour that
would bring the matter to a final climax; and every hint, every careless
probing of her wound, did but further lacerate her heart.

VIII.

This same morning dawned for the prince pregnant with no less painful
presentiments,--which fact his physical state was, of course, quite
enough to account for; but he was so indefinably melancholy,--his
sadness could not attach itself to anything in particular, and this
tormented him more than anything else. Of course certain facts stood
before him, clear and painful, but his sadness went beyond all that he
could remember or imagine; he realized that he was powerless to console
himself unaided. Little by little he began to develop the expectation
that this day something important, something decisive, was to happen to
him.

His attack of yesterday had been a slight one. Excepting some little
heaviness in the head and pain in the limbs, he did not feel any
particular effects. His brain worked all right, though his soul was
heavy within him.

He rose late, and immediately upon waking remembered all about the
previous evening; he also remembered, though not quite so clearly, how,
