eccentric young fellow from ruin, they were unable to take any stronger
measures to attain that end. Neither their position, nor their private
inclination, perhaps (and only naturally), would allow them to use any
more pronounced means.

We have observed before that even some of the prince’s nearest
neighbours had begun to oppose him. Vera Lebedeff’s passive disagreement
was limited to the shedding of a few solitary tears; to more frequent
sitting alone at home, and to a diminished frequency in her visits to
the prince’s apartments.

Colia was occupied with his father at this time. The old man died during
a second stroke, which took place just eight days after the first. The
prince showed great sympathy in the grief of the family, and during the
first days of their mourning he was at the house a great deal with Nina
Alexandrovna. He went to the funeral, and it was observable that the
public assembled in church greeted his arrival and departure with
whisperings, and watched him closely.

The same thing happened in the park and in the street, wherever he went.
He was pointed out when he drove by, and he often overheard the name of
Nastasia Philipovna coupled with his own as he passed. People looked
out for her at the funeral, too, but she was not there; and another
conspicuous absentee was the captain’s widow, whom Lebedeff had
prevented from coming.

The funeral service produced a great effect on the prince. He whispered
to Lebedeff that this was the first time he had ever heard a Russian
funeral service since he was a little boy. Observing that he was looking
about him uneasily, Lebedeff asked him whom he was seeking.

“Nothing. I only thought I--”

“Is it Rogojin?”

“Why--is he here?”

“Yes, he’s in church.”

“I thought I caught sight of his eyes!” muttered the prince, in
confusion. “But what of it!--Why is he here? Was he asked?”

“Oh, dear, no! Why, they don’t even know him! Anyone can come in, you
know. Why do you look so amazed? I often meet him; I’ve seen him at
least four times, here at Pavlofsk, within the last week.”

“I haven’t seen him once--since that day!” the prince murmured.

As Nastasia Philipovna had not said a word about having met Rogojin
since “that day,” the prince concluded that the latter had his own
reasons for wishing to keep out of sight. All the day of the funeral our
hero was in a deeply thoughtful state, while Nastasia Philipovna was
particularly merry, both in the daytime and in the evening.

Colia had made it up with the prince before his father’s death, and it
was he who urged him to make use of Keller and Burdovsky, promising
to answer himself for the former’s behaviour. Nina Alexandrovna and
Lebedeff tried to persuade him to have the wedding in St. Petersburg,
instead of in the public fashion contemplated, down here at Pavlofsk
in the height of the season. But the prince only said that Nastasia
Philipovna desired to have it so, though he saw well enough what
prompted their arguments.

The next day Keller came to visit the prince. He was in a high state of
delight with the post of honour assigned to him at the wedding.

Before entering he stopped on the threshold, raised his hand as if
making a solemn vow, and cried:

“I won’t drink!”

Then he went up to the prince, seized both his hands, shook them warmly,
and declared that he had at first felt hostile towards the project of
this marriage, and had openly said so in the billiard-rooms, but that
the reason simply was that, with the impatience of a friend, he had
hoped to see the prince marry at least a Princess de Rohan or de Chabot;
but that now he saw that the prince’s way of thinking was ten times more
noble than that of “all the rest put together.” For he desired neither
pomp nor wealth nor honour, but only the truth! The sympathies of
exalted personages were well known, and the prince was too highly
placed by his education, and so on, not to be in some sense an exalted
personage!

“But all the common herd judge differently; in the town, at
the meetings, in the villas, at the band, in the inns and the
billiard-rooms, the coming event has only to be mentioned and there are
shouts and cries from everybody. I have even heard talk of getting up a
‘charivari’ under the windows on the wedding-night. So if ‘you have need
of the pistol’ of an honest man, prince, I am ready to fire half a dozen
shots even before you rise from your nuptial couch!”

Keller also advised, in anticipation of the crowd making a rush after
the ceremony, that a fire-hose should be placed at the entrance to the
house; but Lebedeff was opposed to this measure, which he said might
result in the place being pulled down.

“I assure you, prince, that Lebedeff is intriguing against you. He wants
to put you under control. Imagine that! To take ‘from you the use of
your free-will and your money’--that is to say, the two things that
distinguish us from the animals! I have heard it said positively. It is
the sober truth.”

The prince recollected that somebody had told him something of the kind
before, and he had, of course, scoffed at it. He only laughed now, and
forgot the hint at once.

Lebedeff really had been busy for some little while; but, as usual, his
plans had become too complex to succeed, through sheer excess of ardour.
When he came to the prince--the very day before the wedding--to confess
(for he always confessed to the persons against whom he intrigued,
especially when the plan failed), he informed our hero that he himself
was a born Talleyrand, but for some unknown reason had become simple
Lebedeff. He then proceeded to explain his whole game to the prince,
interesting the latter exceedingly.

According to Lebedeff’s account, he had first tried what he could do
with General Epanchin. The latter informed him that he wished well to
the unfortunate young man, and would gladly do what he could to “save
him,” but that he did not think it would be seemly for him to interfere
in this matter. Lizabetha Prokofievna would neither hear nor see him.
Prince S. and Evgenie Pavlovitch only shrugged their shoulders, and
implied that it was no business of theirs. However, Lebedeff had not
lost heart, and went off to a clever lawyer,--a worthy and respectable
man, whom he knew well. This old gentleman informed him that the thing
was perfectly feasible if he could get hold of competent witnesses as
to Muishkin’s mental incapacity. Then, with the assistance of a few
influential persons, he would soon see the matter arranged.

Lebedeff immediately procured the services of an old doctor, and carried
the latter away to Pavlofsk to see the prince, by way of viewing the
ground, as it were, and to give him (Lebedeff) counsel as to whether
the thing was to be done or not. The visit was not to be official, but
merely friendly.

Muishkin remembered the doctor’s visit quite well. He remembered that
Lebedeff had said that he looked ill, and had better see a doctor; and
although the prince scouted the idea, Lebedeff had turned up almost
immediately with his old friend, explaining that they had just met at
the bedside of Hippolyte, who was very ill, and that the doctor had
something to tell the prince about the sick man.

The prince had, of course, at once received him, and had plunged into
a conversation about Hippolyte. He had given the doctor an account of
Hippolyte’s attempted suicide; and had proceeded thereafter to talk of
his own malady,--of Switzerland, of Schneider, and so on; and so
deeply was the old man interested by the prince’s conversation and his
description of Schneider’s system, that he sat on for two hours.

Muishkin gave him excellent cigars to smoke, and Lebedeff, for his part,
regaled him with liqueurs, brought in by Vera, to whom the doctor--a
