fly which buzzes around my head in the sun’s rays--even this little fly
is a sharer and participator in all the glory of the universe, and knows
its place and is happy in it;--while I--only I, am an outcast, and have
been blind to the fact hitherto, thanks to my simplicity! Oh! I know
well how the prince and others would like me, instead of indulging in
all these wicked words of my own, to sing, to the glory and triumph of
morality, that well-known verse of Gilbert’s:

  “‘O, puissent voir longtemps votre beauté sacrée
    Tant d’amis, sourds à mes adieux!
    Qu’ils meurent pleins de jours, que leur mort soit pleurée,
    Qu’un ami leur ferme les yeux!’

“But believe me, believe me, my simple-hearted friends, that in this
highly moral verse, in this academical blessing to the world in general
in the French language, is hidden the intensest gall and bitterness;
but so well concealed is the venom, that I dare say the poet actually
persuaded himself that his words were full of the tears of pardon and
peace, instead of the bitterness of disappointment and malice, and so
died in the delusion.

“Do you know there is a limit of ignominy, beyond which man’s
consciousness of shame cannot go, and after which begins satisfaction in
shame? Well, of course humility is a great force in that sense, I admit
that--though not in the sense in which religion accounts humility to be
strength!

“Religion!--I admit eternal life--and perhaps I always did admit it.

“Admitted that consciousness is called into existence by the will of a
Higher Power; admitted that this consciousness looks out upon the world
and says ‘I am;’ and admitted that the Higher Power wills that the
consciousness so called into existence, be suddenly extinguished (for
so--for some unexplained reason--it is and must be)--still there comes
the eternal question--why must I be humble through all this? Is it not
enough that I am devoured, without my being expected to bless the
power that devours me? Surely--surely I need not suppose that
Somebody--there--will be offended because I do not wish to live out the
fortnight allowed me? I don’t believe it.

“It is much simpler, and far more likely, to believe that my death
is needed--the death of an insignificant atom--in order to fulfil the
general harmony of the universe--in order to make even some plus or
minus in the sum of existence. Just as every day the death of numbers of
beings is necessary because without their annihilation the rest cannot
live on--(although we must admit that the idea is not a particularly
grand one in itself!)

“However--admit the fact! Admit that without such perpetual devouring of
one another the world cannot continue to exist, or could never have been
organized--I am ever ready to confess that I cannot understand why this
is so--but I’ll tell you what I _do_ know, for certain. If I have once
been given to understand and realize that I _am_--what does it matter
to me that the world is organized on a system full of errors and that
otherwise it cannot be organized at all? Who will or can judge me after
this? Say what you like--the thing is impossible and unjust!

“And meanwhile I have never been able, in spite of my great desire to
do so, to persuade myself that there is no future existence, and no
Providence.

“The fact of the matter is that all this _does_ exist, but that we know
absolutely nothing about the future life and its laws!

“But it is so difficult, and even impossible to understand, that surely
I am not to be blamed because I could not fathom the incomprehensible?

“Of course I know they say that one must be obedient, and of course,
too, the prince is one of those who say so: that one must be obedient
without questions, out of pure goodness of heart, and that for my worthy
conduct in this matter I shall meet with reward in another world. We
degrade God when we attribute our own ideas to Him, out of annoyance
that we cannot fathom His ways.

“Again, I repeat, I cannot be blamed because I am unable to understand
that which it is not given to mankind to fathom. Why am I to be judged
because I could not comprehend the Will and Laws of Providence? No, we
had better drop religion.

“And enough of this. By the time I have got so far in the reading of
my document the sun will be up and the huge force of his rays will be
acting upon the living world. So be it. I shall die gazing straight at
the great Fountain of life and power; I do not want this life!

“If I had had the power to prevent my own birth I should certainly never
have consented to accept existence under such ridiculous conditions.
However, I have the power to end my existence, although I do but give
back days that are already numbered. It is an insignificant gift, and my
revolt is equally insignificant.

“Final explanation: I die, not in the least because I am unable to
support these next three weeks. Oh no, I should find strength enough,
and if I wished it I could obtain consolation from the thought of the
injury that is done me. But I am not a French poet, and I do not desire
such consolation. And finally, nature has so limited my capacity for
work or activity of any kind, in allotting me but three weeks of time,
that suicide is about the only thing left that I can begin and end in
the time of my own free will.

“Perhaps then I am anxious to take advantage of my last chance of doing
something for myself. A protest is sometimes no small thing.”

The explanation was finished; Hippolyte paused at last.

There is, in extreme cases, a final stage of cynical candour when a
nervous man, excited, and beside himself with emotion, will be afraid
of nothing and ready for any sort of scandal, nay, glad of it. The
extraordinary, almost unnatural, tension of the nerves which upheld
Hippolyte up to this point, had now arrived at this final stage. This
poor feeble boy of eighteen--exhausted by disease--looked for all the
world as weak and frail as a leaflet torn from its parent tree and
trembling in the breeze; but no sooner had his eye swept over his
audience, for the first time during the whole of the last hour, than the
most contemptuous, the most haughty expression of repugnance lighted
up his face. He defied them all, as it were. But his hearers were
indignant, too; they rose to their feet with annoyance. Fatigue,
the wine consumed, the strain of listening so long, all added to the
disagreeable impression which the reading had made upon them.

Suddenly Hippolyte jumped up as though he had been shot.

“The sun is rising,” he cried, seeing the gilded tops of the trees, and
pointing to them as to a miracle. “See, it is rising now!”

“Well, what then? Did you suppose it wasn’t going to rise?” asked
Ferdishenko.

“It’s going to be atrociously hot again all day,” said Gania, with an
air of annoyance, taking his hat. “A month of this... Are you coming
home, Ptitsin?” Hippolyte listened to this in amazement, almost
amounting to stupefaction. Suddenly he became deadly pale and shuddered.

“You manage your composure too awkwardly. I see you wish to insult me,”
 he cried to Gania. “You--you are a cur!” He looked at Gania with an
expression of malice.

“What on earth is the matter with the boy? What phenomenal
feeble-mindedness!” exclaimed Ferdishenko.

“Oh, he’s simply a fool,” said Gania.

Hippolyte braced himself up a little.

“I understand, gentlemen,” he began, trembling as before, and stumbling
over every word, “that I have deserved your resentment, and--and
am sorry that I should have troubled you with this raving nonsense”
 (pointing to his article), “or rather, I am sorry that I have not
troubled you enough.” He smiled feebly. “Have I troubled you, Evgenie
Pavlovitch?” He suddenly turned on Evgenie with this question. “Tell me
now, have I troubled you or not?”
