chanced to find it? In Switzerland, of all places! Now that is an
ordinary English hand. It can hardly be improved, it is so refined and
exquisite--almost perfection. This is an example of another kind,
a mixture of styles. The copy was given me by a French commercial
traveller. It is founded on the English, but the downstrokes are a
little blacker, and more marked. Notice that the oval has some slight
modification--it is more rounded. This writing allows for flourishes;
now a flourish is a dangerous thing! Its use requires such taste, but,
if successful, what a distinction it gives to the whole! It results in
an incomparable type--one to fall in love with!”

“Dear me! How you have gone into all the refinements and details of the
question! Why, my dear fellow, you are not a caligraphist, you are an
artist! Eh, Gania?”

“Wonderful!” said Gania. “And he knows it too,” he added, with a
sarcastic smile.

“You may smile,--but there’s a career in this,” said the general. “You
don’t know what a great personage I shall show this to, prince. Why, you
can command a situation at thirty-five roubles per month to start with.
However, it’s half-past twelve,” he concluded, looking at his watch; “so
to business, prince, for I must be setting to work and shall not see you
again today. Sit down a minute. I have told you that I cannot receive
you myself very often, but I should like to be of some assistance to
you, some small assistance, of a kind that would give you satisfaction.
I shall find you a place in one of the State departments, an easy
place--but you will require to be accurate. Now, as to your plans--in
the house, or rather in the family of Gania here--my young friend, whom
I hope you will know better--his mother and sister have prepared two
or three rooms for lodgers, and let them to highly recommended young
fellows, with board and attendance. I am sure Nina Alexandrovna will
take you in on my recommendation. There you will be comfortable and well
taken care of; for I do not think, prince, that you are the sort of
man to be left to the mercy of Fate in a town like Petersburg. Nina
Alexandrovna, Gania’s mother, and Varvara Alexandrovna, are ladies for
whom I have the highest possible esteem and respect. Nina Alexandrovna
is the wife of General Ardalion Alexandrovitch, my old brother in arms,
with whom, I regret to say, on account of certain circumstances, I am no
longer acquainted. I give you all this information, prince, in order
to make it clear to you that I am personally recommending you to this
family, and that in so doing, I am more or less taking upon myself to
answer for you. The terms are most reasonable, and I trust that your
salary will very shortly prove amply sufficient for your expenditure. Of
course pocket-money is a necessity, if only a little; do not be angry,
prince, if I strongly recommend you to avoid carrying money in your
pocket. But as your purse is quite empty at the present moment, you must
allow me to press these twenty-five roubles upon your acceptance, as
something to begin with. Of course we will settle this little matter
another time, and if you are the upright, honest man you look, I
anticipate very little trouble between us on that score. Taking so much
interest in you as you may perceive I do, I am not without my object,
and you shall know it in good time. You see, I am perfectly candid with
you. I hope, Gania, you have nothing to say against the prince’s taking
up his abode in your house?”

“Oh, on the contrary! my mother will be very glad,” said Gania,
courteously and kindly.

“I think only one of your rooms is engaged as yet, is it not? That
fellow Ferd-Ferd--”

“Ferdishenko.”

“Yes--I don’t like that Ferdishenko. I can’t understand why Nastasia
Philipovna encourages him so. Is he really her cousin, as he says?”

“Oh dear no, it’s all a joke. No more cousin than I am.”

“Well, what do you think of the arrangement, prince?”

“Thank you, general; you have behaved very kindly to me; all the more
so since I did not ask you to help me. I don’t say that out of pride. I
certainly did not know where to lay my head tonight. Rogojin asked me to
come to his house, of course, but--”

“Rogojin? No, no, my good fellow. I should strongly recommend you,
paternally,--or, if you prefer it, as a friend,--to forget all about
Rogojin, and, in fact, to stick to the family into which you are about
to enter.”

“Thank you,” began the prince; “and since you are so very kind there is
just one matter which I--”

“You must really excuse me,” interrupted the general, “but I positively
haven’t another moment now. I shall just tell Elizabetha Prokofievna
about you, and if she wishes to receive you at once--as I shall advise
her--I strongly recommend you to ingratiate yourself with her at the
first opportunity, for my wife may be of the greatest service to you in
many ways. If she cannot receive you now, you must be content to wait
till another time. Meanwhile you, Gania, just look over these accounts,
will you? We mustn’t forget to finish off that matter--”

The general left the room, and the prince never succeeded in broaching
the business which he had on hand, though he had endeavoured to do so
four times.

Gania lit a cigarette and offered one to the prince. The latter accepted
the offer, but did not talk, being unwilling to disturb Gania’s work.
He commenced to examine the study and its contents. But Gania hardly
so much as glanced at the papers lying before him; he was absent and
thoughtful, and his smile and general appearance struck the prince still
more disagreeably now that the two were left alone together.

Suddenly Gania approached our hero who was at the moment standing over
Nastasia Philipovna’s portrait, gazing at it.

“Do you admire that sort of woman, prince?” he asked, looking intently
at him. He seemed to have some special object in the question.

“It’s a wonderful face,” said the prince, “and I feel sure that her
destiny is not by any means an ordinary, uneventful one. Her face is
smiling enough, but she must have suffered terribly--hasn’t she? Her
eyes show it--those two bones there, the little points under her eyes,
just where the cheek begins. It’s a proud face too, terribly proud! And
I--I can’t say whether she is good and kind, or not. Oh, if she be but
good! That would make all well!”

“And would you marry a woman like that, now?” continued Gania, never
taking his excited eyes off the prince’s face.

“I cannot marry at all,” said the latter. “I am an invalid.”

“Would Rogojin marry her, do you think?”

“Why not? Certainly he would, I should think. He would marry her
tomorrow!--marry her tomorrow and murder her in a week!”

Hardly had the prince uttered the last word when Gania gave such a
fearful shudder that the prince almost cried out.

“What’s the matter?” said he, seizing Gania’s hand.

“Your highness! His excellency begs your presence in her excellency’s
apartments!” announced the footman, appearing at the door.

The prince immediately followed the man out of the room.

IV.

All three of the Miss Epanchins were fine, healthy girls, well-grown,
with good shoulders and busts, and strong--almost masculine--hands;
and, of course, with all the above attributes, they enjoyed capital
appetites, of which they were not in the least ashamed.

Elizabetha Prokofievna sometimes informed the girls that they were
a little too candid in this matter, but in spite of their outward
deference to their mother these three young women, in solemn conclave,
had long agreed to modify the unquestioning obedience which they had
been in the habit of according to her; and Mrs. General Epanchin had
