“Yes, it is really much too late to send to town now,” said Evgenie
Pavlovitch, who had escaped from Aglaya as rapidly as possible. “I am
sure the shops are shut in Petersburg; it is past eight o’clock,” he
added, looking at his watch.

“We have done without him so far,” interrupted Adelaida in her turn.
“Surely we can wait until to-morrow.”

“Besides,” said Colia, “it is quite unusual, almost improper, for
people in our position to take any interest in literature. Ask Evgenie
Pavlovitch if I am not right. It is much more fashionable to drive a
waggonette with red wheels.”

“You got that from some magazine, Colia,” remarked Adelaida.

“He gets most of his conversation in that way,” laughed Evgenie
Pavlovitch. “He borrows whole phrases from the reviews. I have long
had the pleasure of knowing both Nicholai Ardalionovitch and his
conversational methods, but this time he was not repeating something he
had read; he was alluding, no doubt, to my yellow waggonette, which has,
or had, red wheels. But I have exchanged it, so you are rather behind
the times, Colia.”

The prince had been listening attentively to Radomski’s words, and
thought his manner very pleasant. When Colia chaffed him about his
waggonette he had replied with perfect equality and in a friendly
fashion. This pleased Muishkin.

At this moment Vera came up to Lizabetha Prokofievna, carrying several
large and beautifully bound books, apparently quite new.

“What is it?” demanded the lady.

“This is Pushkin,” replied the girl. “Papa told me to offer it to you.”

“What? Impossible!” exclaimed Mrs. Epanchin.

“Not as a present, not as a present! I should not have taken the
liberty,” said Lebedeff, appearing suddenly from behind his daughter.
“It is our own Pushkin, our family copy, Annenkoff’s edition; it could
not be bought now. I beg to suggest, with great respect, that your
excellency should buy it, and thus quench the noble literary thirst
which is consuming you at this moment,” he concluded grandiloquently.

“Oh! if you will sell it, very good--and thank you. You shall not be a
loser! But for goodness’ sake, don’t twist about like that, sir! I have
heard of you; they tell me you are a very learned person. We must have a
talk one of these days. You will bring me the books yourself?”

“With the greatest respect... and... and veneration,” replied Lebedeff,
making extraordinary grimaces.

“Well, bring them, with or without respect, provided always you do not
drop them on the way; but on the condition,” went on the lady, looking
full at him, “that you do not cross my threshold. I do not intend to
receive you today. You may send your daughter Vera at once, if you like.
I am much pleased with her.”

“Why don’t you tell him about them?” said Vera impatiently to her
father. “They will come in, whether you announce them or not, and they
are beginning to make a row. Lef Nicolaievitch,”--she addressed herself
to the prince--“four men are here asking for you. They have waited some
time, and are beginning to make a fuss, and papa will not bring them
in.”

“Who are these people?” said the prince.

“They say that they have come on business, and they are the kind of men,
who, if you do not see them here, will follow you about the street.
It would be better to receive them, and then you will get rid of them.
Gavrila Ardalionovitch and Ptitsin are both there, trying to make them
hear reason.”

“Pavlicheff’s son! It is not worth while!” cried Lebedeff. “There is
no necessity to see them, and it would be most unpleasant for your
excellency. They do not deserve...”

“What? Pavlicheff’s son!” cried the prince, much perturbed. “I know...
I know--but I entrusted this matter to Gavrila Ardalionovitch. He told
me...”

At that moment Gania, accompanied by Ptitsin, came out to the terrace.
From an adjoining room came a noise of angry voices, and General
Ivolgin, in loud tones, seemed to be trying to shout them down. Colia
rushed off at once to investigate the cause of the uproar.

“This is most interesting!” observed Evgenie Pavlovitch.

“I expect he knows all about it!” thought the prince.

“What, the son of Pavlicheff? And who may this son of Pavlicheff be?”
 asked General Epanchin with surprise; and looking curiously around him,
he discovered that he alone had no clue to the mystery. Expectation and
suspense were on every face, with the exception of that of the prince,
who stood gravely wondering how an affair so entirely personal could
have awakened such lively and widespread interest in so short a time.

Aglaya went up to him with a peculiarly serious look.

“It will be well,” she said, “if you put an end to this affair yourself
_at once_: but you must allow us to be your witnesses. They want to throw
mud at you, prince, and you must be triumphantly vindicated. I give you
joy beforehand!”

“And I also wish for justice to be done, once for all,” cried Madame
Epanchin, “about this impudent claim. Deal with them promptly, prince,
and don’t spare them! I am sick of hearing about the affair, and many a
quarrel I have had in your cause. But I confess I am anxious to see what
happens, so do make them come out here, and we will remain. You have
heard people talking about it, no doubt?” she added, turning to Prince
S.

“Of course,” said he. “I have heard it spoken about at your house, and I
am anxious to see these young men!”

“They are Nihilists, are they not?”

“No, they are not Nihilists,” explained Lebedeff, who seemed much
excited. “This is another lot--a special group. According to my nephew
they are more advanced even than the Nihilists. You are quite wrong,
excellency, if you think that your presence will intimidate them;
nothing intimidates them. Educated men, learned men even, are to be
found among Nihilists; these go further, in that they are men of action.
The movement is, properly speaking, a derivative from Nihilism--though
they are only known indirectly, and by hearsay, for they never advertise
their doings in the papers. They go straight to the point. For them, it
is not a question of showing that Pushkin is stupid, or that Russia must
be torn in pieces. No; but if they have a great desire for anything,
they believe they have a right to get it even at the cost of the lives,
say, of eight persons. They are checked by no obstacles. In fact,
prince, I should not advise you...”

But Muishkin had risen, and was on his way to open the door for his
visitors.

“You are slandering them, Lebedeff,” said he, smiling.

“You are always thinking about your nephew’s conduct. Don’t believe
him, Lizabetha Prokofievna. I can assure you Gorsky and Daniloff are
exceptions--and that these are only... mistaken. However, I do not care
about receiving them here, in public. Excuse me, Lizabetha Prokofievna.
They are coming, and you can see them, and then I will take them away.
Please come in, gentlemen!”

Another thought tormented him: He wondered was this an arranged
business--arranged to happen when he had guests in his house, and in
anticipation of his humiliation rather than of his triumph? But he
reproached himself bitterly for such a thought, and felt as if he should
die of shame if it were discovered. When his new visitors appeared, he
was quite ready to believe himself infinitely less to be respected than
