
“Marie was very gentle to her mother, and nursed her, and did everything
for her; but the old woman accepted all her services without a word
and never showed her the slightest kindness. Marie bore all this; and
I could see when I got to know her that she thought it quite right and
fitting, considering herself the lowest and meanest of creatures.

“When the old woman took to her bed finally, the other old women in the
village sat with her by turns, as the custom is there; and then Marie
was quite driven out of the house. They gave her no food at all, and she
could not get any work in the village; none would employ her. The men
seemed to consider her no longer a woman, they said such dreadful things
to her. Sometimes on Sundays, if they were drunk enough, they used to
throw her a penny or two, into the mud, and Marie would silently pick up
the money. She had began to spit blood at that time.

“At last her rags became so tattered and torn that she was ashamed of
appearing in the village any longer. The children used to pelt her with
mud; so she begged to be taken on as assistant cowherd, but the cowherd
would not have her. Then she took to helping him without leave; and he
saw how valuable her assistance was to him, and did not drive her away
again; on the contrary, he occasionally gave her the remnants of his
dinner, bread and cheese. He considered that he was being very kind.
When the mother died, the village parson was not ashamed to hold Marie
up to public derision and shame. Marie was standing at the coffin’s
head, in all her rags, crying.

“A crowd of people had collected to see how she would cry. The parson,
a young fellow ambitious of becoming a great preacher, began his sermon
and pointed to Marie. ‘There,’ he said, ‘there is the cause of the death
of this venerable woman’--(which was a lie, because she had been ill for
at least two years)--‘there she stands before you, and dares not lift
her eyes from the ground, because she knows that the finger of God is
upon her. Look at her tatters and rags--the badge of those who lose
their virtue. Who is she? her daughter!’ and so on to the end.

“And just fancy, this infamy pleased them, all of them, nearly. Only the
children had altered--for then they were all on my side and had learned
to love Marie.

“This is how it was: I had wished to do something for Marie; I longed to
give her some money, but I never had a farthing while I was there. But
I had a little diamond pin, and this I sold to a travelling pedlar; he
gave me eight francs for it--it was worth at least forty.

“I long sought to meet Marie alone; and at last I did meet her, on the
hillside beyond the village. I gave her the eight francs and asked her
to take care of the money because I could get no more; and then I kissed
her and said that she was not to suppose I kissed her with any evil
motives or because I was in love with her, for that I did so solely out
of pity for her, and because from the first I had not accounted her as
guilty so much as unfortunate. I longed to console and encourage her
somehow, and to assure her that she was not the low, base thing which
she and others strove to make out; but I don’t think she understood me.
She stood before me, dreadfully ashamed of herself, and with downcast
eyes; and when I had finished she kissed my hand. I would have kissed
hers, but she drew it away. Just at this moment the whole troop of
children saw us. (I found out afterwards that they had long kept a
watch upon me.) They all began whistling and clapping their hands, and
laughing at us. Marie ran away at once; and when I tried to talk to
them, they threw stones at me. All the village heard of it the same day,
and Marie’s position became worse than ever. The children would not let
her pass now in the streets, but annoyed her and threw dirt at her more
than before. They used to run after her--she racing away with her poor
feeble lungs panting and gasping, and they pelting her and shouting
abuse at her.

“Once I had to interfere by force; and after that I took to speaking
to them every day and whenever I could. Occasionally they stopped and
listened; but they teased Marie all the same.

“I told them how unhappy Marie was, and after a while they stopped their
abuse of her, and let her go by silently. Little by little we got into
the way of conversing together, the children and I. I concealed nothing
from them, I told them all. They listened very attentively and soon
began to be sorry for Marie. At last some of them took to saying
‘Good-morning’ to her, kindly, when they met her. It is the custom there
to salute anyone you meet with ‘Good-morning’ whether acquainted or not.
I can imagine how astonished Marie was at these first greetings from the
children.

“Once two little girls got hold of some food and took it to her, and
came back and told me. They said she had burst into tears, and that they
loved her very much now. Very soon after that they all became fond of
Marie, and at the same time they began to develop the greatest affection
for myself. They often came to me and begged me to tell them stories. I
think I must have told stories well, for they did so love to hear them.
At last I took to reading up interesting things on purpose to pass them
on to the little ones, and this went on for all the rest of my time
there, three years. Later, when everyone--even Schneider--was angry with
me for hiding nothing from the children, I pointed out how foolish it
was, for they always knew things, only they learnt them in a way that
soiled their minds but not so from me. One has only to remember one’s
own childhood to admit the truth of this. But nobody was convinced... It
was two weeks before her mother died that I had kissed Marie; and when
the clergyman preached that sermon the children were all on my side.

“When I told them what a shame it was of the parson to talk as he had
done, and explained my reason, they were so angry that some of them went
and broke his windows with stones. Of course I stopped them, for that
was not right, but all the village heard of it, and how I caught it for
spoiling the children! Everyone discovered now that the little ones had
taken to being fond of Marie, and their parents were terribly alarmed;
but Marie was so happy. The children were forbidden to meet her; but
they used to run out of the village to the herd and take her food and
things; and sometimes just ran off there and kissed her, and said,
‘_Je vous aime, Marie!_’ and then trotted back again. They imagined
that I was in love with Marie, and this was the only point on which
I did not undeceive them, for they got such enjoyment out of it. And
what delicacy and tenderness they showed!

“In the evening I used to walk to the waterfall. There was a spot there
which was quite closed in and hidden from view by large trees; and to
this spot the children used to come to me. They could not bear that
their dear Leon should love a poor girl without shoes to her feet and
dressed all in rags and tatters. So, would you believe it, they actually
clubbed together, somehow, and bought her shoes and stockings, and some
linen, and even a dress! I can’t understand how they managed it, but
they did it, all together. When I asked them about it they only laughed
and shouted, and the little girls clapped their hands and kissed me. I
sometimes went to see Marie secretly, too. She had become very ill, and
could hardly walk. She still went with the herd, but could not help the
herdsman any longer. She used to sit on a stone near, and wait there
almost motionless all day, till the herd went home. Her consumption was
so advanced, and she was so weak, that she used to sit with closed eyes,
breathing heavily. Her face was as thin as a skeleton’s, and sweat used
to stand on her white brow in large drops. I always found her sitting
just like that. I used to come up quietly to look at her; but Marie
would hear me, open her eyes, and tremble violently as she kissed my
hands. I did not take my hand away because it made her happy to have it,
and so she would sit and cry quietly. Sometimes she tried to speak; but
it was very difficult to understand her. She was almost like a madwoman,
with excitement and ecstasy, whenever I came. Occasionally the children
came with me; when they did so, they would stand some way off and keep
guard over us, so as to tell me if anybody came near. This was a great
pleasure to them.

“When we left her, Marie used to relapse at once into her old condition,
and sit with closed eyes and motionless limbs. One day she could not
go out at all, and remained at home all alone in the empty hut; but
the children very soon became aware of the fact, and nearly all of them
visited her that day as she lay alone and helpless in her miserable bed.

“For two days the children looked after her, and then, when the village
people got to know that Marie was really dying, some of the old women
came and took it in turns to sit by her and look after her a bit. I
think they began to be a little sorry for her in the village at last;
at all events they did not interfere with the children any more, on her
account.

