continued with some excitement, “the whole thing is a calumny, a dirty
calumny. It is simply a plot, an intrigue, to upset our plans and to
stir up a quarrel. You see, prince, I’ll tell you privately, Evgenie and
ourselves have not said a word yet, we have no formal understanding, we
are in no way bound on either side, but the word may be said very soon,
don’t you see, _very_ soon, and all this is most injurious, and is meant
to be so. Why? I’m sure I can’t tell you. She’s an extraordinary woman,
you see, an eccentric woman; I tell you I am so frightened of that woman
that I can’t sleep. What a carriage that was, and where did it come
from, eh? I declare, I was base enough to suspect Evgenie at first; but
it seems certain that that cannot be the case, and if so, why is she
interfering here? That’s the riddle, what does she want? Is it to keep
Evgenie to herself? But, my dear fellow, I swear to you, I swear he
doesn’t even _know_ her, and as for those bills, why, the whole thing is
an invention! And the familiarity of the woman! It’s quite clear we must
treat the impudent creature’s attempt with disdain, and redouble our
courtesy towards Evgenie. I told my wife so.

“Now I’ll tell you my secret conviction. I’m certain that she’s doing
this to revenge herself on me, on account of the past, though I assure
you that all the time I was blameless. I blush at the very idea. And
now she turns up again like this, when I thought she had finally
disappeared! Where’s Rogojin all this time? I thought she was Mrs.
Rogojin, long ago.”

The old man was in a state of great mental perturbation. The whole of
the journey, which occupied nearly an hour, he continued in this strain,
putting questions and answering them himself, shrugging his shoulders,
pressing the prince’s hand, and assuring the latter that, at all
events, he had no suspicion whatever of _him_. This last assurance was
satisfactory, at all events. The general finished by informing him that
Evgenie’s uncle was head of one of the civil service departments, and
rich, very rich, and a gourmand. “And, well, Heaven preserve him, of
course--but Evgenie gets his money, don’t you see? But, for all this,
I’m uncomfortable, I don’t know why. There’s something in the air, I
feel there’s something nasty in the air, like a bat, and I’m by no means
comfortable.”

And it was not until the third day that the formal reconciliation
between the prince and the Epanchins took place, as said before.

XII.

It was seven in the evening, and the prince was just preparing to go
out for a walk in the park, when suddenly Mrs. Epanchin appeared on the
terrace.

“In the first place, don’t dare to suppose,” she began, “that I am going
to apologize. Nonsense! You were entirely to blame.”

The prince remained silent.

“Were you to blame, or not?”

“No, certainly not, no more than yourself, though at first I thought I
was.”

“Oh, very well, let’s sit down, at all events, for I don’t intend to
stand up all day. And remember, if you say, one word about ‘mischievous
urchins,’ I shall go away and break with you altogether. Now then, did
you, or did you not, send a letter to Aglaya, a couple of months or so
ago, about Easter-tide?”

“Yes!”

“What for? What was your object? Show me the letter.” Mrs. Epanchin’s
eyes flashed; she was almost trembling with impatience.

“I have not got the letter,” said the prince, timidly, extremely
surprised at the turn the conversation had taken. “If anyone has it, if
it still exists, Aglaya Ivanovna must have it.”

“No finessing, please. What did you write about?”

“I am not finessing, and I am not in the least afraid of telling you;
but I don’t see the slightest reason why I should not have written.”

“Be quiet, you can talk afterwards! What was the letter about? Why are
you blushing?”

The prince was silent. At last he spoke.

“I don’t understand your thoughts, Lizabetha Prokofievna; but I can see
that the fact of my having written is for some reason repugnant to you.
You must admit that I have a perfect right to refuse to answer your
questions; but, in order to show you that I am neither ashamed of
the letter, nor sorry that I wrote it, and that I am not in the least
inclined to blush about it” (here the prince’s blushes redoubled), “I
will repeat the substance of my letter, for I think I know it almost by
heart.”

So saying, the prince repeated the letter almost word for word, as he
had written it.

“My goodness, what utter twaddle, and what may all this nonsense have
signified, pray? If it had any meaning at all!” said Mrs. Epanchin,
cuttingly, after having listened with great attention.

“I really don’t absolutely know myself; I know my feeling was very
sincere. I had moments at that time full of life and hope.”

“What sort of hope?”

“It is difficult to explain, but certainly not the hopes you have in
your mind. Hopes--well, in a word, hopes for the future, and a feeling
of joy that _there_, at all events, I was not entirely a stranger and a
foreigner. I felt an ecstasy in being in my native land once more; and
one sunny morning I took up a pen and wrote her that letter, but why to
_her_, I don’t quite know. Sometimes one longs to have a friend near, and
I evidently felt the need of one then,” added the prince, and paused.

“Are you in love with her?”

“N-no! I wrote to her as to a sister; I signed myself her brother.”

“Oh yes, of course, on purpose! I quite understand.”

“It is very painful to me to answer these questions, Lizabetha
Prokofievna.”

“I dare say it is; but that’s no affair of mine. Now then, assure me
truly as before Heaven, are you lying to me or not?”

“No, I am not lying.”

“Are you telling the truth when you say you are not in love?”

“I believe it is the absolute truth.”

“‘I believe,’ indeed! Did that mischievous urchin give it to her?”

“I asked Nicolai Ardalionovitch...”

“The urchin! the urchin!” interrupted Lizabetha Prokofievna in an angry
voice. “I do not want to know if it were Nicolai Ardalionovitch! The
urchin!”

“Nicolai Ardalionovitch...”

“The urchin, I tell you!”

“No, it was not the urchin: it was Nicolai Ardalionovitch,” said the
prince very firmly, but without raising his voice.

“Well, all right! All right, my dear! I shall put that down to your
account.”

She was silent a moment to get breath, and to recover her composure.

“Well!--and what’s the meaning of the ‘poor knight,’ eh?”
