“I think you disturb yourself too much.”

“What an extraordinary person you are, prince! Do you mean to say that
you doubt the fact that he is capable of murdering ten men?”

“I daren’t say, one way or the other; all this is very strange--but--”

“Well, as you like, just as you like,” said Evgenie Pavlovitch,
irritably. “Only you are such a plucky fellow, take care you don’t get
included among the ten victims!”

“Oh, he is much more likely not to kill anyone at all,” said the prince,
gazing thoughtfully at Evgenie. The latter laughed disagreeably.

“Well, _au revoir!_ Did you observe that he ‘willed’ a copy of his
confession to Aglaya Ivanovna?”

“Yes, I did; I am thinking of it.”

“In connection with ‘the ten,’ eh?” laughed Evgenie, as he left the
room.

An hour later, towards four o’clock, the prince went into the park.
He had endeavoured to fall asleep, but could not, owing to the painful
beating of his heart.

He had left things quiet and peaceful; the invalid was fast asleep, and
the doctor, who had been called in, had stated that there was no special
danger. Lebedeff, Colia, and Burdovsky were lying down in the sick-room,
ready to take it in turns to watch. There was nothing to fear,
therefore, at home.

But the prince’s mental perturbation increased every moment. He wandered
about the park, looking absently around him, and paused in astonishment
when he suddenly found himself in the empty space with the rows of
chairs round it, near the Vauxhall. The look of the place struck him
as dreadful now: so he turned round and went by the path which he had
followed with the Epanchins on the way to the band, until he reached the
green bench which Aglaya had pointed out for their rendezvous. He sat
down on it and suddenly burst into a loud fit of laughter, immediately
followed by a feeling of irritation. His disturbance of mind continued;
he felt that he must go away somewhere, anywhere.

Above his head some little bird sang out, of a sudden; he began to peer
about for it among the leaves. Suddenly the bird darted out of the tree
and away, and instantly he thought of the “fly buzzing about in the
sun’s rays” that Hippolyte had talked of; how that it knew its place
and was a participator in the universal life, while he alone was an
“outcast.” This picture had impressed him at the time, and he meditated
upon it now. An old, forgotten memory awoke in his brain, and suddenly
burst into clearness and light. It was a recollection of Switzerland,
during the first year of his cure, the very first months. At that time
he had been pretty nearly an idiot still; he could not speak properly,
and had difficulty in understanding when others spoke to him. He climbed
the mountain-side, one sunny morning, and wandered long and aimlessly
with a certain thought in his brain, which would not become clear. Above
him was the blazing sky, below, the lake; all around was the horizon,
clear and infinite. He looked out upon this, long and anxiously. He
remembered how he had stretched out his arms towards the beautiful,
boundless blue of the horizon, and wept, and wept. What had so tormented
him was the idea that he was a stranger to all this, that he was outside
this glorious festival.

What was this universe? What was this grand, eternal pageant to which
he had yearned from his childhood up, and in which he could never take
part? Every morning the same magnificent sun; every morning the
same rainbow in the waterfall; every evening the same glow on the
snow-mountains.

Every little fly that buzzed in the sun’s rays was a singer in the
universal chorus, “knew its place, and was happy in it.” Every blade of
grass grew and was happy. Everything knew its path and loved it, went
forth with a song and returned with a song; only he knew nothing,
understood nothing, neither men nor words, nor any of nature’s voices;
he was a stranger and an outcast.

Oh, he could not then speak these words, or express all he felt! He had
been tormented dumbly; but now it appeared to him that he must have
said these very words--even then--and that Hippolyte must have taken his
picture of the little fly from his tears and words of that time.

He was sure of it, and his heart beat excitedly at the thought, he knew
not why.

He fell asleep on the bench; but his mental disquiet continued through
his slumbers.

Just before he dozed off, the idea of Hippolyte murdering ten men
flitted through his brain, and he smiled at the absurdity of such a
thought.

Around him all was quiet; only the flutter and whisper of the leaves
broke the silence, but broke it only to cause it to appear yet more deep
and still.

He dreamed many dreams as he sat there, and all were full of disquiet,
so that he shuddered every moment.

At length a woman seemed to approach him. He knew her, oh! he knew her
only too well. He could always name her and recognize her anywhere; but,
strange, she seemed to have quite a different face from hers, as he had
known it, and he felt a tormenting desire to be able to say she was not
the same woman. In the face before him there was such dreadful remorse
and horror that he thought she must be a criminal, that she must have
just committed some awful crime.

Tears were trembling on her white cheek. She beckoned him, but placed
her finger on her lip as though to warn him that he must follow her very
quietly. His heart froze within him. He wouldn’t, he _couldn’t_ confess
her to be a criminal, and yet he felt that something dreadful would
happen the next moment, something which would blast his whole life.

She seemed to wish to show him something, not far off, in the park.

He rose from his seat in order to follow her, when a bright, clear peal
of laughter rang out by his side. He felt somebody’s hand suddenly in
his own, seized it, pressed it hard, and awoke. Before him stood Aglaya,
laughing aloud.

VIII.

She laughed, but she was rather angry too.

“He’s asleep! You were asleep,” she said, with contemptuous surprise.

“Is it really you?” muttered the prince, not quite himself as yet,
and recognizing her with a start of amazement. “Oh yes, of course,” he
added, “this is our rendezvous. I fell asleep here.”

“So I saw.”

“Did no one awake me besides yourself? Was there no one else here? I
thought there was another woman.”

“There was another woman here?”

At last he was wide awake.

“It was a dream, of course,” he said, musingly. “Strange that I should
have a dream like that at such a moment. Sit down--”

He took her hand and seated her on the bench; then sat down beside her
and reflected.

Aglaya did not begin the conversation, but contented herself with
watching her companion intently.

He looked back at her, but at times it was clear that he did not see her
and was not thinking of her.

