latest.

So next day the prince was expected all the morning, and at dinner, tea,
and supper; and when he did not appear in the evening, Mrs. Epanchin
quarrelled with everyone in the house, finding plenty of pretexts
without so much as mentioning the prince’s name.

On the third day there was no talk of him at all, until Aglaya remarked
at dinner: “Mamma is cross because the prince hasn’t turned up,” to
which the general replied that it was not his fault.

Mrs. Epanchin misunderstood the observation, and rising from her place
she left the room in majestic wrath. In the evening, however, Colia came
with the story of the prince’s adventures, so far as he knew them. Mrs.
Epanchin was triumphant; although Colia had to listen to a long lecture.
“He idles about here the whole day long, one can’t get rid of him; and
then when he is wanted he does not come. He might have sent a line if he
did not wish to inconvenience himself.”

At the words “one can’t get rid of him,” Colia was very angry, and
nearly flew into a rage; but he resolved to be quiet for the time and
show his resentment later. If the words had been less offensive he
might have forgiven them, so pleased was he to see Lizabetha Prokofievna
worried and anxious about the prince’s illness.

She would have insisted on sending to Petersburg at once, for a certain
great medical celebrity; but her daughters dissuaded her, though they
were not willing to stay behind when she at once prepared to go and
visit the invalid. Aglaya, however, suggested that it was a little
unceremonious to go _en masse_ to see him.

“Very well then, stay at home,” said Mrs. Epanchin, “and a good thing
too, for Evgenie Pavlovitch is coming down and there will be no one at
home to receive him.”

Of course, after this, Aglaya went with the rest. In fact, she had never
had the slightest intention of doing otherwise.

Prince S., who was in the house, was requested to escort the ladies.
He had been much interested when he first heard of the prince from the
Epanchins. It appeared that they had known one another before, and had
spent some time together in a little provincial town three months
ago. Prince S. had greatly taken to him, and was delighted with the
opportunity of meeting him again.

The general had not come down from town as yet, nor had Evgenie
Pavlovitch arrived.

It was not more than two or three hundred yards from the Epanchins’
house to Lebedeff’s. The first disagreeable impression experienced by
Mrs. Epanchin was to find the prince surrounded by a whole assembly of
other guests--not to mention the fact that some of those present were
particularly detestable in her eyes. The next annoying circumstance was
when an apparently strong and healthy young fellow, well dressed,
and smiling, came forward to meet her on the terrace, instead of the
half-dying unfortunate whom she had expected to see.

She was astonished and vexed, and her disappointment pleased Colia
immensely. Of course he could have undeceived her before she started,
but the mischievous boy had been careful not to do that, foreseeing the
probably laughable disgust that she would experience when she found her
dear friend, the prince, in good health. Colia was indelicate enough to
voice the delight he felt at his success in managing to annoy Lizabetha
Prokofievna, with whom, in spite of their really amicable relations, he
was constantly sparring.

“Just wait a while, my boy!” said she; “don’t be too certain of your
triumph.” And she sat down heavily, in the arm-chair pushed forward by
the prince.

Lebedeff, Ptitsin, and General Ivolgin hastened to find chairs for
the young ladies. Varia greeted them joyfully, and they exchanged
confidences in ecstatic whispers.

“I must admit, prince, I was a little put out to see you up and about
like this--I expected to find you in bed; but I give you my word, I was
only annoyed for an instant, before I collected my thoughts properly. I
am always wiser on second thoughts, and I dare say you are the same.
I assure you I am as glad to see you well as though you were my own
son,--yes, and more; and if you don’t believe me the more shame to you,
and it’s not my fault. But that spiteful boy delights in playing all
sorts of tricks. You are his patron, it seems. Well, I warn you that
one fine morning I shall deprive myself of the pleasure of his further
acquaintance.”

“What have I done wrong now?” cried Colia. “What was the good of telling
you that the prince was nearly well again? You would not have believed
me; it was so much more interesting to picture him on his death-bed.”

“How long do you remain here, prince?” asked Madame Epanchin.

“All the summer, and perhaps longer.”

“You are alone, aren’t you,--not married?”

“No, I’m not married!” replied the prince, smiling at the ingenuousness
of this little feeler.

“Oh, you needn’t laugh! These things do happen, you know! Now then--why
didn’t you come to us? We have a wing quite empty. But just as you like,
of course. Do you lease it from _him?_--this fellow, I mean,” she added,
nodding towards Lebedeff. “And why does he always wriggle so?”

At that moment Vera, carrying the baby in her arms as usual, came out of
the house, on to the terrace. Lebedeff kept fidgeting among the chairs,
and did not seem to know what to do with himself, though he had no
intention of going away. He no sooner caught sight of his daughter, than
he rushed in her direction, waving his arms to keep her away; he even
forgot himself so far as to stamp his foot.

“Is he mad?” asked Madame Epanchin suddenly.

“No, he...”

“Perhaps he is drunk? Your company is rather peculiar,” she added, with
a glance at the other guests....

“But what a pretty girl! Who is she?”

“That is Lebedeff’s daughter--Vera Lukianovna.”

“Indeed? She looks very sweet. I should like to make her acquaintance.”

The words were hardly out of her mouth, when Lebedeff dragged Vera
forward, in order to present her.

“Orphans, poor orphans!” he began in a pathetic voice.

“The child she carries is an orphan, too. She is Vera’s sister, my
daughter Luboff. The day this babe was born, six weeks ago, my wife
died, by the will of God Almighty.... Yes... Vera takes her mother’s
place, though she is but her sister... nothing more... nothing more...”

“And you! You are nothing more than a fool, if you’ll excuse me! Well!
well! you know that yourself, I expect,” said the lady indignantly.

Lebedeff bowed low. “It is the truth,” he replied, with extreme respect.

“Oh, Mr. Lebedeff, I am told you lecture on the Apocalypse. Is it true?”
 asked Aglaya.

“Yes, that is so... for the last fifteen years.”

“I have heard of you, and I think read of you in the newspapers.”

“No, that was another commentator, whom the papers named. He is dead,
however, and I have taken his place,” said the other, much delighted.

“We are neighbours, so will you be so kind as to come over one day and
explain the Apocalypse to me?” said Aglaya. “I do not understand it in
