hedgehog’s basket violently to and fro, she called out to him from the
verandah, as if they had never quarrelled: “Colia, dear, please take
care not to drop him!” Colia appeared to have no grudge against her,
either, for he stopped, and answered most cordially: “No, I will not
drop him! Don’t be afraid, Aglaya Ivanovna!” After which he went on his
way. Aglaya burst out laughing and ran up to her room, highly delighted.
Her good spirits lasted the whole day.

All this filled poor Lizabetha’s mind with chaotic confusion. What on
earth did it all mean? The most disturbing feature was the hedgehog.
What was the symbolic signification of a hedgehog? What did they
understand by it? What underlay it? Was it a cryptic message?

Poor General Epanchin “put his foot in it” by answering the above
questions in his own way. He said there was no cryptic message at
all. As for the hedgehog, it was just a hedgehog, which meant
nothing--unless, indeed, it was a pledge of friendship,--the sign of
forgetting of offences and so on. At all events, it was a joke, and, of
course, a most pardonable and innocent one.

We may as well remark that the general had guessed perfectly accurately.

The prince, returning home from the interview with Aglaya, had sat
gloomy and depressed for half an hour. He was almost in despair when
Colia arrived with the hedgehog.

Then the sky cleared in a moment. The prince seemed to arise from the
dead; he asked Colia all about it, made him repeat the story over and
over again, and laughed and shook hands with the boys in his delight.

It seemed clear to the prince that Aglaya forgave him, and that he might
go there again this very evening; and in his eyes that was not only the
main thing, but everything in the world.

“What children we are still, Colia!” he cried at last,
enthusiastically,--“and how delightful it is that we can be children
still!”

“Simply--my dear prince,--simply she is in love with you,--that’s the
whole of the secret!” replied Colia, with authority.

The prince blushed, but this time he said nothing. Colia burst out
laughing and clapped his hands. A minute later the prince laughed too,
and from this moment until the evening he looked at his watch every
other minute to see how much time he had to wait before evening came.

But the situation was becoming rapidly critical.

Mrs. Epanchin could bear her suspense no longer, and in spite of the
opposition of husband and daughters, she sent for Aglaya, determined to
get a straightforward answer out of her, once for all.

“Otherwise,” she observed hysterically, “I shall die before evening.”

It was only now that everyone realized to what a ridiculous dead-lock
the whole matter had been brought. Excepting feigned surprise,
indignation, laughter, and jeering--both at the prince and at everyone
who asked her questions,--nothing could be got out of Aglaya.

Lizabetha Prokofievna went to bed and only rose again in time for tea,
when the prince might be expected.

She awaited him in trembling agitation; and when he at last arrived she
nearly went off into hysterics.

Muishkin himself came in very timidly. He seemed to feel his way, and
looked in each person’s eyes in a questioning way,--for Aglaya was
absent, which fact alarmed him at once.

This evening there were no strangers present--no one but the immediate
members of the family. Prince S. was still in town, occupied with the
affairs of Evgenie Pavlovitch’s uncle.

“I wish at least _he_ would come and say something!” complained poor
Lizabetha Prokofievna.

The general sat still with a most preoccupied air. The sisters were
looking very serious and did not speak a word, and Lizabetha Prokofievna
did not know how to commence the conversation.

At length she plunged into an energetic and hostile criticism of
railways, and glared at the prince defiantly.

Alas Aglaya still did not come--and the prince was quite lost. He had
the greatest difficulty in expressing his opinion that railways were
most useful institutions,--and in the middle of his speech Adelaida
laughed, which threw him into a still worse state of confusion.

At this moment in marched Aglaya, as calm and collected as could be.
She gave the prince a ceremonious bow and solemnly took up a
prominent position near the big round table. She looked at the prince
questioningly.

All present realized that the moment for the settlement of perplexities
had arrived.

“Did you get my hedgehog?” she inquired, firmly and almost angrily.

“Yes, I got it,” said the prince, blushing.

“Tell us now, at once, what you made of the present? I must have you
answer this question for mother’s sake; she needs pacifying, and so do
all the rest of the family!”

“Look here, Aglaya--” began the general.

“This--this is going beyond all limits!” said Lizabetha Prokofievna,
suddenly alarmed.

“It is not in the least beyond all limits, mamma!” said her daughter,
firmly. “I sent the prince a hedgehog this morning, and I wish to hear
his opinion of it. Go on, prince.”

“What--what sort of opinion, Aglaya Ivanovna?”

“About the hedgehog.”

“That is--I suppose you wish to know how I received the hedgehog, Aglaya
Ivanovna,--or, I should say, how I regarded your sending him to me? In
that case, I may tell you--in a word--that I--in fact--”

He paused, breathless.

“Come--you haven’t told us much!” said Aglaya, after waiting some five
seconds. “Very well, I am ready to drop the hedgehog, if you like; but
I am anxious to be able to clear up this accumulation of
misunderstandings. Allow me to ask you, prince,--I wish to hear from
you, personally--are you making me an offer, or not?”

“Gracious heavens!” exclaimed Lizabetha Prokofievna. The prince started.
The general stiffened in his chair; the sisters frowned.

“Don’t deceive me now, prince--tell the truth. All these people
persecute me with astounding questions--about you. Is there any ground
for all these questions, or not? Come!”

“I have not asked you to marry me yet, Aglaya Ivanovna,” said the
prince, becoming suddenly animated; “but you know yourself how much I
love you and trust you.”

“No--I asked you this--answer this! Do you intend to ask for my hand, or
not?”

“Yes--I do ask for it!” said the prince, more dead than alive now.

There was a general stir in the room.

“No--no--my dear girl,” began the general. “You cannot proceed like
this, Aglaya, if that’s how the matter stands. It’s impossible. Prince,
forgive it, my dear fellow, but--Lizabetha Prokofievna!”--he appealed to
