generally far more complicated than we are apt to suppose, and that we
can very rarely accurately describe the motives of another. It is much
better for the writer, as a rule, to content himself with the bare
statement of events; and we shall take this line with regard to the
catastrophe recorded above, and shall state the remaining events
connected with the general’s trouble shortly, because we feel that
we have already given to this secondary character in our story more
attention than we originally intended.

The course of events had marched in the following order. When Lebedeff
returned, in company with the general, after their expedition to town a
few days since, for the purpose of investigation, he brought the prince
no information whatever. If the latter had not himself been occupied
with other thoughts and impressions at the time, he must have observed
that Lebedeff not only was very uncommunicative, but even appeared
anxious to avoid him.

When the prince did give the matter a little attention, he recalled
the fact that during these days he had always found Lebedeff to be in
radiantly good spirits, when they happened to meet; and further, that
the general and Lebedeff were always together. The two friends did not
seem ever to be parted for a moment.

Occasionally the prince heard loud talking and laughing upstairs, and
once he detected the sound of a jolly soldier’s song going on above, and
recognized the unmistakable bass of the general’s voice. But the sudden
outbreak of song did not last; and for an hour afterwards the animated
sound of apparently drunken conversation continued to be heard from
above. At length there was the clearest evidence of a grand mutual
embracing, and someone burst into tears. Shortly after this, however,
there was a violent but short-lived quarrel, with loud talking on both
sides.

All these days Colia had been in a state of great mental preoccupation.
Muishkin was usually out all day, and only came home late at night. On
his return he was invariably informed that Colia had been looking for
him. However, when they did meet, Colia never had anything particular to
tell him, excepting that he was highly dissatisfied with the general and
his present condition of mind and behaviour.

“They drag each other about the place,” he said, “and get drunk together
at the pub close by here, and quarrel in the street on the way home, and
embrace one another after it, and don’t seem to part for a moment.”

When the prince pointed out that there was nothing new about that, for
that they had always behaved in this manner together, Colia did not know
what to say; in fact he could not explain what it was that specially
worried him, just now, about his father.

On the morning following the bacchanalian songs and quarrels recorded
above, as the prince stepped out of the house at about eleven o’clock,
the general suddenly appeared before him, much agitated.

“I have long sought the honour and opportunity of meeting
you--much-esteemed Lef Nicolaievitch,” he murmured, pressing the
prince’s hand very hard, almost painfully so; “long--very long.”

The prince begged him to step in and sit down.

“No--I will not sit down,--I am keeping you, I see,--another time!--I
think I may be permitted to congratulate you upon the realization of
your heart’s best wishes, is it not so?”

“What best wishes?”

The prince blushed. He thought, as so many in his position do, that
nobody had seen, heard, noticed, or understood anything.

“Oh--be easy, sir, be easy! I shall not wound your tenderest feelings.
I’ve been through it all myself, and I know well how unpleasant it is
when an outsider sticks his nose in where he is not wanted. I experience
this every morning. I came to speak to you about another matter, though,
an important matter. A very important matter, prince.”

The latter requested him to take a seat once more, and sat down himself.

“Well--just for one second, then. The fact is, I came for advice. Of
course I live now without any very practical objects in life; but,
being full of self-respect, in which quality the ordinary Russian is so
deficient as a rule, and of activity, I am desirous, in a word, prince,
of placing myself and my wife and children in a position of--in fact, I
want advice.”

The prince commended his aspirations with warmth.

“Quite so--quite so! But this is all mere nonsense. I came here to speak
of something quite different, something very important, prince. And
I have determined to come to you as to a man in whose sincerity and
nobility of feeling I can trust like--like--are you surprised at my
words, prince?”

The prince was watching his guest, if not with much surprise, at all
events with great attention and curiosity.

The old man was very pale; every now and then his lips trembled, and his
hands seemed unable to rest quietly, but continually moved from place to
place. He had twice already jumped up from his chair and sat down again
without being in the least aware of it. He would take up a book from
the table and open it--talking all the while,--look at the heading of a
chapter, shut it and put it back again, seizing another immediately, but
holding it unopened in his hand, and waving it in the air as he spoke.

“But enough!” he cried, suddenly. “I see I have been boring you with
my--”

“Not in the least--not in the least, I assure you. On the contrary, I am
listening most attentively, and am anxious to guess--”

“Prince, I wish to place myself in a respectable position--I wish to
esteem myself--and to--”

“My dear sir, a man of such noble aspirations is worthy of all esteem by
virtue of those aspirations alone.”

The prince brought out his “copy-book sentence” in the firm belief that
it would produce a good effect. He felt instinctively that some such
well-sounding humbug, brought out at the proper moment, would soothe the
old man’s feelings, and would be specially acceptable to such a man in
such a position. At all hazards, his guest must be despatched with heart
relieved and spirit comforted; that was the problem before the prince at
this moment.

The phrase flattered the general, touched him, and pleased him mightily.
He immediately changed his tone, and started off on a long and solemn
explanation. But listen as he would, the prince could make neither head
nor tail of it.

The general spoke hotly and quickly for ten minutes; he spoke as though
his words could not keep pace with his crowding thoughts. Tears stood
in his eyes, and yet his speech was nothing but a collection of
disconnected sentences, without beginning and without end--a string of
unexpected words and unexpected sentiments--colliding with one another,
and jumping over one another, as they burst from his lips.

“Enough!” he concluded at last, “you understand me, and that is the
great thing. A heart like yours cannot help understanding the sufferings
of another. Prince, you are the ideal of generosity; what are other men
beside yourself? But you are young--accept my blessing! My
principal object is to beg you to fix an hour for a most important
conversation--that is my great hope, prince. My heart needs but a little
friendship and sympathy, and yet I cannot always find means to satisfy
it.”

“But why not now? I am ready to listen, and--”

“No, no--prince, not now! Now is a dream! And it is too, too important!
It is to be the hour of Fate to me--_my own_ hour. Our interview is not
to be broken in upon by every chance comer, every impertinent guest--and
there are plenty of such stupid, impertinent fellows”--(he bent over and
whispered mysteriously, with a funny, frightened look on his face)--“who
