
“But who else _could_ it be, my very dear prince?” repeated Lebedeff, as
sweet as sugar again. “If you don’t wish me to suspect Mr. Burdovsky?”

“Of course not.”

“Nor the general? Ha, ha, ha!”

“Nonsense!” said the prince, angrily, turning round upon him.

“Quite so, nonsense! Ha, ha, ha! dear me! He did amuse me, did the
general! We went off on the hot scent to Wilkin’s together, you know;
but I must first observe that the general was even more thunderstruck
than I myself this morning, when I awoke him after discovering the
theft; so much so that his very face changed--he grew red and then pale,
and at length flew into a paroxysm of such noble wrath that I assure you
I was quite surprised! He is a most generous-hearted man! He tells lies
by the thousands, I know, but it is merely a weakness; he is a man of
the highest feelings; a simple-minded man too, and a man who carries the
conviction of innocence in his very appearance. I love that man, sir; I
may have told you so before; it is a weakness of mine. Well--he suddenly
stopped in the middle of the road, opened out his coat and bared his
breast. ‘Search me,’ he says, ‘you searched Keller; why don’t you search
me too? It is only fair!’ says he. And all the while his legs and hands
were trembling with anger, and he as white as a sheet all over! So I
said to him, ‘Nonsense, general; if anybody but yourself had said that
to me, I’d have taken my head, my own head, and put it on a large dish
and carried it round to anyone who suspected you; and I should have
said: “There, you see that head? It’s my head, and I’ll go bail with
that head for him! Yes, and walk through the fire for him, too.” There,’
says I, ‘that’s how I’d answer for you, general!’ Then he embraced me,
in the middle of the street, and hugged me so tight (crying over me all
the while) that I coughed fit to choke! ‘You are the one friend left to
me amid all my misfortunes,’ says he. Oh, he’s a man of sentiment, that!
He went on to tell me a story of how he had been accused, or suspected,
of stealing five hundred thousand roubles once, as a young man; and how,
the very next day, he had rushed into a burning, blazing house and saved
the very count who suspected him, and Nina Alexandrovna (who was then
a young girl), from a fiery death. The count embraced him, and that was
how he came to marry Nina Alexandrovna, he said. As for the money, it
was found among the ruins next day in an English iron box with a secret
lock; it had got under the floor somehow, and if it had not been for the
fire it would never have been found! The whole thing is, of course, an
absolute fabrication, though when he spoke of Nina Alexandrovna he wept!
She’s a grand woman, is Nina Alexandrovna, though she is very angry with
me!”

“Are you acquainted with her?”

“Well, hardly at all. I wish I were, if only for the sake of justifying
myself in her eyes. Nina Alexandrovna has a grudge against me for, as
she thinks, encouraging her husband in drinking; whereas in reality I
not only do not encourage him, but I actually keep him out of harm’s
way, and out of bad company. Besides, he’s my friend, prince, so that
I shall not lose sight of him, again. Where he goes, I go. He’s quite
given up visiting the captain’s widow, though sometimes he thinks sadly
of her, especially in the morning, when he’s putting on his boots. I
don’t know why it’s at that time. But he has no money, and it’s no
use his going to see her without. Has he borrowed any money from you,
prince?”

“No, he has not.”

“Ah, he’s ashamed to! He _meant_ to ask you, I know, for he said so. I
suppose he thinks that as you gave him some once (you remember), you
would probably refuse if he asked you again.”

“Do you ever give him money?”

“Prince! Money! Why I would give that man not only my money, but my
very life, if he wanted it. Well, perhaps that’s exaggeration; not life,
we’ll say, but some illness, a boil or a bad cough, or anything of that
sort, I would stand with pleasure, for his sake; for I consider him a
great man fallen--money, indeed!”

“H’m, then you _do_ give him money?”

“N-no, I have never given him money, and he knows well that I will never
give him any; because I am anxious to keep him out of intemperate
ways. He is going to town with me now; for you must know I am off to
Petersburg after Ferdishenko, while the scent is hot; I’m certain he is
there. I shall let the general go one way, while I go the other; we have
so arranged matters in order to pop out upon Ferdishenko, you see, from
different sides. But I am going to follow that naughty old general and
catch him, I know where, at a certain widow’s house; for I think it will
be a good lesson, to put him to shame by catching him with the widow.”

“Oh, Lebedeff, don’t, don’t make any scandal about it!” said the prince,
much agitated, and speaking in a low voice.

“Not for the world, not for the world! I merely wish to make him ashamed
of himself. Oh, prince, great though this misfortune be to myself, I
cannot help thinking of his morals! I have a great favour to ask of you,
esteemed prince; I confess that it is the chief object of my visit. You
know the Ivolgins, you have even lived in their house; so if you would
lend me your help, honoured prince, in the general’s own interest and
for his good.”

Lebedeff clasped his hands in supplication.

“What help do you want from me? You may be certain that I am most
anxious to understand you, Lebedeff.”

“I felt sure of that, or I should not have come to you. We might manage
it with the help of Nina Alexandrovna, so that he might be closely
watched in his own house. Unfortunately I am not on terms...
otherwise... but Nicolai Ardalionovitch, who adores you with all his
youthful soul, might help, too.”

“No, no! Heaven forbid that we should bring Nina Alexandrovna into this
business! Or Colia, either. But perhaps I have not yet quite understood
you, Lebedeff?”

Lebedeff made an impatient movement.

“But there is nothing to understand! Sympathy and tenderness, that
is all--that is all our poor invalid requires! You will permit me to
consider him an invalid?”

“Yes, it shows delicacy and intelligence on your part.”

“I will explain my idea by a practical example, to make it clearer. You
know the sort of man he is. At present his only failing is that he is
crazy about that captain’s widow, and he cannot go to her without
money, and I mean to catch him at her house today--for his own good; but
supposing it was not only the widow, but that he had committed a real
crime, or at least some very dishonourable action (of which he is, of
course, incapable), I repeat that even in that case, if he were treated
with what I may call generous tenderness, one could get at the whole
truth, for he is very soft-hearted! Believe me, he would betray himself
before five days were out; he would burst into tears, and make a clean
breast of the matter; especially if managed with tact, and if you and
his family watched his every step, so to speak. Oh, my dear prince,”
 Lebedeff added most emphatically, “I do not positively assert that he
has... I am ready, as the saying is, to shed my last drop of blood for
him this instant; but you will admit that debauchery, drunkenness, and
the captain’s widow, all these together may lead him very far.”

“I am, of course, quite ready to add my efforts to yours in such a
case,” said the prince, rising; “but I confess, Lebedeff, that I am
terribly perplexed. Tell me, do you still think... plainly, you say
yourself that you suspect Mr. Ferdishenko?”

Lebedeff clasped his hands once more.

“Why, who else could I possibly suspect? Who else, most outspoken
prince?” he replied, with an unctuous smile.

Muishkin frowned, and rose from his seat.

