to him. I lived near him for a whole month, and I understood then that
you, too, must love him. I think of you and him as one.”

“What was the matter yesterday?” (she wrote on another sheet). “I passed
by you, and you seemed to me to _blush_. Perhaps it was only my fancy.
If I were to bring you to the most loathsome den, and show you the
revelation of undisguised vice--you should not blush. You can never feel
the sense of personal affront. You may hate all who are mean, or base,
or unworthy--but not for yourself--only for those whom they wrong. No
one can wrong _you_. Do you know, I think you ought to love me--for you
are the same in my eyes as in his--you are as light. An angel cannot
hate, perhaps cannot love, either. I often ask myself--is it possible to
love everybody? Indeed it is not; it is not in nature. Abstract love
of humanity is nearly always love of self. But you are different. You
cannot help loving all, since you can compare with none, and are above
all personal offence or anger. Oh! how bitter it would be to me to
know that you felt anger or shame on my account, for that would be your
fall--you would become comparable at once with such as me.

“Yesterday, after seeing you, I went home and thought out a picture.

“Artists always draw the Saviour as an actor in one of the Gospel
stories. I should do differently. I should represent Christ alone--the
disciples did leave Him alone occasionally. I should paint one little
child left with Him. This child has been playing about near Him, and
had probably just been telling the Saviour something in its pretty
baby prattle. Christ had listened to it, but was now musing--one
hand reposing on the child’s bright head. His eyes have a far-away
expression. Thought, great as the Universe, is in them--His face is sad.
The little one leans its elbow upon Christ’s knee, and with its cheek
resting on its hand, gazes up at Him, pondering as children sometimes do
ponder. The sun is setting. There you have my picture.

“You are innocent--and in your innocence lies all your perfection--oh,
remember that! What is my passion to you?--you are mine now; I shall be
near you all my life--I shall not live long!”

At length, in the last letter of all, he found:

“For Heaven’s sake, don’t misunderstand me! Do not think that I
humiliate myself by writing thus to you, or that I belong to that class
of people who take a satisfaction in humiliating themselves--from pride.
I have my consolation, though it would be difficult to explain it--but I
do not humiliate myself.

“Why do I wish to unite you two? For your sakes or my own? For my own
sake, naturally. All the problems of my life would thus be solved;
I have thought so for a long time. I know that once when your sister
Adelaida saw my portrait she said that such beauty could overthrow
the world. But I have renounced the world. You think it strange that
I should say so, for you saw me decked with lace and diamonds, in the
company of drunkards and wastrels. Take no notice of that; I know that
I have almost ceased to exist. God knows what it is dwelling within me
now--it is not myself. I can see it every day in two dreadful eyes which
are always looking at me, even when not present. These eyes are silent
now, they say nothing; but I know their secret. His house is gloomy, and
there is a secret in it. I am convinced that in some box he has a razor
hidden, tied round with silk, just like the one that Moscow murderer
had. This man also lived with his mother, and had a razor hidden away,
tied round with white silk, and with this razor he intended to cut a
throat.

“All the while I was in their house I felt sure that somewhere beneath
the floor there was hidden away some dreadful corpse, wrapped in
oil-cloth, perhaps buried there by his father, who knows? Just as in the
Moscow case. I could have shown you the very spot!

“He is always silent, but I know well that he loves me so much that he
must hate me. My wedding and yours are to be on the same day; so I have
arranged with him. I have no secrets from him. I would kill him from
very fright, but he will kill me first. He has just burst out laughing,
and says that I am raving. He knows I am writing to you.”

There was much more of this delirious wandering in the letters--one of
them was very long.

At last the prince came out of the dark, gloomy park, in which he had
wandered about for hours just as yesterday. The bright night seemed to
him to be lighter than ever. “It must be quite early,” he thought. (He
had forgotten his watch.) There was a sound of distant music somewhere.
“Ah,” he thought, “the Vauxhall! They won’t be there today, of course!”
 At this moment he noticed that he was close to their house; he had felt
that he must gravitate to this spot eventually, and, with a beating
heart, he mounted the verandah steps.

No one met him; the verandah was empty, and nearly pitch dark. He opened
the door into the room, but it, too, was dark and empty. He stood in the
middle of the room in perplexity. Suddenly the door opened, and in came
Alexandra, candle in hand. Seeing the prince she stopped before him in
surprise, looking at him questioningly.

It was clear that she had been merely passing through the room from door
to door, and had not had the remotest notion that she would meet anyone.

“How did you come here?” she asked, at last.

“I--I--came in--”

“Mamma is not very well, nor is Aglaya. Adelaida has gone to bed, and
I am just going. We were alone the whole evening. Father and Prince S.
have gone to town.”

“I have come to you--now--to--”

“Do you know what time it is?”

“N--no!”

“Half-past twelve. We are always in bed by one.”

“I--I thought it was half-past nine!”

“Never mind!” she laughed, “but why didn’t you come earlier? Perhaps you
were expected!”

“I thought” he stammered, making for the door.

“_Au revoir!_ I shall amuse them all with this story tomorrow!”

He walked along the road towards his own house. His heart was beating,
his thoughts were confused, everything around seemed to be part of a
dream.

And suddenly, just as twice already he had awaked from sleep with the
same vision, that very apparition now seemed to rise up before him. The
woman appeared to step out from the park, and stand in the path in front
of him, as though she had been waiting for him there.

He shuddered and stopped; she seized his hand and pressed it frenziedly.

No, this was no apparition!

There she stood at last, face to face with him, for the first time since
their parting.

She said something, but he looked silently back at her. His heart ached
with anguish. Oh! never would he banish the recollection of this meeting
with her, and he never remembered it but with the same pain and agony of
mind.

She went on her knees before him--there in the open road--like a
madwoman. He retreated a step, but she caught his hand and kissed
it, and, just as in his dream, the tears were sparkling on her long,
beautiful lashes.

“Get up!” he said, in a frightened whisper, raising her. “Get up at
once!”

“Are you happy--are you happy?” she asked. “Say this one word. Are you
happy now? Today, this moment? Have you just been with her? What did she
