He remembered that during his epileptic fits, or rather immediately
preceding them, he had always experienced a moment or two when his whole
heart, and mind, and body seemed to wake up to vigour and light; when
he became filled with joy and hope, and all his anxieties seemed to be
swept away for ever; these moments were but presentiments, as it were,
of the one final second (it was never more than a second) in which the
fit came upon him. That second, of course, was inexpressible. When his
attack was over, and the prince reflected on his symptoms, he used to
say to himself: “These moments, short as they are, when I feel such
extreme consciousness of myself, and consequently more of life than
at other times, are due only to the disease--to the sudden rupture of
normal conditions. Therefore they are not really a higher kind of life,
but a lower.” This reasoning, however, seemed to end in a paradox,
and lead to the further consideration:--“What matter though it be only
disease, an abnormal tension of the brain, if when I recall and analyze
the moment, it seems to have been one of harmony and beauty in the
highest degree--an instant of deepest sensation, overflowing with
unbounded joy and rapture, ecstatic devotion, and completest life?”
 Vague though this sounds, it was perfectly comprehensible to Muishkin,
though he knew that it was but a feeble expression of his sensations.

That there was, indeed, beauty and harmony in those abnormal moments,
that they really contained the highest synthesis of life, he could not
doubt, nor even admit the possibility of doubt. He felt that they were
not analogous to the fantastic and unreal dreams due to intoxication
by hashish, opium or wine. Of that he could judge, when the attack was
over. These instants were characterized--to define it in a word--by
an intense quickening of the sense of personality. Since, in the last
conscious moment preceding the attack, he could say to himself, with
full understanding of his words: “I would give my whole life for this
one instant,” then doubtless to him it really was worth a lifetime.
For the rest, he thought the dialectical part of his argument of little
worth; he saw only too clearly that the result of these ecstatic moments
was stupefaction, mental darkness, idiocy. No argument was possible
on that point. His conclusion, his estimate of the “moment,” doubtless
contained some error, yet the reality of the sensation troubled him.
What’s more unanswerable than a fact? And this fact had occurred. The
prince had confessed unreservedly to himself that the feeling of intense
beatitude in that crowded moment made the moment worth a lifetime. “I
feel then,” he said one day to Rogojin in Moscow, “I feel then as if I
understood those amazing words--‘There shall be no more time.’” And he
added with a smile: “No doubt the epileptic Mahomet refers to that same
moment when he says that he visited all the dwellings of Allah, in less
time than was needed to empty his pitcher of water.” Yes, he had often
met Rogojin in Moscow, and many were the subjects they discussed. “He
told me I had been a brother to him,” thought the prince. “He said so
today, for the first time.”

He was sitting in the Summer Garden on a seat under a tree, and his
mind dwelt on the matter. It was about seven o’clock, and the place was
empty. The stifling atmosphere foretold a storm, and the prince felt a
certain charm in the contemplative mood which possessed him. He found
pleasure, too, in gazing at the exterior objects around him. All the
time he was trying to forget some thing, to escape from some idea that
haunted him; but melancholy thoughts came back, though he would so
willingly have escaped from them. He remembered suddenly how he had been
talking to the waiter, while he dined, about a recently committed murder
which the whole town was discussing, and as he thought of it something
strange came over him. He was seized all at once by a violent desire,
almost a temptation, against which he strove in vain.

He jumped up and walked off as fast as he could towards the “Petersburg
Side.” [One of the quarters of St. Petersburg.] He had asked someone, a
little while before, to show him which was the Petersburg Side, on the
banks of the Neva. He had not gone there, however; and he knew very
well that it was of no use to go now, for he would certainly not find
Lebedeff’s relation at home. He had the address, but she must certainly
have gone to Pavlofsk, or Colia would have let him know. If he were to
go now, it would merely be out of curiosity, but a sudden, new idea had
come into his head.

However, it was something to move on and know where he was going. A
minute later he was still moving on, but without knowing anything. He
could no longer think out his new idea. He tried to take an interest in
all he saw; in the sky, in the Neva. He spoke to some children he met.
He felt his epileptic condition becoming more and more developed. The
evening was very close; thunder was heard some way off.

The prince was haunted all that day by the face of Lebedeff’s nephew
whom he had seen for the first time that morning, just as one is haunted
at times by some persistent musical refrain. By a curious association
of ideas, the young man always appeared as the murderer of whom Lebedeff
had spoken when introducing him to Muishkin. Yes, he had read something
about the murder, and that quite recently. Since he came to Russia, he
had heard many stories of this kind, and was interested in them. His
conversation with the waiter, an hour ago, chanced to be on the subject
of this murder of the Zemarins, and the latter had agreed with him about
it. He thought of the waiter again, and decided that he was no fool, but
a steady, intelligent man: though, said he to himself, “God knows
what he may really be; in a country with which one is unfamiliar it is
difficult to understand the people one meets.” He was beginning to have
a passionate faith in the Russian soul, however, and what discoveries he
had made in the last six months, what unexpected discoveries! But every
soul is a mystery, and depths of mystery lie in the soul of a Russian.
He had been intimate with Rogojin, for example, and a brotherly
friendship had sprung up between them--yet did he really know him?
What chaos and ugliness fills the world at times! What a self-satisfied
rascal is that nephew of Lebedeff’s! “But what am I thinking,” continued
the prince to himself. “Can he really have committed that crime? Did he
kill those six persons? I seem to be confusing things... how strange
it all is.... My head goes round... And Lebedeff’s daughter--how
sympathetic and charming her face was as she held the child in her arms!
What an innocent look and child-like laugh she had! It is curious that I
had forgotten her until now. I expect Lebedeff adores her--and I really
believe, when I think of it, that as sure as two and two make four, he
is fond of that nephew, too!”

Well, why should he judge them so hastily! Could he really say what they
were, after one short visit? Even Lebedeff seemed an enigma today.
Did he expect to find him so? He had never seen him like that before.
Lebedeff and the Comtesse du Barry! Good Heavens! If Rogojin should
really kill someone, it would not, at any rate, be such a senseless,
chaotic affair. A knife made to a special pattern, and six people killed
in a kind of delirium. But Rogojin also had a knife made to a special
pattern. Can it be that Rogojin wishes to murder anyone? The prince
began to tremble violently. “It is a crime on my part to imagine
anything so base, with such cynical frankness.” His face reddened with
shame at the thought; and then there came across him as in a flash
the memory of the incidents at the Pavlofsk station, and at the other
station in the morning; and the question asked him by Rogojin about
_the eyes_ and Rogojin’s cross, that he was even now wearing; and the
benediction of Rogojin’s mother; and his embrace on the darkened
staircase--that last supreme renunciation--and now, to find himself full
of this new “idea,” staring into shop-windows, and looking round for
things--how base he was!

Despair overmastered his soul; he would not go on, he would go back to
his hotel; he even turned and went the other way; but a moment after he
changed his mind again and went on in the old direction.

Why, here he was on the Petersburg Side already, quite close to the
house! Where was his “idea”? He was marching along without it now. Yes,
his malady was coming back, it was clear enough; all this gloom and
heaviness, all these “ideas,” were nothing more nor less than a fit
coming on; perhaps he would have a fit this very day.

But just now all the gloom and darkness had fled, his heart felt full of
joy and hope, there was no such thing as doubt. And yes, he hadn’t
seen her for so long; he really must see her. He wished he could meet
Rogojin; he would take his hand, and they would go to her together. His
heart was pure, he was no rival of Parfen’s. Tomorrow, he would go
and tell him that he had seen her. Why, he had only come for the sole
purpose of seeing her, all the way from Moscow! Perhaps she might be
here still, who knows? She might not have gone away to Pavlofsk yet.

Yes, all this must be put straight and above-board, there must be no
more passionate renouncements, such as Rogojin’s. It must all be clear
as day. Cannot Rogojin’s soul bear the light? He said he did not love
her with sympathy and pity; true, he added that “your pity is greater
than my love,” but he was not quite fair on himself there. Kin! Rogojin
