beautifully furnished and arranged. At one period of these five years
of Petersburg life, Totski had certainly not spared his expenditure upon
her. He had calculated upon her eventual love, and tried to tempt her
with a lavish outlay upon comforts and luxuries, knowing too well how
easily the heart accustoms itself to comforts, and how difficult it is
to tear one’s self away from luxuries which have become habitual and,
little by little, indispensable.

Nastasia did not reject all this, she even loved her comforts and
luxuries, but, strangely enough, never became, in the least degree,
dependent upon them, and always gave the impression that she could do
just as well without them. In fact, she went so far as to inform Totski
on several occasions that such was the case, which the latter gentleman
considered a very unpleasant communication indeed.

But, of late, Totski had observed many strange and original features
and characteristics in Nastasia, which he had neither known nor reckoned
upon in former times, and some of these fascinated him, even now, in
spite of the fact that all his old calculations with regard to her were
long ago cast to the winds.

A maid opened the door for the prince (Nastasia’s servants were all
females) and, to his surprise, received his request to announce him to
her mistress without any astonishment. Neither his dirty boots, nor his
wide-brimmed hat, nor his sleeveless cloak, nor his evident confusion of
manner, produced the least impression upon her. She helped him off with
his cloak, and begged him to wait a moment in the ante-room while she
announced him.

The company assembled at Nastasia Philipovna’s consisted of none but her
most intimate friends, and formed a very small party in comparison with
her usual gatherings on this anniversary.

In the first place there were present Totski, and General Epanchin.
They were both highly amiable, but both appeared to be labouring under
a half-hidden feeling of anxiety as to the result of Nastasia’s
deliberations with regard to Gania, which result was to be made public
this evening.

Then, of course, there was Gania who was by no means so amiable as
his elders, but stood apart, gloomy, and miserable, and silent. He had
determined not to bring Varia with him; but Nastasia had not even asked
after her, though no sooner had he arrived than she had reminded him of
the episode between himself and the prince. The general, who had heard
nothing of it before, began to listen with some interest, while Gania,
drily, but with perfect candour, went through the whole history,
including the fact of his apology to the prince. He finished by
declaring that the prince was a most extraordinary man, and goodness
knows why he had been considered an idiot hitherto, for he was very far
from being one.

Nastasia listened to all this with great interest; but the conversation
soon turned to Rogojin and his visit, and this theme proved of the
greatest attraction to both Totski and the general.

Ptitsin was able to afford some particulars as to Rogojin’s conduct
since the afternoon. He declared that he had been busy finding money for
the latter ever since, and up to nine o’clock, Rogojin having declared
that he must absolutely have a hundred thousand roubles by the evening.
He added that Rogojin was drunk, of course; but that he thought the
money would be forthcoming, for the excited and intoxicated rapture of
the fellow impelled him to give any interest or premium that was asked
of him, and there were several others engaged in beating up the money,
also.

All this news was received by the company with somewhat gloomy interest.
Nastasia was silent, and would not say what she thought about it. Gania
was equally uncommunicative. The general seemed the most anxious of all,
and decidedly uneasy. The present of pearls which he had prepared with
so much joy in the morning had been accepted but coldly, and Nastasia
had smiled rather disagreeably as she took it from him. Ferdishenko was
the only person present in good spirits.

Totski himself, who had the reputation of being a capital talker, and
was usually the life and soul of these entertainments, was as silent
as any on this occasion, and sat in a state of, for him, most uncommon
perturbation.

The rest of the guests (an old tutor or schoolmaster, goodness knows
why invited; a young man, very timid, and shy and silent; a rather
loud woman of about forty, apparently an actress; and a very pretty,
well-dressed German lady who hardly said a word all the evening) not
only had no gift for enlivening the proceedings, but hardly knew what to
say for themselves when addressed. Under these circumstances the arrival
of the prince came almost as a godsend.

The announcement of his name gave rise to some surprise and to some
smiles, especially when it became evident, from Nastasia’s astonished
look, that she had not thought of inviting him. But her astonishment
once over, Nastasia showed such satisfaction that all prepared to greet
the prince with cordial smiles of welcome.

“Of course,” remarked General Epanchin, “he does this out of pure
innocence. It’s a little dangerous, perhaps, to encourage this sort of
freedom; but it is rather a good thing that he has arrived just at this
moment. He may enliven us a little with his originalities.”

“Especially as he asked himself,” said Ferdishenko.

“What’s that got to do with it?” asked the general, who loathed
Ferdishenko.

“Why, he must pay toll for his entrance,” explained the latter.

“H’m! Prince Muishkin is not Ferdishenko,” said the general,
impatiently. This worthy gentleman could never quite reconcile himself
to the idea of meeting Ferdishenko in society, and on an equal footing.

“Oh general, spare Ferdishenko!” replied the other, smiling. “I have
special privileges.”

“What do you mean by special privileges?”

“Once before I had the honour of stating them to the company. I will
repeat the explanation to-day for your excellency’s benefit. You see,
excellency, all the world is witty and clever except myself. I am
neither. As a kind of compensation I am allowed to tell the truth, for
it is a well-known fact that only stupid people tell ‘the truth.’ Added
to this, I am a spiteful man, just because I am not clever. If I am
offended or injured I bear it quite patiently until the man injuring
me meets with some misfortune. Then I remember, and take my revenge. I
return the injury sevenfold, as Ivan Petrovitch Ptitsin says. (Of course
he never does so himself.) Excellency, no doubt you recollect Kryloff’s
fable, ‘The Lion and the Ass’? Well now, that’s you and I. That fable
was written precisely for us.”

“You seem to be talking nonsense again, Ferdishenko,” growled the
general.

“What is the matter, excellency? I know how to keep my place. When I
said just now that we, you and I, were the lion and the ass of Kryloff’s
fable, of course it is understood that I take the role of the ass. Your
excellency is the lion of which the fable remarks:

  ‘A mighty lion, terror of the woods,
   Was shorn of his great prowess by old age.’

And I, your excellency, am the ass.”

“I am of your opinion on that last point,” said Ivan Fedorovitch, with
ill-concealed irritation.

All this was no doubt extremely coarse, and moreover it was
premeditated, but after all Ferdishenko had persuaded everyone to accept
him as a buffoon.

“If I am admitted and tolerated here,” he had said one day, “it is
simply because I talk in this way. How can anyone possibly receive
such a man as I am? I quite understand. Now, could I, a Ferdishenko,
be allowed to sit shoulder to shoulder with a clever man like Afanasy
