“He restrained himself, and didn’t go after it; so his self-respect is
greater than his thirst for money. All right--he’ll come to directly--he
must have the packet or he’ll cut his throat afterwards. There! He’s
coming to himself. General, Totski, all of you, did you hear me? The
money is all Gania’s. I give it to him, fully conscious of my action, as
recompense for--well, for anything he thinks best. Tell him so. Let it
lie here beside him. Off we go, Rogojin! Goodbye, prince. I have seen
a man for the first time in my life. Goodbye, Afanasy Ivanovitch--and
thanks!”

The Rogojin gang followed their leader and Nastasia Philipovna to the
entrance-hall, laughing and shouting and whistling.

In the hall the servants were waiting, and handed her her fur cloak.
Martha, the cook, ran in from the kitchen. Nastasia kissed them all
round.

“Are you really throwing us all over, little mother? Where, where are
you going to? And on your birthday, too!” cried the four girls, crying
over her and kissing her hands.

“I am going out into the world, Katia; perhaps I shall be a laundress. I
don’t know. No more of Afanasy Ivanovitch, anyhow. Give him my respects.
Don’t think badly of me, girls.”

The prince hurried down to the front gate where the party were settling
into the troikas, all the bells tinkling a merry accompaniment the
while. The general caught him up on the stairs:

“Prince, prince!” he cried, seizing hold of his arm, “recollect
yourself! Drop her, prince! You see what sort of a woman she is. I am
speaking to you like a father.”

The prince glanced at him, but said nothing. He shook himself free, and
rushed on downstairs.

The general was just in time to see the prince take the first sledge he
could get, and, giving the order to Ekaterinhof, start off in pursuit
of the troikas. Then the general’s fine grey horse dragged that worthy
home, with some new thoughts, and some new hopes and calculations
developing in his brain, and with the pearls in his pocket, for he had
not forgotten to bring them along with him, being a man of business.
Amid his new thoughts and ideas there came, once or twice, the image of
Nastasia Philipovna. The general sighed.

“I’m sorry, really sorry,” he muttered. “She’s a ruined woman. Mad! mad!
However, the prince is not for Nastasia Philipovna now,--perhaps it’s as
well.”

Two more of Nastasia’s guests, who walked a short distance together,
indulged in high moral sentiments of a similar nature.

“Do you know, Totski, this is all very like what they say goes on
among the Japanese?” said Ptitsin. “The offended party there, they say,
marches off to his insulter and says to him, ‘You insulted me, so I have
come to rip myself open before your eyes;’ and with these words he
does actually rip his stomach open before his enemy, and considers,
doubtless, that he is having all possible and necessary satisfaction and
revenge. There are strange characters in the world, sir!”

“H’m! and you think there was something of this sort here, do you? Dear
me--a very remarkable comparison, you know! But you must have observed,
my dear Ptitsin, that I did all I possibly could. I could do no more
than I did. And you must admit that there are some rare qualities in
this woman. I felt I could not speak in that Bedlam, or I should have
been tempted to cry out, when she reproached me, that she herself was
my best justification. Such a woman could make anyone forget all
reason--everything! Even that moujik, Rogojin, you saw, brought her
a hundred thousand roubles! Of course, all that happened tonight
was ephemeral, fantastic, unseemly--yet it lacked neither colour nor
originality. My God! What might not have been made of such a character
combined with such beauty! Yet in spite of all efforts--in spite of all
education, even--all those gifts are wasted! She is an uncut diamond....
I have often said so.”

And Afanasy Ivanovitch heaved a deep sigh.




PART II

I.

Two days after the strange conclusion to Nastasia Philipovna’s birthday
party, with the record of which we concluded the first part of this
story, Prince Muishkin hurriedly left St. Petersburg for Moscow, in
order to see after some business connected with the receipt of his
unexpected fortune.

It was said that there were other reasons for his hurried departure; but
as to this, and as to his movements in Moscow, and as to his
prolonged absence from St. Petersburg, we are able to give very little
information.

The prince was away for six months, and even those who were most
interested in his destiny were able to pick up very little news about
him all that while. True, certain rumours did reach his friends, but
these were both strange and rare, and each one contradicted the last.

Of course the Epanchin family was much interested in his movements,
though he had not had time to bid them farewell before his departure.
The general, however, had had an opportunity of seeing him once or twice
since the eventful evening, and had spoken very seriously with him;
but though he had seen the prince, as I say, he told his family nothing
about the circumstance. In fact, for a month or so after his departure
it was considered not the thing to mention the prince’s name in the
Epanchin household. Only Mrs. Epanchin, at the commencement of this
period, had announced that she had been “cruelly mistaken in the
prince!” and a day or two after, she had added, evidently alluding
to him, but not mentioning his name, that it was an unalterable
characteristic of hers to be mistaken in people. Then once more, ten
days later, after some passage of arms with one of her daughters, she
had remarked sententiously. “We have had enough of mistakes. I shall be
more careful in future!” However, it was impossible to avoid remarking
that there was some sense of oppression in the household--something
unspoken, but felt; something strained. All the members of the family
wore frowning looks. The general was unusually busy; his family hardly
ever saw him.

As to the girls, nothing was said openly, at all events; and probably
very little in private. They were proud damsels, and were not always
perfectly confidential even among themselves. But they understood each
other thoroughly at the first word on all occasions; very often at the
first glance, so that there was no need of much talking as a rule.

One fact, at least, would have been perfectly plain to an outsider, had
any such person been on the spot; and that was, that the prince had made
a very considerable impression upon the family, in spite of the fact
that he had but once been inside the house, and then only for a short
time. Of course, if analyzed, this impression might have proved to be
nothing more than a feeling of curiosity; but be it what it might, there
it undoubtedly was.

Little by little, the rumours spread about town became lost in a maze of
uncertainty. It was said that some foolish young prince, name unknown,
had suddenly come into possession of a gigantic fortune, and had married
a French ballet dancer. This was contradicted, and the rumour circulated
that it was a young merchant who had come into the enormous fortune and
married the great ballet dancer, and that at the wedding the drunken
young fool had burned seventy thousand roubles at a candle out of pure
bravado.

However, all these rumours soon died down, to which circumstance certain
facts largely contributed. For instance, the whole of the Rogojin troop
had departed, with him at their head, for Moscow. This was exactly a
week after a dreadful orgy at the Ekaterinhof gardens, where Nastasia
Philipovna had been present. It became known that after this orgy
Nastasia Philipovna had entirely disappeared, and that she had since
been traced to Moscow; so that the exodus of the Rogojin band was found
