“Yes, I have just read it.”

“And she gave it you to read herself--_herself?_”

“Yes, herself; and you may believe me when I tell you that I would not
have read it for anything without her permission.”

Gania was silent for a minute or two, as though thinking out some
problem. Suddenly he cried:

“It’s impossible, she cannot have given it to you to read! You are
lying. You read it yourself!”

“I am telling you the truth,” said the prince in his former composed
tone of voice; “and believe me, I am extremely sorry that the
circumstance should have made such an unpleasant impression upon you!”

“But, you wretched man, at least she must have said something? There
must be _some_ answer from her!”

“Yes, of course, she did say something!”

“Out with it then, damn it! Out with it at once!” and Gania stamped his
foot twice on the pavement.

“As soon as I had finished reading it, she told me that you were fishing
for her; that you wished to compromise her so far as to receive some
hopes from her, trusting to which hopes you might break with the
prospect of receiving a hundred thousand roubles. She said that if you
had done this without bargaining with her, if you had broken with the
money prospects without trying to force a guarantee out of her first,
she might have been your friend. That’s all, I think. Oh no, when I
asked her what I was to say, as I took the letter, she replied that ‘no
answer is the best answer.’ I think that was it. Forgive me if I do
not use her exact expressions. I tell you the sense as I understood it
myself.”

Ungovernable rage and madness took entire possession of Gania, and his
fury burst out without the least attempt at restraint.

“Oh! that’s it, is it!” he yelled. “She throws my letters out of the
window, does she! Oh! and she does not condescend to bargain, while I
_do_, eh? We shall see, we shall see! I shall pay her out for this.”

He twisted himself about with rage, and grew paler and paler; he shook
his fist. So the pair walked along a few steps. Gania did not stand on
ceremony with the prince; he behaved just as though he were alone in
his room. He clearly counted the latter as a nonentity. But suddenly he
seemed to have an idea, and recollected himself.

“But how was it?” he asked, “how was it that you (idiot that you are),”
 he added to himself, “were so very confidential a couple of hours after
your first meeting with these people? How was that, eh?”

Up to this moment jealousy had not been one of his torments; now it
suddenly gnawed at his heart.

“That is a thing I cannot undertake to explain,” replied the prince.
Gania looked at him with angry contempt.

“Oh! I suppose the present she wished to make to you, when she took you
into the dining-room, was her confidence, eh?”

“I suppose that was it; I cannot explain it otherwise.”

“But why, _why?_ Devil take it, what did you do in there? Why did they
fancy you? Look here, can’t you remember exactly what you said to them,
from the very beginning? Can’t you remember?”

“Oh, we talked of a great many things. When first I went in we began to
speak of Switzerland.”

“Oh, the devil take Switzerland!”

“Then about executions.”

“Executions?”

“Yes--at least about one. Then I told the whole three years’ story of my
life, and the history of a poor peasant girl--”

“Oh, damn the peasant girl! go on, go on!” said Gania, impatiently.

“Then how Schneider told me about my childish nature, and--”

“Oh, _curse_ Schneider and his dirty opinions! Go on.”

“Then I began to talk about faces, at least about the _expressions_ of
faces, and said that Aglaya Ivanovna was nearly as lovely as Nastasia
Philipovna. It was then I blurted out about the portrait--”

“But you didn’t repeat what you heard in the study? You didn’t repeat
that--eh?”

“No, I tell you I did _not_.”

“Then how did they--look here! Did Aglaya show my letter to the old
lady?”

“Oh, there I can give you my fullest assurance that she did _not_. I was
there all the while--she had no time to do it!”

“But perhaps you may not have observed it, oh, you damned idiot, you!”
 he shouted, quite beside himself with fury. “You can’t even describe
what went on.”

Gania having once descended to abuse, and receiving no check, very soon
knew no bounds or limit to his licence, as is often the way in such
cases. His rage so blinded him that he had not even been able to detect
that this “idiot,” whom he was abusing to such an extent, was very
far from being slow of comprehension, and had a way of taking in
an impression, and afterwards giving it out again, which was very
un-idiotic indeed. But something a little unforeseen now occurred.

“I think I ought to tell you, Gavrila Ardalionovitch,” said the prince,
suddenly, “that though I once was so ill that I really was little better
than an idiot, yet now I am almost recovered, and that, therefore, it is
not altogether pleasant to be called an idiot to my face. Of course your
anger is excusable, considering the treatment you have just experienced;
but I must remind you that you have twice abused me rather rudely. I
do not like this sort of thing, and especially so at the first time
of meeting a man, and, therefore, as we happen to be at this moment
standing at a crossroad, don’t you think we had better part, you to the
left, homewards, and I to the right, here? I have twenty-five roubles,
and I shall easily find a lodging.”

Gania was much confused, and blushed for shame “Do forgive me, prince!”
 he cried, suddenly changing his abusive tone for one of great courtesy.
“For Heaven’s sake, forgive me! You see what a miserable plight I am
in, but you hardly know anything of the facts of the case as yet. If you
did, I am sure you would forgive me, at least partially. Of course it
was inexcusable of me, I know, but--”

“Oh, dear me, I really do not require such profuse apologies,” replied
the prince, hastily. “I quite understand how unpleasant your position
is, and that is what made you abuse me. So come along to your house,
after all. I shall be delighted--”

“I am not going to let him go like this,” thought Gania, glancing
angrily at the prince as they walked along. “The fellow has sucked
everything out of me, and now he takes off his mask--there’s something
more than appears, here we shall see. It shall all be as clear as water
by tonight, everything!”

But by this time they had reached Gania’s house.

VIII.

The flat occupied by Gania and his family was on the third floor of the
house. It was reached by a clean light staircase, and consisted of seven
