has gone to sleep, as you see. Will you show me the way, for I do not
know the street? I have the address, though; it is close to the Grand
Theatre.”

“Nastasia Philipovna? She does not live there, and to tell you the truth
my father has never been to her house! It is strange that you should
have depended on him! She lives near Wladimir Street, at the Five
Corners, and it is quite close by. Will you go directly? It is just
half-past nine. I will show you the way with pleasure.”

Colia and the prince went off together. Alas! the latter had no money to
pay for a cab, so they were obliged to walk.

“I should have liked to have taken you to see Hippolyte,” said Colia.
“He is the eldest son of the lady you met just now, and was in the next
room. He is ill, and has been in bed all day. But he is rather strange,
and extremely sensitive, and I thought he might be upset considering
the circumstances in which you came... Somehow it touches me less, as
it concerns my father, while it is _his_ mother. That, of course, makes
a great difference. What is a terrible disgrace to a woman, does not
disgrace a man, at least not in the same way. Perhaps public opinion
is wrong in condemning one sex, and excusing the other. Hippolyte is
an extremely clever boy, but so prejudiced. He is really a slave to his
opinions.”

“Do you say he is consumptive?”

“Yes. It really would be happier for him to die young. If I were in his
place I should certainly long for death. He is unhappy about his brother
and sisters, the children you saw. If it were possible, if we only had a
little money, we should leave our respective families, and live together
in a little apartment of our own. It is our dream. But, do you know,
when I was talking over your affair with him, he was angry, and said
that anyone who did not call out a man who had given him a blow was a
coward. He is very irritable to-day, and I left off arguing the matter
with him. So Nastasia Philipovna has invited you to go and see her?”

“To tell the truth, she has not.”

“Then how do you come to be going there?” cried Colia, so much
astonished that he stopped short in the middle of the pavement. “And...
and are you going to her ‘At Home’ in that costume?”

“I don’t know, really, whether I shall be allowed in at all. If she will
receive me, so much the better. If not, the matter is ended. As to my
clothes--what can I do?”

“Are you going there for some particular reason, or only as a way of
getting into her society, and that of her friends?”

“No, I have really an object in going... That is, I am going on business
it is difficult to explain, but...”

“Well, whether you go on business or not is your affair, I do not want
to know. The only important thing, in my eyes, is that you should not
be going there simply for the pleasure of spending your evening in such
company--cocottes, generals, usurers! If that were the case I should
despise and laugh at you. There are terribly few honest people here,
and hardly any whom one can respect, although people put on airs--Varia
especially! Have you noticed, prince, how many adventurers there are
nowadays? Especially here, in our dear Russia. How it has happened I
never can understand. There used to be a certain amount of solidity in
all things, but now what happens? Everything is exposed to the public
gaze, veils are thrown back, every wound is probed by careless fingers.
We are for ever present at an orgy of scandalous revelations. Parents
blush when they remember their old-fashioned morality. At Moscow lately
a father was heard urging his son to stop at nothing--at nothing, mind
you!--to get money! The press seized upon the story, of course, and now
it is public property. Look at my father, the general! See what he is,
and yet, I assure you, he is an honest man! Only... he drinks too much,
and his morals are not all we could desire. Yes, that’s true! I pity
him, to tell the truth, but I dare not say so, because everybody would
laugh at me--but I do pity him! And who are the really clever men, after
all? Money-grubbers, every one of them, from the first to the last.
Hippolyte finds excuses for money-lending, and says it is a necessity.
He talks about the economic movement, and the ebb and flow of capital;
the devil knows what he means. It makes me angry to hear him talk so,
but he is soured by his troubles. Just imagine--the general keeps his
mother--but she lends him money! She lends it for a week or ten days
at very high interest! Isn’t it disgusting? And then, you would hardly
believe it, but my mother--Nina Alexandrovna--helps Hippolyte in all
sorts of ways, sends him money and clothes. She even goes as far as
helping the children, through Hippolyte, because their mother cares
nothing about them, and Varia does the same.”

“Well, just now you said there were no honest nor good people about,
that there were only money-grubbers--and here they are quite close at
hand, these honest and good people, your mother and Varia! I think
there is a good deal of moral strength in helping people in such
circumstances.”

“Varia does it from pride, and likes showing off, and giving herself
airs. As to my mother, I really do admire her--yes, and honour her.
Hippolyte, hardened as he is, feels it. He laughed at first, and thought
it vulgar of her--but now, he is sometimes quite touched and overcome by
her kindness. H’m! You call that being strong and good? I will remember
that! Gania knows nothing about it. He would say that it was encouraging
vice.”

“Ah, Gania knows nothing about it? It seems there are many things that
Gania does not know,” exclaimed the prince, as he considered Colia’s
last words.

“Do you know, I like you very much indeed, prince? I shall never forget
about this afternoon.”

“I like you too, Colia.”

“Listen to me! You are going to live here, are you not?” said Colia.
“I mean to get something to do directly, and earn money. Then shall we
three live together? You, and I, and Hippolyte? We will hire a flat, and
let the general come and visit us. What do you say?”

“It would be very pleasant,” returned the prince. “But we must see. I am
really rather worried just now. What! are we there already? Is that the
house? What a long flight of steps! And there’s a porter! Well, Colia I
don’t know what will come of it all.”

The prince seemed quite distracted for the moment.

“You must tell me all about it tomorrow! Don’t be afraid. I wish you
success; we agree so entirely that I can do so, although I do not
understand why you are here. Good-bye!” cried Colia excitedly. “Now I
will rush back and tell Hippolyte all about our plans and proposals! But
as to your getting in--don’t be in the least afraid. You will see her.
She is so original about everything. It’s the first floor. The porter
will show you.”

XIII.

The prince was very nervous as he reached the outer door; but he did his
best to encourage himself with the reflection that the worst thing that
could happen to him would be that he would not be received, or, perhaps,
received, then laughed at for coming.

But there was another question, which terrified him considerably,
and that was: what was he going to do when he _did_ get in? And to this
question he could fashion no satisfactory reply.

If only he could find an opportunity of coming close up to Nastasia
Philipovna and saying to her: “Don’t ruin yourself by marrying this man.
He does not love you, he only loves your money. He told me so himself,
and so did Aglaya Ivanovna, and I have come on purpose to warn you”--but
even that did not seem quite a legitimate or practicable thing to do.
Then, again, there was another delicate question, to which he could not
find an answer; dared not, in fact, think of it; but at the very idea
of which he trembled and blushed. However, in spite of all his fears and
heart-quakings he went in, and asked for Nastasia Philipovna.

Nastasia occupied a medium-sized, but distinctly tasteful, flat,
