“Marie lay in a state of uncomfortable delirium the whole while; she
coughed dreadfully. The old women would not let the children stay in the
room; but they all collected outside the window each morning, if only
for a moment, and shouted ‘_Bon jour, notre bonne Marie!_’ and Marie no
sooner caught sight of, or heard them, and she became quite animated at
once, and, in spite of the old women, would try to sit up and nod her
head and smile at them, and thank them. The little ones used to bring
her nice things and sweets to eat, but she could hardly touch anything.
Thanks to them, I assure you, the girl died almost perfectly happy. She
almost forgot her misery, and seemed to accept their love as a sort of
symbol of pardon for her offence, though she never ceased to consider
herself a dreadful sinner. They used to flutter at her window just like
little birds, calling out: ‘_Nous t’aimons, Marie!_’

“She died very soon; I had thought she would live much longer. The
day before her death I went to see her for the last time, just before
sunset. I think she recognized me, for she pressed my hand.

“Next morning they came and told me that Marie was dead. The children
could not be restrained now; they went and covered her coffin with
flowers, and put a wreath of lovely blossoms on her head. The pastor did
not throw any more shameful words at the poor dead woman; but there were
very few people at the funeral. However, when it came to carrying the
coffin, all the children rushed up, to carry it themselves. Of course
they could not do it alone, but they insisted on helping, and walked
alongside and behind, crying.

“They have planted roses all round her grave, and every year they look
after the flowers and make Marie’s resting-place as beautiful as they
can. I was in ill odour after all this with the parents of the children,
and especially with the parson and schoolmaster. Schneider was obliged
to promise that I should not meet them and talk to them; but we
conversed from a distance by signs, and they used to write me sweet
little notes. Afterwards I came closer than ever to those little souls,
but even then it was very dear to me, to have them so fond of me.

“Schneider said that I did the children great harm by my pernicious
‘system’; what nonsense that was! And what did he mean by my system?
He said afterwards that he believed I was a child myself--just before
I came away. ‘You have the form and face of an adult’ he said, ‘but as
regards soul, and character, and perhaps even intelligence, you are a
child in the completest sense of the word, and always will be, if you
live to be sixty.’ I laughed very much, for of course that is nonsense.
But it is a fact that I do not care to be among grown-up people and
much prefer the society of children. However kind people may be to me, I
never feel quite at home with them, and am always glad to get back to
my little companions. Now my companions have always been children, not
because I was a child myself once, but because young things attract
me. On one of the first days of my stay in Switzerland, I was strolling
about alone and miserable, when I came upon the children rushing noisily
out of school, with their slates and bags, and books, their games, their
laughter and shouts--and my soul went out to them. I stopped and laughed
happily as I watched their little feet moving so quickly. Girls and
boys, laughing and crying; for as they went home many of them found
time to fight and make peace, to weep and play. I forgot my troubles in
looking at them. And then, all those three years, I tried to understand
why men should be for ever tormenting themselves. I lived the life of
a child there, and thought I should never leave the little village;
indeed, I was far from thinking that I should ever return to Russia.
But at last I recognized the fact that Schneider could not keep me any
longer. And then something so important happened, that Schneider himself
urged me to depart. I am going to see now if can get good advice
about it. Perhaps my lot in life will be changed; but that is not the
principal thing. The principal thing is the entire change that has
already come over me. I left many things behind me--too many. They have
gone. On the journey I said to myself, ‘I am going into the world of
men. I don’t know much, perhaps, but a new life has begun for me.’ I
made up my mind to be honest, and steadfast in accomplishing my task.
Perhaps I shall meet with troubles and many disappointments, but I have
made up my mind to be polite and sincere to everyone; more cannot be
asked of me. People may consider me a child if they like. I am often
called an idiot, and at one time I certainly was so ill that I was
nearly as bad as an idiot; but I am not an idiot now. How can I possibly
be so when I know myself that I am considered one?

“When I received a letter from those dear little souls, while passing
through Berlin, I only then realized how much I loved them. It was very,
very painful, getting that first little letter. How melancholy they had
been when they saw me off! For a month before, they had been talking of
my departure and sorrowing over it; and at the waterfall, of an evening,
when we parted for the night, they would hug me so tight and kiss me so
warmly, far more so than before. And every now and then they would turn
up one by one when I was alone, just to give me a kiss and a hug, to
show their love for me. The whole flock went with me to the station,
which was about a mile from the village, and every now and then one of
them would stop to throw his arms round me, and all the little girls had
tears in their voices, though they tried hard not to cry. As the train
steamed out of the station, I saw them all standing on the platform
waving to me and crying ‘Hurrah!’ till they were lost in the distance.

“I assure you, when I came in here just now and saw your kind faces (I
can read faces well) my heart felt light for the first time since that
moment of parting. I think I must be one of those who are born to be in
luck, for one does not often meet with people whom one feels he can love
from the first sight of their faces; and yet, no sooner do I step out of
the railway carriage than I happen upon you!

“I know it is more or less a shamefaced thing to speak of one’s feelings
before others; and yet here am I talking like this to you, and am not
a bit ashamed or shy. I am an unsociable sort of fellow and shall very
likely not come to see you again for some time; but don’t think the
worse of me for that. It is not that I do not value your society; and
you must never suppose that I have taken offence at anything.

“You asked me about your faces, and what I could read in them; I will
tell you with the greatest pleasure. You, Adelaida Ivanovna, have a very
happy face; it is the most sympathetic of the three. Not to speak of
your natural beauty, one can look at your face and say to one’s self,
‘She has the face of a kind sister.’ You are simple and merry, but you
can see into another’s heart very quickly. That’s what I read in your
face.

“You too, Alexandra Ivanovna, have a very lovely face; but I think you
may have some secret sorrow. Your heart is undoubtedly a kind, good one,
but you are not merry. There is a certain suspicion of ‘shadow’ in your
face, like in that of Holbein’s Madonna in Dresden. So much for your
face. Have I guessed right?

“As for your face, Lizabetha Prokofievna, I not only think, but am
perfectly _sure_, that you are an absolute child--in all, in all, mind,
both good and bad--and in spite of your years. Don’t be angry with me
for saying so; you know what my feelings for children are. And do not
suppose that I am so candid out of pure simplicity of soul. Oh dear no,
it is by no means the case! Perhaps I have my own very profound object
in view.”

VII.

When the prince ceased speaking all were gazing merrily at him--even
Aglaya; but Lizabetha Prokofievna looked the jolliest of all.

“Well!” she cried, “we _have_ ‘put him through his paces,’ with a
vengeance! My dears, you imagined, I believe, that you were about
to patronize this young gentleman, like some poor _protégé_ picked up
somewhere, and taken under your magnificent protection. What fools we
were, and what a specially big fool is your father! Well done, prince! I
assure you the general actually asked me to put you through your paces,
and examine you. As to what you said about my face, you are absolutely
correct in your judgment. I am a child, and know it. I knew it long
before you said so; you have expressed my own thoughts. I think your
nature and mine must be extremely alike, and I am very glad of it. We
are like two drops of water, only you are a man and I a woman, and I’ve
not been to Switzerland, and that is all the difference between us.”

“Don’t be in a hurry, mother; the prince says that he has some motive
behind his simplicity,” cried Aglaya.

“Yes, yes, so he does,” laughed the others.

“Oh, don’t you begin bantering him,” said mamma. “He is probably a good
