“You cannot really feel like that! You don’t mean what you say. It is
not true,” he murmured.

“It _is_ true, it _is_ true,” cried Aglaya, almost beside herself
with rage.

“What’s true? What’s all this? What’s true?” said an alarmed voice just
beside them.

Before them stood Lizabetha Prokofievna.

“Why, it’s true that I am going to marry Gavrila Ardalionovitch, that I
love him and intend to elope with him tomorrow,” cried Aglaya, turning
upon her mother. “Do you hear? Is your curiosity satisfied? Are you
pleased with what you have heard?”

Aglaya rushed away homewards with these words.

“H’m! well, _you_ are not going away just yet, my friend, at all events,”
 said Lizabetha, stopping the prince. “Kindly step home with me, and let
me have a little explanation of the mystery. Nice goings on, these! I
haven’t slept a wink all night as it is.”

The prince followed her.

IX.

Arrived at her house, Lizabetha Prokofievna paused in the first room.
She could go no farther, and subsided on to a couch quite exhausted; too
feeble to remember so much as to ask the prince to take a seat. This was
a large reception-room, full of flowers, and with a glass door leading
into the garden.

Alexandra and Adelaida came in almost immediately, and looked
inquiringly at the prince and their mother.

The girls generally rose at about nine in the morning in the country;
Aglaya, of late, had been in the habit of getting up rather earlier and
having a walk in the garden, but not at seven o’clock; about eight or a
little later was her usual time.

Lizabetha Prokofievna, who really had not slept all night, rose at about
eight on purpose to meet Aglaya in the garden and walk with her; but she
could not find her either in the garden or in her own room.

This agitated the old lady considerably; and she awoke her other
daughters. Next, she learned from the maid that Aglaya had gone into
the park before seven o’clock. The sisters made a joke of Aglaya’s last
freak, and told their mother that if she went into the park to look
for her, Aglaya would probably be very angry with her, and that she was
pretty sure to be sitting reading on the green bench that she had talked
of two or three days since, and about which she had nearly quarrelled
with Prince S., who did not see anything particularly lovely in it.

Arrived at the rendezvous of the prince and her daughter, and hearing
the strange words of the latter, Lizabetha Prokofievna had been
dreadfully alarmed, for many reasons. However, now that she had dragged
the prince home with her, she began to feel a little frightened at what
she had undertaken. Why should not Aglaya meet the prince in the
park and have a talk with him, even if such a meeting should be by
appointment?

“Don’t suppose, prince,” she began, bracing herself up for the effort,
“don’t suppose that I have brought you here to ask questions. After last
night, I assure you, I am not so exceedingly anxious to see you at all;
I could have postponed the pleasure for a long while.” She paused.

“But at the same time you would be very glad to know how I happened to
meet Aglaya Ivanovna this morning?” The prince finished her speech for
her with the utmost composure.

“Well, what then? Supposing I should like to know?” cried Lizabetha
Prokofievna, blushing. “I’m sure I am not afraid of plain speaking. I’m
not offending anyone, and I never wish to, and--”

“Pardon me, it is no offence to wish to know this; you are her
mother. We met at the green bench this morning, punctually at seven
o’clock,--according to an agreement made by Aglaya Ivanovna with myself
yesterday. She said that she wished to see me and speak to me about
something important. We met and conversed for an hour about matters
concerning Aglaya Ivanovna herself, and that’s all.”

“Of course it is all, my friend. I don’t doubt you for a moment,” said
Lizabetha Prokofievna with dignity.

“Well done, prince, capital!” cried Aglaya, who entered the room at
this moment. “Thank you for assuming that I would not demean myself
with lies. Come, is that enough, mamma, or do you intend to put any more
questions?”

“You know I have never needed to blush before you, up to this day,
though perhaps you would have been glad enough to make me,” said
Lizabetha Prokofievna,--with majesty. “Good-bye, prince; forgive me for
bothering you. I trust you will rest assured of my unalterable esteem
for you.”

The prince made his bows and retired at once. Alexandra and Adelaida
smiled and whispered to each other, while Lizabetha Prokofievna glared
severely at them. “We are only laughing at the prince’s beautiful bows,
mamma,” said Adelaida. “Sometimes he bows just like a meal-sack, but
to-day he was like--like Evgenie Pavlovitch!”

“It is the _heart_ which is the best teacher of refinement and dignity,
not the dancing-master,” said her mother, sententiously, and departed
upstairs to her own room, not so much as glancing at Aglaya.

When the prince reached home, about nine o’clock, he found Vera Lebedeff
and the maid on the verandah. They were both busy trying to tidy up the
place after last night’s disorderly party.

“Thank goodness, we’ve just managed to finish it before you came in!”
 said Vera, joyfully.

“Good-morning! My head whirls so; I didn’t sleep all night. I should
like to have a nap now.”

“Here, on the verandah? Very well, I’ll tell them all not to come and
wake you. Papa has gone out somewhere.”

The servant left the room. Vera was about to follow her, but returned
and approached the prince with a preoccupied air.

“Prince!” she said, “have pity on that poor boy; don’t turn him out
today.”

“Not for the world; he shall do just as he likes.”

“He won’t do any harm now; and--and don’t be too severe with him.”

“Oh dear no! Why--”

“And--and you won’t _laugh_ at him? That’s the chief thing.”

“Oh no! Never.”

“How foolish I am to speak of such things to a man like you,” said Vera,
blushing. “Though you _do_ look tired,” she added, half turning away,
“your eyes are so splendid at this moment--so full of happiness.”

“Really?” asked the prince, gleefully, and he laughed in delight.

But Vera, simple-minded little girl that she was (just like a boy, in
fact), here became dreadfully confused, of a sudden, and ran hastily out
of the room, laughing and blushing.

“What a dear little thing she is,” thought the prince, and immediately
forgot all about her.

He walked to the far end of the verandah, where the sofa stood, with
a table in front of it. Here he sat down and covered his face with his
