another man I met last year. There was a very strange feature in this
case, strange because of its extremely rare occurrence. This man had
once been brought to the scaffold in company with several others, and
had had the sentence of death by shooting passed upon him for some
political crime. Twenty minutes later he had been reprieved and
some other punishment substituted; but the interval between the two
sentences, twenty minutes, or at least a quarter of an hour, had been
passed in the certainty that within a few minutes he must die. I was
very anxious to hear him speak of his impressions during that dreadful
time, and I several times inquired of him as to what he thought and
felt. He remembered everything with the most accurate and extraordinary
distinctness, and declared that he would never forget a single iota of
the experience.

“About twenty paces from the scaffold, where he had stood to hear the
sentence, were three posts, fixed in the ground, to which to fasten the
criminals (of whom there were several). The first three criminals were
taken to the posts, dressed in long white tunics, with white caps drawn
over their faces, so that they could not see the rifles pointed at them.
Then a group of soldiers took their stand opposite to each post. My
friend was the eighth on the list, and therefore he would have been
among the third lot to go up. A priest went about among them with a
cross: and there was about five minutes of time left for him to live.

“He said that those five minutes seemed to him to be a most interminable
period, an enormous wealth of time; he seemed to be living, in these
minutes, so many lives that there was no need as yet to think of that
last moment, so that he made several arrangements, dividing up the time
into portions--one for saying farewell to his companions, two minutes
for that; then a couple more for thinking over his own life and career
and all about himself; and another minute for a last look around. He
remembered having divided his time like this quite well. While saying
good-bye to his friends he recollected asking one of them some very
usual everyday question, and being much interested in the answer. Then
having bade farewell, he embarked upon those two minutes which he had
allotted to looking into himself; he knew beforehand what he was going
to think about. He wished to put it to himself as quickly and clearly
as possible, that here was he, a living, thinking man, and that in three
minutes he would be nobody; or if somebody or something, then what and
where? He thought he would decide this question once for all in these
last three minutes. A little way off there stood a church, and its
gilded spire glittered in the sun. He remembered staring stubbornly at
this spire, and at the rays of light sparkling from it. He could not
tear his eyes from these rays of light; he got the idea that these rays
were his new nature, and that in three minutes he would become one of
them, amalgamated somehow with them.

“The repugnance to what must ensue almost immediately, and the
uncertainty, were dreadful, he said; but worst of all was the idea,
‘What should I do if I were not to die now? What if I were to return to
life again? What an eternity of days, and all mine! How I should grudge
and count up every minute of it, so as to waste not a single instant!’
He said that this thought weighed so upon him and became such a terrible
burden upon his brain that he could not bear it, and wished they would
shoot him quickly and have done with it.”

The prince paused and all waited, expecting him to go on again and
finish the story.

“Is that all?” asked Aglaya.

“All? Yes,” said the prince, emerging from a momentary reverie.

“And why did you tell us this?”

“Oh, I happened to recall it, that’s all! It fitted into the
conversation--”

“You probably wish to deduce, prince,” said Alexandra, “that moments of
time cannot be reckoned by money value, and that sometimes five minutes
are worth priceless treasures. All this is very praiseworthy; but may I
ask about this friend of yours, who told you the terrible experience of
his life? He was reprieved, you say; in other words, they did restore to
him that ‘eternity of days.’ What did he do with these riches of time?
Did he keep careful account of his minutes?”

“Oh no, he didn’t! I asked him myself. He said that he had not lived a
bit as he had intended, and had wasted many, and many a minute.”

“Very well, then there’s an experiment, and the thing is proved; one
cannot live and count each moment; say what you like, but one _cannot_.”

“That is true,” said the prince, “I have thought so myself. And yet, why
shouldn’t one do it?”

“You think, then, that you could live more wisely than other people?”
 said Aglaya.

“I have had that idea.”

“And you have it still?”

“Yes--I have it still,” the prince replied.

He had contemplated Aglaya until now, with a pleasant though rather
timid smile, but as the last words fell from his lips he began to laugh,
and looked at her merrily.

“You are not very modest!” said she.

“But how brave you are!” said he. “You are laughing, and I--that man’s
tale impressed me so much, that I dreamt of it afterwards; yes, I dreamt
of those five minutes...”

He looked at his listeners again with that same serious, searching
expression.

“You are not angry with me?” he asked suddenly, and with a kind of
nervous hurry, although he looked them straight in the face.

“Why should we be angry?” they cried.

“Only because I seem to be giving you a lecture, all the time!”

At this they laughed heartily.

“Please don’t be angry with me,” continued the prince. “I know very well
that I have seen less of life than other people, and have less knowledge
of it. I must appear to speak strangely sometimes...”

He said the last words nervously.

“You say you have been happy, and that proves you have lived, not less,
but more than other people. Why make all these excuses?” interrupted
Aglaya in a mocking tone of voice. “Besides, you need not mind about
lecturing us; you have nothing to boast of. With your quietism, one
could live happily for a hundred years at least. One might show you the
execution of a felon, or show you one’s little finger. You could draw
a moral from either, and be quite satisfied. That sort of existence is
easy enough.”

“I can’t understand why you always fly into a temper,” said Mrs.
Epanchin, who had been listening to the conversation and examining the
faces of the speakers in turn. “I do not understand what you mean. What
has your little finger to do with it? The prince talks well, though he
is not amusing. He began all right, but now he seems sad.”

“Never mind, mamma! Prince, I wish you had seen an execution,” said
Aglaya. “I should like to ask you a question about that, if you had.”

“I have seen an execution,” said the prince.

“You have!” cried Aglaya. “I might have guessed it. That’s a fitting
crown to the rest of the story. If you have seen an execution, how can
you say you lived happily all the while?”

“But is there capital punishment where you were?” asked Adelaida.

“I saw it at Lyons. Schneider took us there, and as soon as we arrived
we came in for that.”
