“And the general?” he asked, abruptly.

“The--the general? How do you mean, the general?” said Lebedeff,
dubiously, as though he had not taken in the drift of the prince’s
remark.

“Oh, good heavens! I mean, what did the general say when the purse
turned up under the chair? You and he had searched for it together
there, hadn’t you?”

“Quite so--together! But the second time I thought better to say nothing
about finding it. I found it alone.”

“But--why in the world--and the money? Was it all there?”

“I opened the purse and counted it myself; right to a single rouble.”

“I think you might have come and told me,” said the prince,
thoughtfully.

“Oh--I didn’t like to disturb you, prince, in the midst of your private
and doubtless most interesting personal reflections. Besides, I wanted
to appear, myself, to have found nothing. I took the purse, and opened
it, and counted the money, and shut it and put it down again under the
chair.”

“What in the world for?”

“Oh, just out of curiosity,” said Lebedeff, rubbing his hands and
sniggering.

“What, it’s still there then, is it? Ever since the day before
yesterday?”

“Oh no! You see, I was half in hopes the general might find it. Because
if I found it, why should not he too observe an object lying before his
very eyes? I moved the chair several times so as to expose the purse
to view, but the general never saw it. He is very absent just now,
evidently. He talks and laughs and tells stories, and suddenly flies
into a rage with me, goodness knows why.”

“Well, but--have you taken the purse away now?”

“No, it disappeared from under the chair in the night.”

“Where is it now, then?”

“Here,” laughed Lebedeff, at last, rising to his full height and looking
pleasantly at the prince, “here, in the lining of my coat. Look, you can
feel it for yourself, if you like!”

Sure enough there was something sticking out of the front of the
coat--something large. It certainly felt as though it might well be the
purse fallen through a hole in the pocket into the lining.

“I took it out and had a look at it; it’s all right. I’ve let it slip
back into the lining now, as you see, and so I have been walking about
ever since yesterday morning; it knocks against my legs when I walk
along.”

“H’m! and you take no notice of it?”

“Quite so, I take no notice of it. Ha, ha! and think of this, prince,
my pockets are always strong and whole, and yet, here in one night, is a
huge hole. I know the phenomenon is unworthy of your notice; but such is
the case. I examined the hole, and I declare it actually looks as though
it had been made with a pen-knife, a most improbable contingency.”

“And--and--the general?”

“Ah, very angry all day, sir; all yesterday and all today. He shows
decided bacchanalian predilections at one time, and at another is
tearful and sensitive, but at any moment he is liable to paroxysms of
such rage that I assure you, prince, I am quite alarmed. I am not
a military man, you know. Yesterday we were sitting together in
the tavern, and the lining of my coat was--quite accidentally, of
course--sticking out right in front. The general squinted at it, and
flew into a rage. He never looks me quite in the face now, unless he is
very drunk or maudlin; but yesterday he looked at me in such a way that
a shiver went all down my back. I intend to find the purse tomorrow; but
till then I am going to have another night of it with him.”

“What’s the good of tormenting him like this?” cried the prince.

“I don’t torment him, prince, I don’t indeed!” cried Lebedeff, hotly. “I
love him, my dear sir, I esteem him; and believe it or not, I love him
all the better for this business, yes--and value him more.”

Lebedeff said this so seriously that the prince quite lost his temper
with him.

“Nonsense! love him and torment him so! Why, by the very fact that he
put the purse prominently before you, first under the chair and then
in your lining, he shows that he does not wish to deceive you, but is
anxious to beg your forgiveness in this artless way. Do you hear? He is
asking your pardon. He confides in the delicacy of your feelings, and
in your friendship for him. And you can allow yourself to humiliate so
thoroughly honest a man!”

“Thoroughly honest, quite so, prince, thoroughly honest!” said Lebedeff,
with flashing eyes. “And only you, prince, could have found so very
appropriate an expression. I honour you for it, prince. Very well,
that’s settled; I shall find the purse now and not tomorrow. Here, I
find it and take it out before your eyes! And the money is all right.
Take it, prince, and keep it till tomorrow, will you? Tomorrow or next
day I’ll take it back again. I think, prince, that the night after
its disappearance it was buried under a bush in the garden. So I
believe--what do you think of that?”

“Well, take care you don’t tell him to his face that you have found the
purse. Simply let him see that it is no longer in the lining of your
coat, and form his own conclusions.”

“Do you think so? Had I not just better tell him I have found it, and
pretend I never guessed where it was?”

“No, I don’t think so,” said the prince, thoughtfully; “it’s too late
for that--that would be dangerous now. No, no! Better say nothing about
it. Be nice with him, you know, but don’t show him--oh, _you_ know well
enough--”

“I know, prince, of course I know, but I’m afraid I shall not carry
it out; for to do so one needs a heart like your own. He is so very
irritable just now, and so proud. At one moment he will embrace me,
and the next he flies out at me and sneers at me, and then I stick the
lining forward on purpose. Well, _au revoir_, prince, I see I am keeping
you, and boring you, too, interfering with your most interesting private
reflections.”

“Now, do be careful! Secrecy, as before!”

“Oh, silence isn’t the word! Softly, softly!”

But in spite of this conclusion to the episode, the prince remained as
puzzled as ever, if not more so. He awaited next morning’s interview
with the general most impatiently.

IV.

The time appointed was twelve o’clock, and the prince, returning home
unexpectedly late, found the general waiting for him. At the first
glance, he saw that the latter was displeased, perhaps because he had
been kept waiting. The prince apologized, and quickly took a seat. He
seemed strangely timid before the general this morning, for some reason,
and felt as though his visitor were some piece of china which he was
afraid of breaking.

On scrutinizing him, the prince soon saw that the general was quite a
different man from what he had been the day before; he looked like one
who had come to some momentous resolve. His calmness, however, was more
