room, his wrath would fall upon her head. So she hastened to put the
question:

“The old story, eh?”

“Old story? No! Heaven knows what’s up now--I don’t! Father has simply
gone mad; mother’s in floods of tears. Upon my word, Varia, I must kick
him out of the house; or else go myself,” he added, probably remembering
that he could not well turn people out of a house which was not his own.

“You must make allowances,” murmured Varia.

“Make allowances? For whom? Him--the old blackguard? No, no, Varia--that
won’t do! It won’t do, I tell you! And look at the swagger of the man!
He’s all to blame himself, and yet he puts on so much ‘side’ that you’d
think--my word!--‘It’s too much trouble to go through the gate, you must
break the fence for me!’ That’s the sort of air he puts on; but what’s
the matter with you, Varia? What a curious expression you have!”

“I’m all right,” said Varia, in a tone that sounded as though she were
all wrong.

Gania looked more intently at her.

“You’ve been _there?_” he asked, suddenly.

“Yes.”

“Did you find out anything?”

“Nothing unexpected. I discovered that it’s all true. My husband was
wiser than either of us. Just as he suspected from the beginning, so it
has fallen out. Where is he?”

“Out. Well--what has happened?--go on.”

“The prince is formally engaged to her--that’s settled. The elder
sisters told me about it. Aglaya has agreed. They don’t attempt to
conceal it any longer; you know how mysterious and secret they have all
been up to now. Adelaida’s wedding is put off again, so that both can be
married on one day. Isn’t that delightfully romantic? Somebody ought to
write a poem on it. Sit down and write an ode instead of tearing up
and down like that. This evening Princess Bielokonski is to arrive; she
comes just in time--they have a party tonight. He is to be presented
to old Bielokonski, though I believe he knows her already; probably the
engagement will be openly announced. They are only afraid that he may
knock something down, or trip over something when he comes into the
room. It would be just like him.”

Gania listened attentively, but to his sister’s astonishment he was by
no means so impressed by this news (which should, she thought, have been
so important to him) as she had expected.

“Well, it was clear enough all along,” he said, after a moment’s
reflection. “So that’s the end,” he added, with a disagreeable smile,
continuing to walk up and down the room, but much slower than before,
and glancing slyly into his sister’s face.

“It’s a good thing that you take it philosophically, at all events,”
 said Varia. “I’m really very glad of it.”

“Yes, it’s off our hands--off _yours_, I should say.”

“I think I have served you faithfully. I never even asked you what
happiness you expected to find with Aglaya.”

“Did I ever expect to find happiness with Aglaya?”

“Come, come, don’t overdo your philosophy. Of course you did. Now it’s
all over, and a good thing, too; pair of fools that we have been! I
confess I have never been able to look at it seriously. I busied myself
in it for your sake, thinking that there was no knowing what might
happen with a funny girl like that to deal with. There were ninety to
one chances against it. To this moment I can’t make out why you wished
for it.”

“H’m! now, I suppose, you and your husband will never weary of egging
me on to work again. You’ll begin your lectures about perseverance and
strength of will, and all that. I know it all by heart,” said Gania,
laughing.

“He’s got some new idea in his head,” thought Varia. “Are they pleased
over there--the parents?” asked Gania, suddenly.

“N-no, I don’t think they are. You can judge for yourself. I think the
general is pleased enough; her mother is a little uneasy. She always
loathed the idea of the prince as a _husband_; everybody knows that.”

“Of course, naturally. The bridegroom is an impossible and ridiculous
one. I mean, has _she_ given her formal consent?”

“She has not said ‘no,’ up to now, and that’s all. It was sure to be so
with her. You know what she is like. You know how absurdly shy she is.
You remember how she used to hide in a cupboard as a child, so as to
avoid seeing visitors, for hours at a time. She is just the same now;
but, do you know, I think there is something serious in the matter, even
from her side; I feel it, somehow. She laughs at the prince, they say,
from morn to night in order to hide her real feelings; but you may be
sure she finds occasion to say something or other to him on the sly, for
he himself is in a state of radiant happiness. He walks in the clouds;
they say he is extremely funny just now; I heard it from themselves.
They seemed to be laughing at me in their sleeves--those elder girls--I
don’t know why.”

Gania had begun to frown, and probably Varia added this last sentence
in order to probe his thought. However, at this moment, the noise began
again upstairs.

“I’ll turn him out!” shouted Gania, glad of the opportunity of venting
his vexation. “I shall just turn him out--we can’t have this.”

“Yes, and then he’ll go about the place and disgrace us as he did
yesterday.”

“How ‘as he did yesterday’? What do you mean? What did he do yesterday?”
 asked Gania, in alarm.

“Why, goodness me, don’t you know?” Varia stopped short.

“What? You don’t mean to say that he went there yesterday!” cried Gania,
flushing red with shame and anger. “Good heavens, Varia! Speak! You have
just been there. _Was_ he there or not, _quick?_” And Gania rushed for the
door. Varia followed and caught him by both hands.

“What are you doing? Where are you going to? You can’t let him go now;
if you do he’ll go and do something worse.”

“What did he do there? What did he say?” “They couldn’t tell me
themselves; they couldn’t make head or tail of it; but he frightened
them all. He came to see the general, who was not at home; so he asked
for Lizabetha Prokofievna. First of all, he begged her for some place,
or situation, for work of some kind, and then he began to complain about
_us_, about me and my husband, and you, especially _you_; he said a lot of
things.”

“Oh! couldn’t you find out?” muttered Gania, trembling hysterically.

“No--nothing more than that. Why, they couldn’t understand him
themselves; and very likely didn’t tell me all.”

Gania seized his head with both hands and tottered to the window; Varia
sat down at the other window.

“Funny girl, Aglaya,” she observed, after a pause. “When she left me she
said, ‘Give my special and personal respects to your parents; I shall
certainly find an opportunity to see your father one day,’ and so
serious over it. She’s a strange creature.”

“Wasn’t she joking? She was speaking sarcastically!”

