 said Gania, rather excitedly. “And as to her answer to me, there’s no
doubt about that. Why should you suppose she will refuse me?”

“Oh, I only judge by what I see. Varvara Ardalionovna said just now--”

“Oh she--they don’t know anything about it! Nastasia was only chaffing
Rogojin. I was alarmed at first, but I have thought better of it now;
she was simply laughing at him. She looks on me as a fool because I show
that I meant her money, and doesn’t realize that there are other men
who would deceive her in far worse fashion. I’m not going to pretend
anything, and you’ll see she’ll marry me, all right. If she likes to
live quietly, so she shall; but if she gives me any of her nonsense, I
shall leave her at once, but I shall keep the money. I’m not going to
look a fool; that’s the first thing, not to look a fool.”

“But Nastasia Philipovna seems to me to be such a _sensible_ woman, and,
as such, why should she run blindly into this business? That’s what
puzzles me so,” said the prince.

“You don’t know all, you see; I tell you there are things--and besides,
I’m sure that she is persuaded that I love her to distraction, and I
give you my word I have a strong suspicion that she loves me, too--in
her own way, of course. She thinks she will be able to make a sort of
slave of me all my life; but I shall prepare a little surprise for her.
I don’t know whether I ought to be confidential with you, prince; but,
I assure you, you are the only decent fellow I have come across. I have
not spoken so sincerely as I am doing at this moment for years. There
are uncommonly few honest people about, prince; there isn’t one honester
than Ptitsin, he’s the best of the lot. Are you laughing? You don’t
know, perhaps, that blackguards like honest people, and being one myself
I like you. _Why_ am I a blackguard? Tell me honestly, now. They all call
me a blackguard because of her, and I have got into the way of thinking
myself one. That’s what is so bad about the business.”

“_I_ for one shall never think you a blackguard again,” said the prince.
“I confess I had a poor opinion of you at first, but I have been so
joyfully surprised about you just now; it’s a good lesson for me. I
shall never judge again without a thorough trial. I see now that you are
not only not a blackguard, but are not even quite spoiled. I see that
you are quite an ordinary man, not original in the least degree, but
rather weak.”

Gania laughed sarcastically, but said nothing. The prince, seeing that
he did not quite like the last remark, blushed, and was silent too.

“Has my father asked you for money?” asked Gania, suddenly.

“No.”

“Don’t give it to him if he does. Fancy, he was a decent, respectable
man once! He was received in the best society; he was not always the
liar he is now. Of course, wine is at the bottom of it all; but he is a
good deal worse than an innocent liar now. Do you know that he keeps a
mistress? I can’t understand how mother is so long-suffering. Did he
tell you the story of the siege of Kars? Or perhaps the one about his
grey horse that talked? He loves to enlarge on these absurd histories.”
 And Gania burst into a fit of laughter. Suddenly he turned to the prince
and asked: “Why are you looking at me like that?”

“I am surprised to see you laugh in that way, like a child. You came
to make friends with me again just now, and you said, ‘I will kiss your
hand, if you like,’ just as a child would have said it. And then, all at
once you are talking of this mad project--of these seventy-five thousand
roubles! It all seems so absurd and impossible.”

“Well, what conclusion have you reached?”

“That you are rushing madly into the undertaking, and that you would
do well to think it over again. It is more than possible that Varvara
Ardalionovna is right.”

“Ah! now you begin to moralize! I know that I am only a child, very
well,” replied Gania impatiently. “That is proved by my having this
conversation with you. It is not for money only, prince, that I am
rushing into this affair,” he continued, hardly master of his words,
so closely had his vanity been touched. “If I reckoned on that I should
certainly be deceived, for I am still too weak in mind and character.
I am obeying a passion, an impulse perhaps, because I have but one aim,
one that overmasters all else. You imagine that once I am in possession
of these seventy-five thousand roubles, I shall rush to buy a
carriage... No, I shall go on wearing the old overcoat I have worn for
three years, and I shall give up my club. I shall follow the example of
men who have made their fortunes. When Ptitsin was seventeen he slept
in the street, he sold pen-knives, and began with a copeck; now he has
sixty thousand roubles, but to get them, what has he not done? Well,
I shall be spared such a hard beginning, and shall start with a little
capital. In fifteen years people will say, ‘Look, that’s Ivolgin, the
king of the Jews!’ You say that I have no originality. Now mark this,
prince--there is nothing so offensive to a man of our time and race
than to be told that he is wanting in originality, that he is weak
in character, has no particular talent, and is, in short, an ordinary
person. You have not even done me the honour of looking upon me as a
rogue. Do you know, I could have knocked you down for that just now! You
wounded me more cruelly than Epanchin, who thinks me capable of selling
him my wife! Observe, it was a perfectly gratuitous idea on his part,
seeing there has never been any discussion of it between us! This has
exasperated me, and I am determined to make a fortune! I will do it!
Once I am rich, I shall be a genius, an extremely original man. One of
the vilest and most hateful things connected with money is that it can
buy even talent; and will do so as long as the world lasts. You will say
that this is childish--or romantic. Well, that will be all the better
for me, but the thing shall be done. I will carry it through. He laughs
most, who laughs last. Why does Epanchin insult me? Simply because,
socially, I am a nobody. However, enough for the present. Colia has put
his nose in to tell us dinner is ready, twice. I’m dining out. I shall
come and talk to you now and then; you shall be comfortable enough with
us. They are sure to make you one of the family. I think you and I
will either be great friends or enemies. Look here now, supposing I had
kissed your hand just now, as I offered to do in all sincerity, should I
have hated you for it afterwards?”

“Certainly, but not always. You would not have been able to keep it up,
and would have ended by forgiving me,” said the prince, after a pause
for reflection, and with a pleasant smile.

“Oho, how careful one has to be with you, prince! Haven’t you put a drop
of poison in that remark now, eh? By the way--ha, ha, ha!--I forgot to
ask, was I right in believing that you were a good deal struck yourself
with Nastasia Philipovna.”

“Ye-yes.”

“Are you in love with her?”

“N-no.”

“And yet you flush up as red as a rosebud! Come--it’s all right. I’m not
going to laugh at you. Do you know she is a very virtuous woman? Believe
it or not, as you like. You think she and Totski--not a bit of it, not a
bit of it! Not for ever so long! _Au revoir!_”

Gania left the room in great good humour. The prince stayed behind, and
meditated alone for a few minutes. At length, Colia popped his head in
once more.

“I don’t want any dinner, thanks, Colia. I had too good a lunch at
General Epanchin’s.”

Colia came into the room and gave the prince a note; it was from the
general and was carefully sealed up. It was clear from Colia’s face how
painful it was to him to deliver the missive. The prince read it, rose,
and took his hat.

“It’s only a couple of yards,” said Colia, blushing.

“He’s sitting there over his bottle--and how they can give him credit,
I cannot understand. Don’t tell mother I brought you the note, prince;
I have sworn not to do it a thousand times, but I’m always so sorry for
him. Don’t stand on ceremony, give him some trifle, and let that end
it.”
