with authority. “And then their way of preaching; they have a skilful
manner of doing it! And they know how to startle one, too. I got quite
a fright myself in ’, in Vienna, I assure you; but I didn’t cave in to
them, I ran away instead, ha, ha!”

“Come, come, I’ve always heard that you ran away with the beautiful
Countess Levitsky that time--throwing up everything in order to do
it--and not from the Jesuits at all,” said Princess Bielokonski,
suddenly.

“Well, yes--but we call it from the Jesuits, you know; it comes to
the same thing,” laughed the old fellow, delighted with the pleasant
recollection.

“You seem to be very religious,” he continued, kindly, addressing the
prince, “which is a thing one meets so seldom nowadays among young
people.”

The prince was listening open-mouthed, and still in a condition of
excited agitation. The old man was evidently interested in him, and
anxious to study him more closely.

“Pavlicheff was a man of bright intellect and a good Christian, a
sincere Christian,” said the prince, suddenly. “How could he possibly
embrace a faith which is unchristian? Roman Catholicism is, so to speak,
simply the same thing as unchristianity,” he added with flashing eyes,
which seemed to take in everybody in the room.

“Come, that’s a little _too_ strong, isn’t it?” murmured the old man,
glancing at General Epanchin in surprise.

“How do you make out that the Roman Catholic religion is _unchristian?_
What is it, then?” asked Ivan Petrovitch, turning to the prince.

“It is not a Christian religion, in the first place,” said the latter,
in extreme agitation, quite out of proportion to the necessity of the
moment. “And in the second place, Roman Catholicism is, in my opinion,
worse than Atheism itself. Yes--that is my opinion. Atheism only
preaches a negation, but Romanism goes further; it preaches a
disfigured, distorted Christ--it preaches Anti-Christ--I assure you, I
swear it! This is my own personal conviction, and it has long distressed
me. The Roman Catholic believes that the Church on earth cannot stand
without universal temporal Power. He cries ‘non possumus!’ In my
opinion the Roman Catholic religion is not a faith at all, but simply a
continuation of the Roman Empire, and everything is subordinated to
this idea--beginning with faith. The Pope has seized territories and an
earthly throne, and has held them with the sword. And so the thing has
gone on, only that to the sword they have added lying, intrigue, deceit,
fanaticism, superstition, swindling;--they have played fast and loose
with the most sacred and sincere feelings of men;--they have exchanged
everything--everything for money, for base earthly _power!_ And is this
not the teaching of Anti-Christ? How could the upshot of all this
be other than Atheism? Atheism is the child of Roman Catholicism--it
proceeded from these Romans themselves, though perhaps they would not
believe it. It grew and fattened on hatred of its parents; it is the
progeny of their lies and spiritual feebleness. Atheism! In our country
it is only among the upper classes that you find unbelievers; men who
have lost the root or spirit of their faith; but abroad whole masses of
the people are beginning to profess unbelief--at first because of
the darkness and lies by which they were surrounded; but now out of
fanaticism, out of loathing for the Church and Christianity!”

The prince paused to get breath. He had spoken with extraordinary
rapidity, and was very pale.

All present interchanged glances, but at last the old dignitary burst
out laughing frankly. Prince N. took out his eye-glass to have a good
look at the speaker. The German poet came out of his corner and crept
nearer to the table, with a spiteful smile.

“You exaggerate the matter very much,” said Ivan Petrovitch, with rather
a bored air. “There are, in the foreign Churches, many representatives
of their faith who are worthy of respect and esteem.”

“Oh, but I did not speak of individual representatives. I was merely
talking about Roman Catholicism, and its essence--of Rome itself. A
Church can never entirely disappear; I never hinted at that!”

“Agreed that all this may be true; but we need not discuss a subject
which belongs to the domain of theology.”

“Oh, no; oh, no! Not to theology alone, I assure you! Why, Socialism is
the progeny of Romanism and of the Romanistic spirit. It and its brother
Atheism proceed from Despair in opposition to Catholicism. It seeks to
replace in itself the moral power of religion, in order to appease the
spiritual thirst of parched humanity and save it; not by Christ, but
by force. ‘Don’t dare to believe in God, don’t dare to possess any
individuality, any property! _Fraternité ou la Mort_; two million heads.
‘By their works ye shall know them’--we are told. And we must not
suppose that all this is harmless and without danger to ourselves. Oh,
no; we must resist, and quickly, quickly! We must let our Christ shine
forth upon the Western nations, our Christ whom we have preserved
intact, and whom they have never known. Not as slaves, allowing
ourselves to be caught by the hooks of the Jesuits, but carrying our
Russian civilization to _them_, we must stand before them, not letting it
be said among us that their preaching is ‘skilful,’ as someone expressed
it just now.”

“But excuse me, excuse me;” cried Ivan Petrovitch considerably
disturbed, and looking around uneasily. “Your ideas are, of course, most
praiseworthy, and in the highest degree patriotic; but you exaggerate
the matter terribly. It would be better if we dropped the subject.”

“No, sir, I do not exaggerate, I understate the matter, if anything,
undoubtedly understate it; simply because I cannot express myself as I
should like, but--”

“Allow me!”

The prince was silent. He sat straight up in his chair and gazed
fervently at Ivan Petrovitch.

“It seems to me that you have been too painfully impressed by the news
of what happened to your good benefactor,” said the old dignitary,
kindly, and with the utmost calmness of demeanour. “You are excitable,
perhaps as the result of your solitary life. If you would make up your
mind to live more among your fellows in society, I trust, I am sure,
that the world would be glad to welcome you, as a remarkable young man;
and you would soon find yourself able to look at things more calmly. You
would see that all these things are much simpler than you think; and,
besides, these rare cases come about, in my opinion, from ennui and from
satiety.”

“Exactly, exactly! That is a true thought!” cried the prince. “From
ennui, from our ennui but not from satiety! Oh, no, you are wrong there!
Say from _thirst_ if you like; the thirst of fever! And please do not
suppose that this is so small a matter that we may have a laugh at it
and dismiss it; we must be able to foresee our disasters and arm against
them. We Russians no sooner arrive at the brink of the water, and
realize that we are really at the brink, than we are so delighted with
the outlook that in we plunge and swim to the farthest point we can
see. Why is this? You say you are surprised at Pavlicheff’s action; you
ascribe it to madness, to kindness of heart, and what not, but it is not
so.

“Our Russian intensity not only astonishes ourselves; all Europe wonders
at our conduct in such cases! For, if one of us goes over to Roman
Catholicism, he is sure to become a Jesuit at once, and a rabid one into
the bargain. If one of us becomes an Atheist, he must needs begin to
insist on the prohibition of faith in God by force, that is, by the
sword. Why is this? Why does he then exceed all bounds at once? Because
he has found land at last, the fatherland that he sought in vain before;
and, because his soul is rejoiced to find it, he throws himself upon it
and kisses it! Oh, it is not from vanity alone, it is not from feelings
of vanity that Russians become Atheists and Jesuits! But from spiritual
thirst, from anguish of longing for higher things, for dry firm land,
for foothold on a fatherland which they never believed in because they
never knew it. It is easier for a Russian to become an Atheist, than for
any other nationality in the world. And not only does a Russian ‘become
an Atheist,’ but he actually _believes in_ Atheism, just as though he
