half an hour after his fit, he had been carried home.

He soon heard that a messenger from the Epanchins’ had already been to
inquire after him. At half-past eleven another arrived; and this pleased
him.

Vera Lebedeff was one of the first to come to see him and offer her
services. No sooner did she catch sight of him than she burst into
tears; but when he tried to soothe her she began to laugh. He was quite
struck by the girl’s deep sympathy for him; he seized her hand and
kissed it. Vera flushed crimson.

“Oh, don’t, don’t!” she exclaimed in alarm, snatching her hand away. She
went hastily out of the room in a state of strange confusion.

Lebedeff also came to see the prince, in a great hurry to get away to
the “deceased,” as he called General Ivolgin, who was alive still, but
very ill. Colia also turned up, and begged the prince for pity’s sake to
tell him all he knew about his father which had been concealed from him
till now. He said he had found out nearly everything since yesterday;
the poor boy was in a state of deep affliction. With all the sympathy
which he could bring into play, the prince told Colia the whole story
without reserve, detailing the facts as clearly as he could. The
tale struck Colia like a thunderbolt. He could not speak. He listened
silently, and cried softly to himself the while. The prince perceived
that this was an impression which would last for the whole of the boy’s
life. He made haste to explain his view of the matter, and pointed out
that the old man’s approaching death was probably brought on by horror
at the thought of his action; and that it was not everyone who was
capable of such a feeling.

Colia’s eyes flashed as he listened.

“Gania and Varia and Ptitsin are a worthless lot! I shall not quarrel
with them; but from this moment our feet shall not travel the same road.
Oh, prince, I have felt much that is quite new to me since yesterday!
It is a lesson for me. I shall now consider my mother as entirely my
responsibility; though she may be safe enough with Varia. Still, meat
and drink is not everything.”

He jumped up and hurried off, remembering suddenly that he was wanted
at his father’s bedside; but before he went out of the room he inquired
hastily after the prince’s health, and receiving the latter’s reply,
added:

“Isn’t there something else, prince? I heard yesterday, but I have
no right to talk about this... If you ever want a true friend and
servant--neither you nor I are so very happy, are we?--come to me. I
won’t ask you questions, though.”

He ran off and left the prince more dejected than ever.

Everyone seemed to be speaking prophetically, hinting at some misfortune
or sorrow to come; they had all looked at him as though they knew
something which he did not know. Lebedeff had asked questions, Colia had
hinted, and Vera had shed tears. What was it?

At last, with a sigh of annoyance, he said to himself that it was
nothing but his own cursed sickly suspicion. His face lighted up with
joy when, at about two o’clock, he espied the Epanchins coming along to
pay him a short visit, “just for a minute.” They really had only come
for a minute.

Lizabetha Prokofievna had announced, directly after lunch, that they
would all take a walk together. The information was given in the form of
a command, without explanation, drily and abruptly. All had issued forth
in obedience to the mandate; that is, the girls, mamma, and Prince S.
Lizabetha Prokofievna went off in a direction exactly contrary to the
usual one, and all understood very well what she was driving at, but
held their peace, fearing to irritate the good lady. She, as though
anxious to avoid any conversation, walked ahead, silent and alone. At
last Adelaida remarked that it was no use racing along at such a pace,
and that she could not keep up with her mother.

“Look here,” said Lizabetha Prokofievna, turning round suddenly; “we are
passing his house. Whatever Aglaya may think, and in spite of anything
that may happen, he is not a stranger to us; besides which, he is ill
and in misfortune. I, for one, shall call in and see him. Let anyone
follow me who cares to.”

Of course every one of them followed her.

The prince hastened to apologize, very properly, for yesterday’s mishap
with the vase, and for the scene generally.

“Oh, that’s nothing,” replied Lizabetha; “I’m not sorry for the vase,
I’m sorry for you. H’m! so you can see that there was a ‘scene,’ can
you? Well, it doesn’t matter much, for everyone must realize now that it
is impossible to be hard on you. Well, _au revoir_. I advise you to have
a walk, and then go to sleep again if you can. Come in as usual, if
you feel inclined; and be assured, once for all, whatever happens, and
whatever may have happened, you shall always remain the friend of the
family--mine, at all events. I can answer for myself.”

In response to this challenge all the others chimed in and re-echoed
mamma’s sentiments.

And so they took their departure; but in this hasty and kindly designed
visit there was hidden a fund of cruelty which Lizabetha Prokofievna
never dreamed of. In the words “as usual,” and again in her added,
“mine, at all events,” there seemed an ominous knell of some evil to
come.

The prince began to think of Aglaya. She had certainly given him a
wonderful smile, both at coming and again at leave-taking, but had not
said a word, not even when the others all professed their friendship for
him. She had looked very intently at him, but that was all. Her face had
been paler than usual; she looked as though she had slept badly.

The prince made up his mind that he would make a point of going there
“as usual,” tonight, and looked feverishly at his watch.

Vera came in three minutes after the Epanchins had left. “Lef
Nicolaievitch,” she said, “Aglaya Ivanovna has just given me a message
for you.”

The prince trembled.

“Is it a note?”

“No, a verbal message; she had hardly time even for that. She begs you
earnestly not to go out of the house for a single moment all to-day,
until seven o’clock in the evening. It may have been nine; I didn’t
quite hear.”

“But--but, why is this? What does it mean?”

“I don’t know at all; but she said I was to tell you particularly.”

“Did she say that?”

“Not those very words. She only just had time to whisper as she went by;
but by the way she looked at me I knew it was important. She looked at
me in a way that made my heart stop beating.”

The prince asked a few more questions, and though he learned nothing
else, he became more and more agitated.

Left alone, he lay down on the sofa, and began to think.

“Perhaps,” he thought, “someone is to be with them until nine tonight
and she is afraid that I may come and make a fool of myself again, in
public.” So he spent his time longing for the evening and looking at his
watch. But the clearing-up of the mystery came long before the evening,
and came in the form of a new and agonizing riddle.

Half an hour after the Epanchins had gone, Hippolyte arrived, so tired
that, almost unconscious, he sank into a chair, and broke into such a
fit of coughing that he could not stop. He coughed till the blood came.
His eyes glittered, and two red spots on his cheeks grew brighter and
