apparent than real. He was courteous, but there was a suggestion of
injured innocence in his manner.

“I’ve brought your book back,” he began, indicating a book lying on the
table. “Much obliged to you for lending it to me.”

“Ah, yes. Well, did you read it, general? It’s curious, isn’t it?” said
the prince, delighted to be able to open up conversation upon an outside
subject.

“Curious enough, yes, but crude, and of course dreadful nonsense;
probably the man lies in every other sentence.”

The general spoke with considerable confidence, and dragged his words
out with a conceited drawl.

“Oh, but it’s only the simple tale of an old soldier who saw the French
enter Moscow. Some of his remarks were wonderfully interesting. Remarks
of an eye-witness are always valuable, whoever he be, don’t you think so?”

“Had I been the publisher I should not have printed it. As to the
evidence of eye-witnesses, in these days people prefer impudent lies to
the stories of men of worth and long service. I know of some notes of
the year , which--I have determined, prince, to leave this house,
Mr. Lebedeff’s house.”

The general looked significantly at his host.

“Of course you have your own lodging at Pavlofsk at--at your daughter’s
house,” began the prince, quite at a loss what to say. He suddenly
recollected that the general had come for advice on a most important
matter, affecting his destiny.

“At my wife’s; in other words, at my own place, my daughter’s house.”

“I beg your pardon, I--”

“I leave Lebedeff’s house, my dear prince, because I have quarrelled
with this person. I broke with him last night, and am very sorry that I
did not do so before. I expect respect, prince, even from those to whom
I give my heart, so to speak. Prince, I have often given away my heart,
and am nearly always deceived. This person was quite unworthy of the
gift.”

“There is much that might be improved in him,” said the prince,
moderately, “but he has some qualities which--though amid them one
cannot but discern a cunning nature--reveal what is often a diverting
intellect.”

The prince’s tone was so natural and respectful that the general could
not possibly suspect him of any insincerity.

“Oh, that he possesses good traits, I was the first to show, when I very
nearly made him a present of my friendship. I am not dependent upon his
hospitality, and upon his house; I have my own family. I do not attempt
to justify my own weakness. I have drunk with this man, and perhaps I
deplore the fact now, but I did not take him up for the sake of drink
alone (excuse the crudeness of the expression, prince); I did not make
friends with him for that alone. I was attracted by his good qualities;
but when the fellow declares that he was a child in , and had his
left leg cut off, and buried in the Vagarkoff cemetery, in Moscow,
such a cock-and-bull story amounts to disrespect, my dear sir, to--to
impudent exaggeration.”

“Oh, he was very likely joking; he said it for fun.”

“I quite understand you. You mean that an innocent lie for the sake of a
good joke is harmless, and does not offend the human heart. Some people
lie, if you like to put it so, out of pure friendship, in order to amuse
their fellows; but when a man makes use of extravagance in order to show
his disrespect and to make clear how the intimacy bores him, it is time
for a man of honour to break off the said intimacy, and to teach the
offender his place.”

The general flushed with indignation as he spoke.

“Oh, but Lebedeff cannot have been in Moscow in . He is much too
young; it is all nonsense.”

“Very well, but even if we admit that he _was_ alive in , can one
believe that a French chasseur pointed a cannon at him for a lark, and
shot his left leg off? He says he picked his own leg up and took it away
and buried it in the cemetery. He swore he had a stone put up over
it with the inscription: ‘Here lies the leg of Collegiate Secretary
Lebedeff,’ and on the other side, ‘Rest, beloved ashes, till the morn of
joy,’ and that he has a service read over it every year (which is simply
sacrilege), and goes to Moscow once a year on purpose. He invites me to
Moscow in order to prove his assertion, and show me his leg’s tomb, and
the very cannon that shot him; he says it’s the eleventh from the
gate of the Kremlin, an old-fashioned falconet taken from the French
afterwards.”

“And, meanwhile both his legs are still on his body,” said the prince,
laughing. “I assure you, it is only an innocent joke, and you need not
be angry about it.”

“Excuse me--wait a minute--he says that the leg we see is a wooden one,
made by Tchernosvitoff.”

“They do say one can dance with those!”

“Quite so, quite so; and he swears that his wife never found out that
one of his legs was wooden all the while they were married. When I
showed him the ridiculousness of all this, he said, ‘Well, if you were
one of Napoleon’s pages in , you might let me bury my leg in the
Moscow cemetery.’ ”

“Why, did you say--” began the prince, and paused in confusion.

The general gazed at his host disdainfully.

“Oh, go on,” he said, “finish your sentence, by all means. Say how odd
it appears to you that a man fallen to such a depth of humiliation as
I, can ever have been the actual eye-witness of great events. Go on, _I_
don’t mind! Has _he_ found time to tell you scandal about me?”

“No, I’ve heard nothing of this from Lebedeff, if you mean Lebedeff.”

“H’m; I thought differently. You see, we were talking over this period
of history. I was criticizing a current report of something which then
happened, and having been myself an eye-witness of the occurrence--you
are smiling, prince--you are looking at my face as if--”

“Oh no! not at all--I--”

“I am rather young-looking, I know; but I am actually older than I
appear to be. I was ten or eleven in the year . I don’t know my age
exactly, but it has always been a weakness of mine to make it out less
than it really is.”

“I assure you, general, I do not in the least doubt your statement. One
of our living autobiographers states that when he was a small baby in
Moscow in  the French soldiers fed him with bread.”

“Well, there you see!” said the general, condescendingly. “There is
nothing whatever unusual about my tale. Truth very often appears to
be impossible. I was a page--it sounds strange, I dare say. Had I been
fifteen years old I should probably have been terribly frightened
when the French arrived, as my mother was (who had been too slow about
clearing out of Moscow); but as I was only just ten I was not in the
least alarmed, and rushed through the crowd to the very door of the
palace when Napoleon alighted from his horse.”

“Undoubtedly, at ten years old you would not have felt the sense of
fear, as you say,” blurted out the prince, horribly uncomfortable in the
sensation that he was just about to blush.

“Of course; and it all happened so easily and naturally. And yet, were
a novelist to describe the episode, he would put in all kinds of
impossible and incredible details.”
