Terentieff?’ he cried, with his usual pleasant, sometimes audacious, but
never offensive familiarity, which I liked in reality, but for which I
also detested him. ‘Why what’s the matter?’ he cried in alarm. ‘Are you
ill?’

“That confounded cough of mine had come on again; I fell into a chair,
and with difficulty recovered my breath. ‘It’s all right, it’s only
consumption’ I said. ‘I have come to you with a petition!’

“He sat down in amazement, and I lost no time in telling him the medical
man’s history; and explained that he, with the influence which he
possessed over his uncle, might do some good to the poor fellow.

“‘I’ll do it--I’ll do it, of course!’ he said. ‘I shall attack my uncle
about it tomorrow morning, and I’m very glad you told me the story. But
how was it that you thought of coming to me about it, Terentieff?’

“‘So much depends upon your uncle,’ I said. ‘And besides we have always
been enemies, Bachmatoff; and as you are a generous sort of fellow, I
thought you would not refuse my request because I was your enemy!’ I
added with irony.

“‘Like Napoleon going to England, eh?’ cried he, laughing. ‘I’ll do it
though--of course, and at once, if I can!’ he added, seeing that I rose
seriously from my chair at this point.

“And sure enough the matter ended as satisfactorily as possible. A month
or so later my medical friend was appointed to another post. He got his
travelling expenses paid, and something to help him to start life with
once more. I think Bachmatoff must have persuaded the doctor to accept
a loan from himself. I saw Bachmatoff two or three times, about this
period, the third time being when he gave a farewell dinner to the
doctor and his wife before their departure, a champagne dinner.

“Bachmatoff saw me home after the dinner and we crossed the Nicolai
bridge. We were both a little drunk. He told me of his joy, the joyful
feeling of having done a good action; he said that it was all thanks to
myself that he could feel this satisfaction; and held forth about the
foolishness of the theory that individual charity is useless.

“I, too, was burning to have my say!

“‘In Moscow,’ I said, ‘there was an old state counsellor, a civil
general, who, all his life, had been in the habit of visiting the
prisons and speaking to criminals. Every party of convicts on its way
to Siberia knew beforehand that on the Vorobeef Hills the “old general”
 would pay them a visit. He did all he undertook seriously and devotedly.
He would walk down the rows of the unfortunate prisoners, stop before
each individual and ask after his needs--he never sermonized them; he
spoke kindly to them--he gave them money; he brought them all sorts of
necessaries for the journey, and gave them devotional books, choosing
those who could read, under the firm conviction that they would read to
those who could not, as they went along.

“‘He scarcely ever talked about the particular crimes of any of them,
but listened if any volunteered information on that point. All the
convicts were equal for him, and he made no distinction. He spoke to all
as to brothers, and every one of them looked upon him as a father. When
he observed among the exiles some poor woman with a child, he would
always come forward and fondle the little one, and make it laugh. He
continued these acts of mercy up to his very death; and by that time all
the criminals, all over Russia and Siberia, knew him!

“‘A man I knew who had been to Siberia and returned, told me that he
himself had been a witness of how the very most hardened criminals
remembered the old general, though, in point of fact, he could never,
of course, have distributed more than a few pence to each member of a
party. Their recollection of him was not sentimental or particularly
devoted. Some wretch, for instance, who had been a murderer--cutting the
throat of a dozen fellow-creatures, for instance; or stabbing six
little children for his own amusement (there have been such men!)--would
perhaps, without rhyme or reason, suddenly give a sigh and say, “I
wonder whether that old general is alive still!” Although perhaps he had
not thought of mentioning him for a dozen years before! How can one say
what seed of good may have been dropped into his soul, never to die?’

“I continued in that strain for a long while, pointing out to Bachmatoff
how impossible it is to follow up the effects of any isolated good deed
one may do, in all its influences and subtle workings upon the heart and
after-actions of others.

“‘And to think that you are to be cut off from life!’ remarked
Bachmatoff, in a tone of reproach, as though he would like to find
someone to pitch into on my account.

“We were leaning over the balustrade of the bridge, looking into the
Neva at this moment.

“‘Do you know what has suddenly come into my head?’ said I,
suddenly--leaning further and further over the rail.

“‘Surely not to throw yourself into the river?’ cried Bachmatoff in
alarm. Perhaps he read my thought in my face.

“‘No, not yet. At present nothing but the following consideration. You
see I have some two or three months left me to live--perhaps four; well,
supposing that when I have but a month or two more, I take a fancy for
some “good deed” that needs both trouble and time, like this business of
our doctor friend, for instance: why, I shall have to give up the idea
of it and take to something else--some _little_ good deed, _more within my
means_, eh? Isn’t that an amusing idea!’

“Poor Bachmatoff was much impressed--painfully so. He took me all the
way home; not attempting to console me, but behaving with the greatest
delicacy. On taking leave he pressed my hand warmly and asked permission
to come and see me. I replied that if he came to me as a ‘comforter,’ so
to speak (for he would be in that capacity whether he spoke to me in a
soothing manner or only kept silence, as I pointed out to him), he
would but remind me each time of my approaching death! He shrugged his
shoulders, but quite agreed with me; and we parted better friends than I
had expected.

“But that evening and that night were sown the first seeds of my ‘last
conviction.’ I seized greedily on my new idea; I thirstily drank in
all its different aspects (I did not sleep a wink that night!), and the
deeper I went into it the more my being seemed to merge itself in it,
and the more alarmed I became. A dreadful terror came over me at last,
and did not leave me all next day.

“Sometimes, thinking over this, I became quite numb with the terror
of it; and I might well have deduced from this fact, that my ‘last
conviction’ was eating into my being too fast and too seriously, and
would undoubtedly come to its climax before long. And for the climax I
needed greater determination than I yet possessed.

“However, within three weeks my determination was taken, owing to a very
strange circumstance.

“Here on my paper, I make a note of all the figures and dates that
come into my explanation. Of course, it is all the same to me, but just
now--and perhaps only at this moment--I desire that all those who are to
judge of my action should see clearly out of how logical a sequence of
deductions has at length proceeded my ‘last conviction.’

“I have said above that the determination needed by me for the
accomplishment of my final resolve, came to hand not through any
sequence of causes, but thanks to a certain strange circumstance which
had perhaps no connection whatever with the matter at issue. Ten days
ago Rogojin called upon me about certain business of his own with which
I have nothing to do at present. I had never seen Rogojin before, but
had often heard about him.

“I gave him all the information he needed, and he very soon took his
departure; so that, since he only came for the purpose of gaining the
information, the matter might have been expected to end there.

“But he interested me too much, and all that day I was under the
influence of strange thoughts connected with him, and I determined to
return his visit the next day.

