
“If that’s the case, darling--then, of course, you shall do exactly as
you like. He is waiting alone downstairs. Hadn’t I better hint to him
gently that he can go?” The general telegraphed to Lizabetha Prokofievna
in his turn.

“No, no, you needn’t do anything of the sort; you mustn’t hint gently
at all. I’ll go down myself directly. I wish to apologize to this young
man, because I hurt his feelings.”

“Yes, _seriously_,” said the general, gravely.

“Well, you’d better stay here, all of you, for a little, and I’ll go
down to him alone to begin with. I’ll just go in and then you can follow
me almost at once. That’s the best way.”

She had almost reached the door when she turned round again.

“I shall laugh--I know I shall; I shall die of laughing,” she said,
lugubriously.

However, she turned and ran down to the prince as fast as her feet could
carry her.

“Well, what does it all mean? What do you make of it?” asked the general
of his spouse, hurriedly.

“I hardly dare say,” said Lizabetha, as hurriedly, “but I think it’s as
plain as anything can be.”

“I think so too, as clear as day; she loves him.”

“Loves him? She is head over ears in love, that’s what she is,” put in
Alexandra.

“Well, God bless her, God bless her, if such is her destiny,” said
Lizabetha, crossing herself devoutly.

“H’m destiny it is,” said the general, “and there’s no getting out of
destiny.”

With these words they all moved off towards the drawing-room, where
another surprise awaited them. Aglaya had not only not laughed, as she
had feared, but had gone to the prince rather timidly, and said to him:

“Forgive a silly, horrid, spoilt girl”--(she took his hand here)--“and
be quite assured that we all of us esteem you beyond all words. And if I
dared to turn your beautiful, admirable simplicity to ridicule, forgive
me as you would a little child its mischief. Forgive me all my absurdity
of just now, which, of course, meant nothing, and could not have the
slightest consequence.” She spoke these words with great emphasis.

Her father, mother, and sisters came into the room and were much struck
with the last words, which they just caught as they entered--“absurdity
which of course meant nothing”--and still more so with the emphasis with
which Aglaya had spoken.

They exchanged glances questioningly, but the prince did not seem to
have understood the meaning of Aglaya’s words; he was in the highest
heaven of delight.

“Why do you speak so?” he murmured. “Why do you ask my forgiveness?”

He wished to add that he was unworthy of being asked for forgiveness
by her, but paused. Perhaps he did understand Aglaya’s sentence about
“absurdity which meant nothing,” and like the strange fellow that he
was, rejoiced in the words.

Undoubtedly the fact that he might now come and see Aglaya as much as
he pleased again was quite enough to make him perfectly happy; that he
might come and speak to her, and see her, and sit by her, and walk with
her--who knows, but that all this was quite enough to satisfy him for
the whole of his life, and that he would desire no more to the end of
time?

(Lizabetha Prokofievna felt that this might be the case, and she didn’t
like it; though very probably she could not have put the idea into
words.)

It would be difficult to describe the animation and high spirits which
distinguished the prince for the rest of the evening.

He was so happy that “it made one feel happy to look at him,” as
Aglaya’s sisters expressed it afterwards. He talked, and told stories
just as he had done once before, and never since, namely on the very
first morning of his acquaintance with the Epanchins, six months ago.
Since his return to Petersburg from Moscow, he had been remarkably
silent, and had told Prince S. on one occasion, before everyone, that he
did not think himself justified in degrading any thought by his unworthy
words.

But this evening he did nearly all the talking himself, and told stories
by the dozen, while he answered all questions put to him clearly,
gladly, and with any amount of detail.

There was nothing, however, of love-making in his talk. His ideas were
all of the most serious kind; some were even mystical and profound.

He aired his own views on various matters, some of his most private
opinions and observations, many of which would have seemed rather funny,
so his hearers agreed afterwards, had they not been so well expressed.

The general liked serious subjects of conversation; but both he and
Lizabetha Prokofievna felt that they were having a little too much of a
good thing tonight, and as the evening advanced, they both grew more
or less melancholy; but towards night, the prince fell to telling funny
stories, and was always the first to burst out laughing himself, which
he invariably did so joyously and simply that the rest laughed just as
much at him as at his stories.

As for Aglaya, she hardly said a word all the evening; but she listened
with all her ears to Lef Nicolaievitch’s talk, and scarcely took her
eyes off him.

“She looked at him, and stared and stared, and hung on every word he
said,” said Lizabetha afterwards, to her husband, “and yet, tell her
that she loves him, and she is furious!”

“What’s to be done? It’s fate,” said the general, shrugging his
shoulders, and, for a long while after, he continued to repeat: “It’s
fate, it’s fate!”

We may add that to a business man like General Epanchin the present
position of affairs was most unsatisfactory. He hated the uncertainty in
which they had been, perforce, left. However, he decided to say no
more about it, and merely to look on, and take his time and tune from
Lizabetha Prokofievna.

The happy state in which the family had spent the evening, as just
recorded, was not of very long duration. Next day Aglaya quarrelled with
the prince again, and so she continued to behave for the next few days.
For whole hours at a time she ridiculed and chaffed the wretched man,
and made him almost a laughing-stock.

It is true that they used to sit in the little summer-house together for
an hour or two at a time, very often, but it was observed that on
these occasions the prince would read the paper, or some book, aloud to
Aglaya.

“Do you know,” Aglaya said to him once, interrupting the reading, “I’ve
remarked that you are dreadfully badly educated. You never know anything
thoroughly, if one asks you; neither anyone’s name, nor dates, nor about
treaties and so on. It’s a great pity, you know!”

“I told you I had not had much of an education,” replied the prince.

“How am I to respect you, if that’s the case? Read on now. No--don’t!
Stop reading!”

And once more, that same evening, Aglaya mystified them all. Prince S.
