his spouse for help--“you must really--”

“Not I--not I! I retire from all responsibility,” said Lizabetha
Prokofievna, with a wave of the hand.

“Allow me to speak, please, mamma,” said Aglaya. “I think I ought to
have something to say in the matter. An important moment of my destiny
is about to be decided”--(this is how Aglaya expressed herself)--“and
I wish to find out how the matter stands, for my own sake, though I am
glad you are all here. Allow me to ask you, prince, since you cherish
those intentions, how you consider that you will provide for my
happiness?”

“I--I don’t quite know how to answer your question, Aglaya Ivanovna.
What is there to say to such a question? And--and must I answer?”

“I think you are rather overwhelmed and out of breath. Have a little
rest, and try to recover yourself. Take a glass of water, or--but
they’ll give you some tea directly.”

“I love you, Aglaya Ivanovna,--I love you very much. I love only
you--and--please don’t jest about it, for I do love you very much.”

“Well, this matter is important. We are not children--we must look into
it thoroughly. Now then, kindly tell me--what does your fortune consist
of?”

“No--Aglaya--come, enough of this, you mustn’t behave like this,” said
her father, in dismay.

“It’s disgraceful,” said Lizabetha Prokofievna in a loud whisper.

“She’s mad--quite!” said Alexandra.

“Fortune--money--do you mean?” asked the prince in some surprise.

“Just so.”

“I have now--let’s see--I have a hundred and thirty-five thousand
roubles,” said the prince, blushing violently.

“Is that all, really?” said Aglaya, candidly, without the slightest
show of confusion. “However, it’s not so bad, especially if managed with
economy. Do you intend to serve?”

“I--I intended to try for a certificate as private tutor.”

“Very good. That would increase our income nicely. Have you any
intention of being a Kammer-junker?”

“A Kammer-junker? I had not thought of it, but--”

But here the two sisters could restrain themselves no longer, and both
of them burst into irrepressible laughter.

Adelaida had long since detected in Aglaya’s features the gathering
signs of an approaching storm of laughter, which she restrained with
amazing self-control.

Aglaya looked menacingly at her laughing sisters, but could not contain
herself any longer, and the next minute she too had burst into an
irrepressible, and almost hysterical, fit of mirth. At length she jumped
up, and ran out of the room.

“I knew it was all a joke!” cried Adelaida. “I felt it ever since--since
the hedgehog.”

“No, no! I cannot allow this,--this is a little too much,” cried
Lizabetha Prokofievna, exploding with rage, and she rose from her seat
and followed Aglaya out of the room as quickly as she could.

The two sisters hurriedly went after her.

The prince and the general were the only two persons left in the room.

“It’s--it’s really--now could you have imagined anything like it, Lef
Nicolaievitch?” cried the general. He was evidently so much agitated
that he hardly knew what he wished to say. “Seriously now, seriously I
mean--”

“I only see that Aglaya Ivanovna is laughing at me,” said the poor
prince, sadly.

“Wait a bit, my boy, I’ll just go--you stay here, you know. But do just
explain, if you can, Lef Nicolaievitch, how in the world has all this
come about? And what does it all mean? You must understand, my dear
fellow; I am a father, you see, and I ought to be allowed to understand
the matter--do explain, I beg you!”

“I love Aglaya Ivanovna--she knows it,--and I think she must have long
known it.”

The general shrugged his shoulders.

“Strange--it’s strange,” he said, “and you love her very much?”

“Yes, very much.”

“Well--it’s all most strange to me. That is--my dear fellow, it is
such a surprise--such a blow--that... You see, it is not your financial
position (though I should not object if you were a bit richer)--I am
thinking of my daughter’s happiness, of course, and the thing is--are
you able to give her the happiness she deserves? And then--is all this
a joke on her part, or is she in earnest? I don’t mean on your side, but
on hers.”

At this moment Alexandra’s voice was heard outside the door, calling out
“Papa!”

“Wait for me here, my boy--will you? Just wait and think it all over,
and I’ll come back directly,” he said hurriedly, and made off with what
looked like the rapidity of alarm in response to Alexandra’s call.

He found the mother and daughter locked in one another’s arms, mingling
their tears.

These were the tears of joy and peace and reconciliation. Aglaya was
kissing her mother’s lips and cheeks and hands; they were hugging each
other in the most ardent way.

“There, look at her now--Ivan Fedorovitch! Here she is--all of her! This
is our _real_ Aglaya at last!” said Lizabetha Prokofievna.

Aglaya raised her happy, tearful face from her mother’s breast, glanced
at her father, and burst out laughing. She sprang at him and hugged him
too, and kissed him over and over again. She then rushed back to her
mother and hid her face in the maternal bosom, and there indulged in
more tears. Her mother covered her with a corner of her shawl.

“Oh, you cruel little girl! How will you treat us all next, I wonder?”
 she said, but she spoke with a ring of joy in her voice, and as though
she breathed at last without the oppression which she had felt so long.

“Cruel?” sobbed Aglaya. “Yes, I _am_ cruel, and worthless, and
spoiled--tell father so,--oh, here he is--I forgot Father, listen!” She
laughed through her tears.

“My darling, my little idol,” cried the general, kissing and fondling
her hands (Aglaya did not draw them away); “so you love this young man,
do you?”

“No, no, no, can’t _bear_ him, I can’t _bear_ your young man!” cried
Aglaya, raising her head. “And if you dare say that _once_ more, papa--I’m
serious, you know, I’m,--do you hear me--I’m serious!”

She certainly did seem to be serious enough. She had flushed up all over
and her eyes were blazing.

The general felt troubled and remained silent, while Lizabetha
Prokofievna telegraphed to him from behind Aglaya to ask no questions.
