told her before that if anyone came and rang--especially you, and I gave
her your name--she was not to tell about me. Then I thought, what if
he goes and stands opposite and looks up, or waits about to watch the
house? So I came to this very window, looked out, and there you were
staring straight at me. That’s how it came about.”

“Where is Nastasia Philipovna?” asked the prince, breathlessly.

“She’s here,” replied Rogojin, slowly, after a slight pause.

“Where?”

Rogojin raised his eyes and gazed intently at the prince.

“Come,” he said.

He continued to speak in a whisper, very deliberately as before, and
looked strangely thoughtful and dreamy. Even while he told the story of
how he had peeped through the blind, he gave the impression of wishing
to say something else. They entered the study. In this room some changes
had taken place since the prince last saw it. It was now divided into
two equal parts by a heavy green silk curtain stretched across it,
separating the alcove beyond, where stood Rogojin’s bed, from the rest
of the room.

The heavy curtain was drawn now, and it was very dark. The bright
Petersburg summer nights were already beginning to close in, and but for
the full moon, it would have been difficult to distinguish anything in
Rogojin’s dismal room, with the drawn blinds. They could just see one
anothers faces, however, though not in detail. Rogojin’s face was white,
as usual. His glittering eyes watched the prince with an intent stare.

“Had you not better light a candle?” said Muishkin.

“No, I needn’t,” replied Rogojin, and taking the other by the hand he
drew him down to a chair. He himself took a chair opposite and drew it
up so close that he almost pressed against the prince’s knees. At their
side was a little round table.

“Sit down,” said Rogojin; “let’s rest a bit.” There was silence for a
moment.

“I knew you would be at that hotel,” he continued, just as men sometimes
commence a serious conversation by discussing any outside subject before
leading up to the main point. “As I entered the passage it struck me
that perhaps you were sitting and waiting for me, just as I was waiting
for you. Have you been to the old lady at Ismailofsky barracks?”

“Yes,” said the prince, squeezing the word out with difficulty owing to
the dreadful beating of his heart.

“I thought you would. ‘They’ll talk about it,’ I thought; so I
determined to go and fetch you to spend the night here--‘We will be
together,’ I thought, ‘for this one night--’”

“Rogojin, _where_ is Nastasia Philipovna?” said the prince, suddenly
rising from his seat. He was quaking in all his limbs, and his words
came in a scarcely audible whisper. Rogojin rose also.

“There,” he whispered, nodding his head towards the curtain.

“Asleep?” whispered the prince.

Rogojin looked intently at him again, as before.

“Let’s go in--but you mustn’t--well--let’s go in.”

He lifted the curtain, paused--and turned to the prince. “Go in,” he
said, motioning him to pass behind the curtain. Muishkin went in.

“It’s so dark,” he said.

“You can see quite enough,” muttered Rogojin.

“I can just see there’s a bed--”

“Go nearer,” suggested Rogojin, softly.

The prince took a step forward--then another--and paused. He stood and
stared for a minute or two.

Neither of the men spoke a word while at the bedside. The prince’s heart
beat so loud that its knocking seemed to be distinctly audible in the
deathly silence.

But now his eyes had become so far accustomed to the darkness that he
could distinguish the whole of the bed. Someone was asleep upon
it--in an absolutely motionless sleep. Not the slightest movement was
perceptible, not the faintest breathing could be heard. The sleeper
was covered with a white sheet; the outline of the limbs was hardly
distinguishable. He could only just make out that a human being lay
outstretched there.

All around, on the bed, on a chair beside it, on the floor, were
scattered the different portions of a magnificent white silk dress, bits
of lace, ribbons and flowers. On a small table at the bedside glittered
a mass of diamonds, torn off and thrown down anyhow. From under a heap
of lace at the end of the bed peeped a small white foot, which looked as
though it had been chiselled out of marble; it was terribly still.

The prince gazed and gazed, and felt that the more he gazed the more
death-like became the silence. Suddenly a fly awoke somewhere, buzzed
across the room, and settled on the pillow. The prince shuddered.

“Let’s go,” said Rogojin, touching his shoulder. They left the alcove
and sat down in the two chairs they had occupied before, opposite to one
another. The prince trembled more and more violently, and never took his
questioning eyes off Rogojin’s face.

“I see you are shuddering, Lef Nicolaievitch,” said the latter, at
length, “almost as you did once in Moscow, before your fit; don’t you
remember? I don’t know what I shall do with you--”

The prince bent forward to listen, putting all the strain he could
muster upon his understanding in order to take in what Rogojin said, and
continuing to gaze at the latter’s face.

“Was it you?” he muttered, at last, motioning with his head towards the
curtain.

“Yes, it was I,” whispered Rogojin, looking down.

Neither spoke for five minutes.

“Because, you know,” Rogojin recommenced, as though continuing a former
sentence, “if you were ill now, or had a fit, or screamed, or anything,
they might hear it in the yard, or even in the street, and guess that
someone was passing the night in the house. They would all come and
knock and want to come in, because they know I am not at home. I didn’t
light a candle for the same reason. When I am not here--for two or
three days at a time, now and then--no one comes in to tidy the house
or anything; those are my orders. So that I want them to not know we are
spending the night here--”

“Wait,” interrupted the prince. “I asked both the porter and the woman
whether Nastasia Philipovna had spent last night in the house; so they
knew--”

“I know you asked. I told them that she had called in for ten minutes,
and then gone straight back to Pavlofsk. No one knows she slept here.
Last night we came in just as carefully as you and I did today. I
thought as I came along with her that she would not like to creep in so
secretly, but I was quite wrong. She whispered, and walked on tip-toe;
she carried her skirt over her arm, so that it shouldn’t rustle, and
she held up her finger at me on the stairs, so that I shouldn’t make
a noise--it was you she was afraid of. She was mad with terror in the
train, and she begged me to bring her to this house. I thought of taking
her to her rooms at the Ismailofsky barracks first; but she wouldn’t
hear of it. She said, ‘No--not there; he’ll find me out at once there.
Take me to your own house, where you can hide me, and tomorrow we’ll set
