direction, as though she had just observed Evgenie Pavlovitch sitting
there for the first time.

“Why, I declare, here he is!” she cried, stopping suddenly. “The man one
can’t find with all one’s messengers sent about the place, sitting just
under one’s nose, exactly where one never thought of looking! I thought
you were sure to be at your uncle’s by this time.”

Evgenie Pavlovitch flushed up and looked angrily at Nastasia Philipovna,
then turned his back on her.

“What! don’t you know about it yet? He doesn’t know--imagine that! Why,
he’s shot himself. Your uncle shot himself this very morning. I was told
at two this afternoon. Half the town must know it by now. They say there
are three hundred and fifty thousand roubles, government money, missing;
some say five hundred thousand. And I was under the impression that he
would leave you a fortune! He’s whistled it all away. A most depraved
old gentleman, really! Well, ta, ta!--bonne chance! Surely you intend
to be off there, don’t you? Ha, ha! You’ve retired from the army in good
time, I see! Plain clothes! Well done, sly rogue! Nonsense! I see--you
knew it all before--I dare say you knew all about it yesterday-”

Although the impudence of this attack, this public proclamation of
intimacy, as it were, was doubtless premeditated, and had its special
object, yet Evgenie Pavlovitch at first seemed to intend to make no
show of observing either his tormentor or her words. But Nastasia’s
communication struck him with the force of a thunderclap. On hearing
of his uncle’s death he suddenly grew as white as a sheet, and turned
towards his informant.

At this moment, Lizabetha Prokofievna rose swiftly from her seat,
beckoned her companions, and left the place almost at a run.

Only the prince stopped behind for a moment, as though in indecision;
and Evgenie Pavlovitch lingered too, for he had not collected his
scattered wits. But the Epanchins had not had time to get more than
twenty paces away when a scandalous episode occurred. The young officer,
Evgenie Pavlovitch’s friend who had been conversing with Aglaya, said
aloud in a great state of indignation:

“She ought to be whipped--that’s the only way to deal with creatures
like that--she ought to be whipped!”

This gentleman was a confidant of Evgenie’s, and had doubtless heard of
the carriage episode.

Nastasia turned to him. Her eyes flashed; she rushed up to a young man
standing near, whom she did not know in the least, but who happened to
have in his hand a thin cane. Seizing this from him, she brought it with
all her force across the face of her insulter.

All this occurred, of course, in one instant of time.

The young officer, forgetting himself, sprang towards her. Nastasia’s
followers were not by her at the moment (the elderly gentleman having
disappeared altogether, and the younger man simply standing aside and
roaring with laughter).

In another moment, of course, the police would have been on the spot,
and it would have gone hard with Nastasia Philipovna had not unexpected
aid appeared.

Muishkin, who was but a couple of steps away, had time to spring forward
and seize the officer’s arms from behind.

The officer, tearing himself from the prince’s grasp, pushed him so
violently backwards that he staggered a few steps and then subsided into
a chair.

But there were other defenders for Nastasia on the spot by this time.
The gentleman known as the “boxer” now confronted the enraged officer.

“Keller is my name, sir; ex-lieutenant,” he said, very loud. “If you
will accept me as champion of the fair sex, I am at your disposal.
English boxing has no secrets from me. I sympathize with you for the
insult you have received, but I can’t permit you to raise your hand
against a woman in public. If you prefer to meet me--as would be more
fitting to your rank--in some other manner, of course you understand me,
captain.”

But the young officer had recovered himself, and was no longer
listening. At this moment Rogojin appeared, elbowing through the crowd;
he took Nastasia’s hand, drew it through his arm, and quickly led her
away. He appeared to be terribly excited; he was trembling all over,
and was as pale as a corpse. As he carried Nastasia off, he turned and
grinned horribly in the officer’s face, and with low malice observed:

“Tfu! look what the fellow got! Look at the blood on his cheek! Ha, ha!”

Recollecting himself, however, and seeing at a glance the sort of people
he had to deal with, the officer turned his back on both his opponents,
and courteously, but concealing his face with his handkerchief,
approached the prince, who was now rising from the chair into which he
had fallen.

“Prince Muishkin, I believe? The gentleman to whom I had the honour of
being introduced?”

“She is mad, insane--I assure you, she is mad,” replied the prince in
trembling tones, holding out both his hands mechanically towards the
officer.

“I cannot boast of any such knowledge, of course, but I wished to know
your name.”

He bowed and retired without waiting for an answer.

Five seconds after the disappearance of the last actor in this scene,
the police arrived. The whole episode had not lasted more than a couple
of minutes. Some of the spectators had risen from their places, and
departed altogether; some merely exchanged their seats for others a
little further off; some were delighted with the occurrence, and talked
and laughed over it for a long time.

In a word, the incident closed as such incidents do, and the band began
to play again. The prince walked away after the Epanchin party. Had
he thought of looking round to the left after he had been pushed so
unceremoniously into the chair, he would have observed Aglaya standing
some twenty yards away. She had stayed to watch the scandalous scene in
spite of her mother’s and sisters’ anxious cries to her to come away.

Prince S. ran up to her and persuaded her, at last, to come home with
them.

Lizabetha Prokofievna saw that she returned in such a state of agitation
that it was doubtful whether she had even heard their calls. But only a
couple of minutes later, when they had reached the park, Aglaya suddenly
remarked, in her usual calm, indifferent voice:

“I wanted to see how the farce would end.”

III.

The occurrence at the Vauxhall had filled both mother and daughters with
something like horror. In their excitement Lizabetha Prokofievna and the
girls were nearly running all the way home.

In her opinion there was so much disclosed and laid bare by the episode,
that, in spite of the chaotic condition of her mind, she was able to
feel more or less decided on certain points which, up to now, had been
in a cloudy condition.

However, one and all of the party realized that something important
had happened, and that, perhaps fortunately enough, something which had
hitherto been enveloped in the obscurity of guess-work had now begun to
come forth a little from the mists. In spite of Prince S.’s assurances
and explanations, Evgenie Pavlovitch’s real character and position were
at last coming to light. He was publicly convicted of intimacy with
“that creature.” So thought Lizabetha Prokofievna and her two elder
daughters.
