people one could eat; they were the fat, among many lean,” said Gavrila
Ardalionovitch.

“A brilliant idea, and most true!” cried Lebedeff, “for he never
even touched the laity. Sixty monks, and not a single layman! It is a
terrible idea, but it is historic, it is statistic; it is indeed one of
those facts which enables an intelligent historian to reconstruct the
physiognomy of a special epoch, for it brings out this further point
with mathematical accuracy, that the clergy were in those days sixty
times richer and more flourishing than the rest of humanity and perhaps
sixty times fatter also...”

“You are exaggerating, you are exaggerating, Lebedeff!” cried his
hearers, amid laughter.

“I admit that it is an historic thought, but what is your conclusion?”
 asked the prince.

He spoke so seriously in addressing Lebedeff, that his tone contrasted
quite comically with that of the others. They were very nearly laughing
at him, too, but he did not notice it.

“Don’t you see he is a lunatic, prince?” whispered Evgenie Pavlovitch
in his ear. “Someone told me just now that he is a bit touched on the
subject of lawyers, that he has a mania for making speeches and intends
to pass the examinations. I am expecting a splendid burlesque now.”

“My conclusion is vast,” replied Lebedeff, in a voice like thunder. “Let
us examine first the psychological and legal position of the criminal.
We see that in spite of the difficulty of finding other food, the
accused, or, as we may say, my client, has often during his peculiar
life exhibited signs of repentance, and of wishing to give up this
clerical diet. Incontrovertible facts prove this assertion. He has eaten
five or six children, a relatively insignificant number, no doubt,
but remarkable enough from another point of view. It is manifest that,
pricked by remorse--for my client is religious, in his way, and has a
conscience, as I shall prove later--and desiring to extenuate his sin
as far as possible, he has tried six times at least to substitute lay
nourishment for clerical. That this was merely an experiment we can
hardly doubt: for if it had been only a question of gastronomic variety,
six would have been too few; why only six? Why not thirty? But if we
regard it as an experiment, inspired by the fear of committing new
sacrilege, then this number six becomes intelligible. Six attempts
to calm his remorse, and the pricking of his conscience, would amply
suffice, for these attempts could scarcely have been happy ones. In
my humble opinion, a child is too small; I should say, not sufficient;
which would result in four or five times more lay children than monks
being required in a given time. The sin, lessened on the one hand, would
therefore be increased on the other, in quantity, not in quality. Please
understand, gentlemen, that in reasoning thus, I am taking the point of
view which might have been taken by a criminal of the middle ages. As
for myself, a man of the late nineteenth century, I, of course, should
reason differently; I say so plainly, and therefore you need not jeer
at me nor mock me, gentlemen. As for you, general, it is still more
unbecoming on your part. In the second place, and giving my own personal
opinion, a child’s flesh is not a satisfying diet; it is too insipid,
too sweet; and the criminal, in making these experiments, could have
satisfied neither his conscience nor his appetite. I am about to
conclude, gentlemen; and my conclusion contains a reply to one of the
most important questions of that day and of our own! This criminal ended
at last by denouncing himself to the clergy, and giving himself up to
justice. We cannot but ask, remembering the penal system of that day,
and the tortures that awaited him--the wheel, the stake, the fire!--we
cannot but ask, I repeat, what induced him to accuse himself of this
crime? Why did he not simply stop short at the number sixty, and keep
his secret until his last breath? Why could he not simply leave the
monks alone, and go into the desert to repent? Or why not become a
monk himself? That is where the puzzle comes in! There must have been
something stronger than the stake or the fire, or even than the habits
of twenty years! There must have been an idea more powerful than all
the calamities and sorrows of this world, famine or torture, leprosy or
plague--an idea which entered into the heart, directed and enlarged the
springs of life, and made even that hell supportable to humanity!
Show me a force, a power like that, in this our century of vices
and railways! I might say, perhaps, in our century of steamboats and
railways, but I repeat in our century of vices and railways, because I
am drunk but truthful! Show me a single idea which unites men nowadays
with half the strength that it had in those centuries, and dare to
maintain that the ‘springs of life’ have not been polluted and weakened
beneath this ‘star,’ beneath this network in which men are entangled!
Don’t talk to me about your prosperity, your riches, the rarity of
famine, the rapidity of the means of transport! There is more of riches,
but less of force. The idea uniting heart and soul to heart and soul
exists no more. All is loose, soft, limp--we are all of us limp....
Enough, gentlemen! I have done. That is not the question. No, the
question is now, excellency, I believe, to sit down to the banquet you
are about to provide for us!”

Lebedeff had roused great indignation in some of his auditors (it
should be remarked that the bottles were constantly uncorked during his
speech); but this unexpected conclusion calmed even the most turbulent
spirits. “That’s how a clever barrister makes a good point!” said he,
when speaking of his peroration later on. The visitors began to laugh
and chatter once again; the committee left their seats, and stretched
their legs on the terrace. Keller alone was still disgusted with
Lebedeff and his speech; he turned from one to another, saying in a loud
voice:

“He attacks education, he boasts of the fanaticism of the twelfth
century, he makes absurd grimaces, and added to that he is by no means
the innocent he makes himself out to be. How did he get the money to buy
this house, allow me to ask?”

In another corner was the general, holding forth to a group of hearers,
among them Ptitsin, whom he had buttonholed. “I have known,” said he,
“a real interpreter of the Apocalypse, the late Gregory Semeonovitch
Burmistroff, and he--he pierced the heart like a fiery flash! He began
by putting on his spectacles, then he opened a large black book;
his white beard, and his two medals on his breast, recalling acts of
charity, all added to his impressiveness. He began in a stern voice, and
before him generals, hard men of the world, bowed down, and ladies
fell to the ground fainting. But this one here--he ends by announcing a
banquet! That is not the real thing!”

Ptitsin listened and smiled, then turned as if to get his hat; but if he
had intended to leave, he changed his mind. Before the others had risen
from the table, Gania had suddenly left off drinking, and pushed away
his glass, a dark shadow seemed to come over his face. When they all
rose, he went and sat down by Rogojin. It might have been believed that
quite friendly relations existed between them. Rogojin, who had also
seemed on the point of going away now sat motionless, his head bent,
seeming to have forgotten his intention. He had drunk no wine, and
appeared absorbed in reflection. From time to time he raised his eyes,
and examined everyone present; one might have imagined that he was
expecting something very important to himself, and that he had decided
to wait for it. The prince had taken two or three glasses of champagne,
and seemed cheerful. As he rose he noticed Evgenie Pavlovitch, and,
remembering the appointment he had made with him, smiled pleasantly.
Evgenie Pavlovitch made a sign with his head towards Hippolyte, whom he
was attentively watching. The invalid was fast asleep, stretched out on
the sofa.

“Tell me, prince, why on earth did this boy intrude himself upon you?”
 he asked, with such annoyance and irritation in his voice that the
prince was quite surprised. “I wouldn’t mind laying odds that he is up
to some mischief.”

“I have observed,” said the prince, “that he seems to be an object of
very singular interest to you, Evgenie Pavlovitch. Why is it?”

“You may add that I have surely enough to think of, on my own account,
without him; and therefore it is all the more surprising that I cannot
tear my eyes and thoughts away from his detestable physiognomy.”

“Oh, come! He has a handsome face.”

“Why, look at him--look at him now!”

The prince glanced again at Evgenie Pavlovitch with considerable
surprise.
