person called Nastasia Philipovna? Who was the anonymous person, eh?
Tell me!”

“Surely not you?” cried the prince.

“Just so,” said Lebedeff, with dignity; “and only this very morning I
have sent up a letter to the noble lady, stating that I have a matter of
great importance to communicate. She received the letter; I know she got
it; and she received _me_, too.”

“Have you just seen Lizabetha Prokofievna?” asked the prince, scarcely
believing his ears.

“Yes, I saw her, and got the said slap in the face as mentioned. She
chucked the letter back to me unopened, and kicked me out of the house,
morally, not physically, although not far off it.”

“What letter do you mean she returned unopened?”

“What! didn’t I tell you? Ha, ha, ha! I thought I had. Why, I received a
letter, you know, to be handed over--”

“From whom? To whom?”

But it was difficult, if not impossible, to extract anything from
Lebedeff. All the prince could gather was, that the letter had been
received very early, and had a request written on the outside that it
might be sent on to the address given.

“Just as before, sir, just as before! To a certain person, and from
a certain hand. The individual’s name who wrote the letter is to be
represented by the letter A.--”

“What? Impossible! To Nastasia Philipovna? Nonsense!” cried the prince.

“It was, I assure you, and if not to her then to Rogojin, which is
the same thing. Mr. Hippolyte has had letters, too, and all from the
individual whose name begins with an A.,” smirked Lebedeff, with a
hideous grin.

As he kept jumping from subject to subject, and forgetting what he had
begun to talk about, the prince said nothing, but waited, to give him
time.

It was all very vague. Who had taken the letters, if letters there were?
Probably Vera--and how could Lebedeff have got them? In all probability,
he had managed to steal the present letter from Vera, and had himself
gone over to Lizabetha Prokofievna with some idea in his head. So the
prince concluded at last.

“You are mad!” he cried, indignantly.

“Not quite, esteemed prince,” replied Lebedeff, with some acerbity. “I
confess I thought of doing you the service of handing the letter over to
yourself, but I decided that it would pay me better to deliver it up to
the noble lady aforesaid, as I had informed her of everything hitherto
by anonymous letters; so when I sent her up a note from myself, with
the letter, you know, in order to fix a meeting for eight o’clock this
morning, I signed it ‘your secret correspondent.’ They let me in at
once--very quickly--by the back door, and the noble lady received me.”

“Well? Go on.”

“Oh, well, when I saw her she almost punched my head, as I say; in fact
so nearly that one might almost say she did punch my head. She threw
the letter in my face; she seemed to reflect first, as if she would
have liked to keep it, but thought better of it and threw it in my face
instead. ‘If anybody can have been such a fool as to trust a man like
you to deliver the letter,’ says she, ‘take it and deliver it!’ Hey! she
was grandly indignant. A fierce, fiery lady that, sir!”

“Where’s the letter now?”

“Oh, I’ve still got it, here!”

And he handed the prince the very letter from Aglaya to Gania, which the
latter showed with so much triumph to his sister at a later hour.

“This letter cannot be allowed to remain in your hands.”

“It’s for you--for you! I’ve brought it you on purpose!” cried Lebedeff,
excitedly. “Why, I’m yours again now, heart and hand, your slave; there
was but a momentary pause in the flow of my love and esteem for you. Mea
culpa, mea culpa! as the Pope of Rome says.”

“This letter should be sent on at once,” said the prince, disturbed.
“I’ll hand it over myself.”

“Wouldn’t it be better, esteemed prince, wouldn’t it be
better--to--don’t you know--”

Lebedeff made a strange and very expressive grimace; he twisted about in
his chair, and did something, apparently symbolical, with his hands.

“What do you mean?” said the prince.

“Why, open it, for the time being, don’t you know?” he said, most
confidentially and mysteriously.

The prince jumped up so furiously that Lebedeff ran towards the door;
having gained which strategic position, however, he stopped and looked
back to see if he might hope for pardon.

“Oh, Lebedeff, Lebedeff! Can a man really sink to such depths of
meanness?” said the prince, sadly.

Lebedeff’s face brightened.

“Oh, I’m a mean wretch--a mean wretch!” he said, approaching the prince
once more, and beating his breast, with tears in his eyes.

“It’s abominable dishonesty, you know!”

“Dishonesty--it is, it is! That’s the very word!”

“What in the world induces you to act so? You are nothing but a spy.
Why did you write anonymously to worry so noble and generous a lady? Why
should not Aglaya Ivanovna write a note to whomever she pleases? What
did you mean to complain of today? What did you expect to get by it?
What made you go at all?”

“Pure amiable curiosity,--I assure you--desire to do a service. That’s
all. Now I’m entirely yours again, your slave; hang me if you like!”

“Did you go before Lizabetha Prokofievna in your present condition?”
 inquired the prince.

“No--oh no, fresher--more the correct card. I only became this like
after the humiliation I suffered there.”

“Well--that’ll do; now leave me.”

This injunction had to be repeated several times before the man could be
persuaded to move. Even then he turned back at the door, came as far as
the middle of the room, and there went through his mysterious motions
designed to convey the suggestion that the prince should open the
letter. He did not dare put his suggestion into words again.

After this performance, he smiled sweetly and left the room on tiptoe.

All this had been very painful to listen to. One fact stood out certain
and clear, and that was that poor Aglaya must be in a state of great
distress and indecision and mental torment (“from jealousy,” the prince
whispered to himself). Undoubtedly in this inexperienced, but hot and
proud little head, there were all sorts of plans forming, wild and
impossible plans, maybe; and the idea of this so frightened the prince
that he could not make up his mind what to do. Something must be done,
that was clear.

He looked at the address on the letter once more. Oh, he was not in the
