that surely that conceited boy, Colia, had not been the one chosen
correspondent of the prince all this while. She determined to ask him,
and did so with an exaggerated show of carelessness. He informed her
haughtily that though he had given the prince his permanent address when
the latter left town, and had offered his services, the prince had never
before given him any commission to perform, nor had he written until the
following lines arrived, with Aglaya’s letter. Aglaya took the note, and
read it.


“DEAR COLIA,--Please be so kind as to give the enclosed sealed letter to
Aglaya Ivanovna. Keep well--Ever your loving,

“PR. L. MUISHKIN.”


“It seems absurd to trust a little pepper-box like you,” said Aglaya,
as she returned the note, and walked past the “pepper-box” with an
expression of great contempt.

This was more than Colia could bear. He had actually borrowed Gania’s
new green tie for the occasion, without saying why he wanted it, in
order to impress her. He was very deeply mortified.

II.

It was the beginning of June, and for a whole week the weather in
St. Petersburg had been magnificent. The Epanchins had a luxurious
country-house at Pavlofsk, [One of the fashionable summer resorts near
St. Petersburg.] and to this spot Mrs. Epanchin determined to proceed
without further delay. In a couple of days all was ready, and the family
had left town. A day or two after this removal to Pavlofsk, Prince
Muishkin arrived in St. Petersburg by the morning train from Moscow. No
one met him; but, as he stepped out of the carriage, he suddenly became
aware of two strangely glowing eyes fixed upon him from among the crowd
that met the train. On endeavouring to re-discover the eyes, and see
to whom they belonged, he could find nothing to guide him. It must have
been a hallucination. But the disagreeable impression remained, and
without this, the prince was sad and thoughtful already, and seemed to
be much preoccupied.

His cab took him to a small and bad hotel near the Litaynaya. Here
he engaged a couple of rooms, dark and badly furnished. He washed and
changed, and hurriedly left the hotel again, as though anxious to
waste no time. Anyone who now saw him for the first time since he
left Petersburg would judge that he had improved vastly so far as his
exterior was concerned. His clothes certainly were very different; they
were more fashionable, perhaps even too much so, and anyone inclined to
mockery might have found something to smile at in his appearance. But
what is there that people will not smile at?

The prince took a cab and drove to a street near the Nativity, where he
soon discovered the house he was seeking. It was a small wooden villa,
and he was struck by its attractive and clean appearance; it stood in
a pleasant little garden, full of flowers. The windows looking on the
street were open, and the sound of a voice, reading aloud or making
a speech, came through them. It rose at times to a shout, and was
interrupted occasionally by bursts of laughter.

Prince Muishkin entered the court-yard, and ascended the steps. A cook
with her sleeves turned up to the elbows opened the door. The visitor
asked if Mr. Lebedeff were at home.

“He is in there,” said she, pointing to the salon.

The room had a blue wall-paper, and was well, almost pretentiously,
furnished, with its round table, its divan, and its bronze clock under
a glass shade. There was a narrow pier-glass against the wall, and a
chandelier adorned with lustres hung by a bronze chain from the ceiling.

When the prince entered, Lebedeff was standing in the middle of the
room, his back to the door. He was in his shirt-sleeves, on account of
the extreme heat, and he seemed to have just reached the peroration of
his speech, and was impressively beating his breast.

His audience consisted of a youth of about fifteen years of age with a
clever face, who had a book in his hand, though he was not reading; a
young lady of twenty, in deep mourning, stood near him with an infant in
her arms; another girl of thirteen, also in black, was laughing loudly,
her mouth wide open; and on the sofa lay a handsome young man,
with black hair and eyes, and a suspicion of beard and whiskers. He
frequently interrupted the speaker and argued with him, to the great
delight of the others.

“Lukian Timofeyovitch! Lukian Timofeyovitch! Here’s someone to see you!
Look here!... a gentleman to speak to you!... Well, it’s not my fault!”
 and the cook turned and went away red with anger.

Lebedeff started, and at sight of the prince stood like a statue for a
moment. Then he moved up to him with an ingratiating smile, but stopped
short again.

“Prince! ex-ex-excellency!” he stammered. Then suddenly he ran towards
the girl with the infant, a movement so unexpected by her that she
staggered and fell back, but next moment he was threatening the other
child, who was standing, still laughing, in the doorway. She screamed,
and ran towards the kitchen. Lebedeff stamped his foot angrily;
then, seeing the prince regarding him with amazement, he murmured
apologetically--“Pardon to show respect!... he-he!”

“You are quite wrong...” began the prince.

“At once... at once... in one moment!”

He rushed like a whirlwind from the room, and Muishkin looked
inquiringly at the others.

They were all laughing, and the guest joined in the chorus.

“He has gone to get his coat,” said the boy.

“How annoying!” exclaimed the prince. “I thought... Tell me, is he...”

“You think he is drunk?” cried the young man on the sofa. “Not in the
least. He’s only had three or four small glasses, perhaps five; but what
is that? The usual thing!”

As the prince opened his mouth to answer, he was interrupted by the
girl, whose sweet face wore an expression of absolute frankness.

“He never drinks much in the morning; if you have come to talk business
with him, do it now. It is the best time. He sometimes comes back drunk
in the evening; but just now he passes the greater part of the evening
in tears, and reads passages of Holy Scripture aloud, because our mother
died five weeks ago.”

“No doubt he ran off because he did not know what to say to you,”
 said the youth on the divan. “I bet he is trying to cheat you, and is
thinking how best to do it.”

Just then Lebedeff returned, having put on his coat.

“Five weeks!” said he, wiping his eyes. “Only five weeks! Poor orphans!”

“But why wear a coat in holes,” asked the girl, “when your new one is
hanging behind the door? Did you not see it?”

“Hold your tongue, dragon-fly!” he scolded. “What a plague you are!” He
stamped his foot irritably, but she only laughed, and answered:

“Are you trying to frighten me? I am not Tania, you know, and I don’t
intend to run away. Look, you are waking Lubotchka, and she will have
convulsions again. Why do you shout like that?”

“Well, well! I won’t again,” said the master of the house, his anxiety
getting the better of his temper. He went up to his daughter, and looked
at the child in her arms, anxiously making the sign of the cross over
her three times. “God bless her! God bless her!” he cried with emotion.
“This little creature is my daughter Luboff,” addressing the prince. “My
wife, Helena, died--at her birth; and this is my big daughter Vera, in
