seemed to blaze like fire. At last Rogojin smiled, though he still
looked agitated and shaken.

“What are you staring at me like that for?” he muttered. “Sit down.”

The prince took a chair.

“Parfen,” he said, “tell me honestly, did you know that I was coming to
Petersburg or no?”

“Oh, I supposed you were coming,” the other replied, smiling
sarcastically, “and I was right in my supposition, you see; but how was I
to know that you would come _today?_”

A certain strangeness and impatience in his manner impressed the prince
very forcibly.

“And if you had known that I was coming today, why be so irritated about
it?” he asked, in quiet surprise.

“Why did you ask me?”

“Because when I jumped out of the train this morning, two eyes glared at
me just as yours did a moment since.”

“Ha! and whose eyes may they have been?” said Rogojin, suspiciously. It
seemed to the prince that he was trembling.

“I don’t know; I thought it was a hallucination. I often have
hallucinations nowadays. I feel just as I did five years ago when my
fits were about to come on.”

“Well, perhaps it was a hallucination, I don’t know,” said Parfen.

He tried to give the prince an affectionate smile, and it seemed to the
latter as though in this smile of his something had broken, and that he
could not mend it, try as he would.

“Shall you go abroad again then?” he asked, and suddenly added, “Do you
remember how we came up in the train from Pskoff together? You and your
cloak and leggings, eh?”

And Rogojin burst out laughing, this time with unconcealed malice, as
though he were glad that he had been able to find an opportunity for
giving vent to it.

“Have you quite taken up your quarters here?” asked the prince

“Yes, I’m at home. Where else should I go to?”

“We haven’t met for some time. Meanwhile I have heard things about you
which I should not have believed to be possible.”

“What of that? People will say anything,” said Rogojin drily.

“At all events, you’ve disbanded your troop--and you are living in your
own house instead of being fast and loose about the place; that’s all
very good. Is this house all yours, or joint property?”

“It is my mother’s. You get to her apartments by that passage.”

“Where’s your brother?”

“In the other wing.”

“Is he married?”

“Widower. Why do you want to know all this?”

The prince looked at him, but said nothing. He had suddenly relapsed
into musing, and had probably not heard the question at all. Rogojin did
not insist upon an answer, and there was silence for a few moments.

“I guessed which was your house from a hundred yards off,” said the
prince at last.

“Why so?”

“I don’t quite know. Your house has the aspect of yourself and all your
family; it bears the stamp of the Rogojin life; but ask me why I think
so, and I can tell you nothing. It is nonsense, of course. I am nervous
about this kind of thing troubling me so much. I had never before
imagined what sort of a house you would live in, and yet no sooner did I
set eyes on this one than I said to myself that it must be yours.”

“Really!” said Rogojin vaguely, not taking in what the prince meant by
his rather obscure remarks.

The room they were now sitting in was a large one, lofty but dark, well
furnished, principally with writing-tables and desks covered with papers
and books. A wide sofa covered with red morocco evidently served Rogojin
for a bed. On the table beside which the prince had been invited to seat
himself lay some books; one containing a marker where the reader had
left off, was a volume of Solovieff’s History. Some oil-paintings in
worn gilded frames hung on the walls, but it was impossible to make out
what subjects they represented, so blackened were they by smoke and age.
One, a life-sized portrait, attracted the prince’s attention. It showed
a man of about fifty, wearing a long riding-coat of German cut. He had
two medals on his breast; his beard was white, short and thin; his face
yellow and wrinkled, with a sly, suspicious expression in the eyes.

“That is your father, is it not?” asked the prince.

“Yes, it is,” replied Rogojin with an unpleasant smile, as if he
had expected his guest to ask the question, and then to make some
disagreeable remark.

“Was he one of the Old Believers?”

“No, he went to church, but to tell the truth he really preferred the
old religion. This was his study and is now mine. Why did you ask if he
were an Old Believer?”

“Are you going to be married here?”

“Ye-yes!” replied Rogojin, starting at the unexpected question.

“Soon?”

“You know yourself it does not depend on me.”

“Parfen, I am not your enemy, and I do not intend to oppose your
intentions in any way. I repeat this to you now just as I said it to you
once before on a very similar occasion. When you were arranging for your
projected marriage in Moscow, I did not interfere with you--you know I
did not. That first time she fled to me from you, from the very altar
almost, and begged me to ‘save her from you.’ Afterwards she ran away
from me again, and you found her and arranged your marriage with her
once more; and now, I hear, she has run away from you and come to
Petersburg. Is it true? Lebedeff wrote me to this effect, and that’s
why I came here. That you had once more arranged matters with Nastasia
Philipovna I only learned last night in the train from a friend of
yours, Zaleshoff--if you wish to know.

“I confess I came here with an object. I wished to persuade Nastasia
to go abroad for her health; she requires it. Both mind and body need a
change badly. I did not intend to take her abroad myself. I was going to
arrange for her to go without me. Now I tell you honestly, Parfen, if it
is true that all is made up between you, I will not so much as set eyes
upon her, and I will never even come to see you again.

“You know quite well that I am telling the truth, because I have always
been frank with you. I have never concealed my own opinion from you.
I have always told you that I consider a marriage between you and her
would be ruin to her. You would also be ruined, and perhaps even more
hopelessly. If this marriage were to be broken off again, I admit I
should be greatly pleased; but at the same time I have not the slightest
intention of trying to part you. You may be quite easy in your mind,
and you need not suspect me. You know yourself whether I was ever really
your rival or not, even when she ran away and came to me.
