
“How did you know who I was? Where had you seen me before? And why were
you so struck dumb at the sight of me? What was there so overwhelming
about me?”

“Oho! ho, ho, ho!” cried Ferdishenko. “_Now_ then, prince! My word,
what things I would say if I had such a chance as that! My goodness,
prince--go on!”

“So should I, in your place, I’ve no doubt!” laughed the prince to
Ferdishenko; then continued, addressing Nastasia: “Your portrait struck
me very forcibly this morning; then I was talking about you to the
Epanchins; and then, in the train, before I reached Petersburg, Parfen
Rogojin told me a good deal about you; and at the very moment that I
opened the door to you I happened to be thinking of you, when--there you
stood before me!”

“And how did you recognize me?”

“From the portrait!”

“What else?”

“I seemed to imagine you exactly as you are--I seemed to have seen you
somewhere.”

“Where--where?”

“I seem to have seen your eyes somewhere; but it cannot be! I have not
seen you--I never was here before. I may have dreamed of you, I don’t
know.”

The prince said all this with manifest effort--in broken sentences, and
with many drawings of breath. He was evidently much agitated. Nastasia
Philipovna looked at him inquisitively, but did not laugh.

“Bravo, prince!” cried Ferdishenko, delighted.

At this moment a loud voice from behind the group which hedged in the
prince and Nastasia Philipovna, divided the crowd, as it were, and
before them stood the head of the family, General Ivolgin. He was
dressed in evening clothes; his moustache was dyed.

This apparition was too much for Gania. Vain and ambitious almost to
morbidness, he had had much to put up with in the last two months, and
was seeking feverishly for some means of enabling himself to lead a more
presentable kind of existence. At home, he now adopted an attitude
of absolute cynicism, but he could not keep this up before Nastasia
Philipovna, although he had sworn to make her pay after marriage for all
he suffered now. He was experiencing a last humiliation, the bitterest
of all, at this moment--the humiliation of blushing for his own kindred
in his own house. A question flashed through his mind as to whether the
game was really worth the candle.

For that had happened at this moment, which for two months had been his
nightmare; which had filled his soul with dread and shame--the meeting
between his father and Nastasia Philipovna. He had often tried to
imagine such an event, but had found the picture too mortifying and
exasperating, and had quietly dropped it. Very likely he anticipated
far worse things than was at all necessary; it is often so with vain
persons. He had long since determined, therefore, to get his father
out of the way, anywhere, before his marriage, in order to avoid such
a meeting; but when Nastasia entered the room just now, he had been so
overwhelmed with astonishment, that he had not thought of his father,
and had made no arrangements to keep him out of the way. And now it was
too late--there he was, and got up, too, in a dress coat and white tie,
and Nastasia in the very humour to heap ridicule on him and his family
circle; of this last fact, he felt quite persuaded. What else had she
come for? There were his mother and his sister sitting before her, and
she seemed to have forgotten their very existence already; and if she
behaved like that, he thought, she must have some object in view.

Ferdishenko led the general up to Nastasia Philipovna.

“Ardalion Alexandrovitch Ivolgin,” said the smiling general, with a low
bow of great dignity, “an old soldier, unfortunate, and the father
of this family; but happy in the hope of including in that family so
exquisite--”

He did not finish his sentence, for at this moment Ferdishenko pushed
a chair up from behind, and the general, not very firm on his legs,
at this post-prandial hour, flopped into it backwards. It was always a
difficult thing to put this warrior to confusion, and his sudden
descent left him as composed as before. He had sat down just opposite to
Nastasia, whose fingers he now took, and raised to his lips with great
elegance, and much courtesy. The general had once belonged to a very
select circle of society, but he had been turned out of it two or three
years since on account of certain weaknesses, in which he now indulged
with all the less restraint; but his good manners remained with him to
this day, in spite of all.

Nastasia Philipovna seemed delighted at the appearance of this latest
arrival, of whom she had of course heard a good deal by report.

“I have heard that my son--” began Ardalion Alexandrovitch.

“Your son, indeed! A nice papa you are! _You_ might have come to see me
anyhow, without compromising anyone. Do you hide yourself, or does your
son hide you?”

“The children of the nineteenth century, and their parents--” began the
general, again.

“Nastasia Philipovna, will you excuse the general for a moment?
Someone is inquiring for him,” said Nina Alexandrovna in a loud voice,
interrupting the conversation.

“Excuse him? Oh no, I have wished to see him too long for that. Why,
what business can he have? He has retired, hasn’t he? You won’t leave
me, general, will you?”

“I give you my word that he shall come and see you--but he--he needs
rest just now.”

“General, they say you require rest,” said Nastasia Philipovna, with the
melancholy face of a child whose toy is taken away.

Ardalion Alexandrovitch immediately did his best to make his foolish
position a great deal worse.

“My dear, my dear!” he said, solemnly and reproachfully, looking at his
wife, with one hand on his heart.

“Won’t you leave the room, mamma?” asked Varia, aloud.

“No, Varia, I shall sit it out to the end.”

Nastasia must have overheard both question and reply, but her vivacity
was not in the least damped. On the contrary, it seemed to increase. She
immediately overwhelmed the general once more with questions, and within
five minutes that gentleman was as happy as a king, and holding forth at
the top of his voice, amid the laughter of almost all who heard him.

Colia jogged the prince’s arm.

“Can’t _you_ get him out of the room, somehow? _Do_, please,” and tears
of annoyance stood in the boy’s eyes. “Curse that Gania!” he muttered,
between his teeth.

“Oh yes, I knew General Epanchin well,” General Ivolgin was saying at
this moment; “he and Prince Nicolai Ivanovitch Muishkin--whose son I
have this day embraced after an absence of twenty years--and I,
were three inseparables. Alas one is in the grave, torn to pieces by
calumnies and bullets; another is now before you, still battling with
calumnies and bullets--”

“Bullets?” cried Nastasia.

“Yes, here in my chest. I received them at the siege of Kars, and I feel
them in bad weather now. And as to the third of our trio, Epanchin, of
