made inquiries about Pavlofsk. On inquiry, it turned out that Rogojin
visited the old lady in town at almost the same moment when Nastasia
declared that she had seen him in the garden; so that the whole thing
turned out to be an illusion on her part. Nastasia immediately went
across to Hippolyte’s to inquire more accurately, and returned immensely
relieved and comforted.

On the day before the wedding, the prince left Nastasia in a state of
great animation. Her wedding-dress and all sorts of finery had just
arrived from town. Muishkin had not imagined that she would be so
excited over it, but he praised everything, and his praise rendered her
doubly happy.

But Nastasia could not hide the cause of her intense interest in her
wedding splendour. She had heard of the indignation in the town, and
knew that some of the populace was getting up a sort of charivari with
music, that verses had been composed for the occasion, and that the
rest of Pavlofsk society more or less encouraged these preparations. So,
since attempts were being made to humiliate her, she wanted to hold her
head even higher than usual, and to overwhelm them all with the beauty
and taste of her toilette. “Let them shout and whistle, if they dare!”
 Her eyes flashed at the thought. But, underneath this, she had another
motive, of which she did not speak. She thought that possibly Aglaya,
or at any rate someone sent by her, would be present incognito at
the ceremony, or in the crowd, and she wished to be prepared for this
eventuality.

The prince left her at eleven, full of these thoughts, and went home.
But it was not twelve o’clock when a messenger came to say that Nastasia
was very bad, and he must come at once.

On hurrying back he found his bride locked up in her own room and could
hear her hysterical cries and sobs. It was some time before she could be
made to hear that the prince had come, and then she opened the door only
just sufficiently to let him in, and immediately locked it behind him.
She then fell on her knees at his feet. (So at least Dana Alexeyevna
reported.)

“What am I doing? What am I doing to you?” she sobbed convulsively,
embracing his knees.

The prince was a whole hour soothing and comforting her, and left her,
at length, pacified and composed. He sent another messenger during the
night to inquire after her, and two more next morning. The last
brought back a message that Nastasia was surrounded by a whole army of
dressmakers and maids, and was as happy and as busy as such a beauty
should be on her wedding morning, and that there was not a vestige of
yesterday’s agitation remaining. The message concluded with the
news that at the moment of the bearer’s departure there was a great
confabulation in progress as to which diamonds were to be worn, and how.

This message entirely calmed the prince’s mind.

The following report of the proceedings on the wedding day may be
depended upon, as coming from eye-witnesses.

The wedding was fixed for eight o’clock in the evening. Nastasia
Philipovna was ready at seven. From six o’clock groups of people began
to gather at Nastasia’s house, at the prince’s, and at the church door,
but more especially at the former place. The church began to fill at
seven.

Colia and Vera Lebedeff were very anxious on the prince’s account, but
they were so busy over the arrangements for receiving the guests after
the wedding, that they had not much time for the indulgence of personal
feelings.

There were to be very few guests besides the best men and so on; only
Dana Alexeyevna, the Ptitsins, Gania, and the doctor. When the prince
asked Lebedeff why he had invited the doctor, who was almost a stranger,
Lebedeff replied:

“Why, he wears an ‘order,’ and it looks so well!”

This idea amused the prince.

Keller and Burdovsky looked wonderfully correct in their dress-coats and
white kid gloves, although Keller caused the bridegroom some alarm by
his undisguisedly hostile glances at the gathering crowd of sight-seers
outside.

At about half-past seven the prince started for the church in his
carriage.

We may remark here that he seemed anxious not to omit a single one of
the recognized customs and traditions observed at weddings. He wished
all to be done as openly as possible, and “in due order.”

Arrived at the church, Muishkin, under Keller’s guidance, passed
through the crowd of spectators, amid continuous whispering and excited
exclamations. The prince stayed near the altar, while Keller made off
once more to fetch the bride.

On reaching the gate of Daria Alexeyevna’s house, Keller found a far
denser crowd than he had encountered at the prince’s. The remarks and
exclamations of the spectators here were of so irritating a nature that
Keller was very near making them a speech on the impropriety of their
conduct, but was luckily caught by Burdovsky, in the act of turning to
address them, and hurried indoors.

Nastasia Philipovna was ready. She rose from her seat, looked into the
glass and remarked, as Keller told the tale afterwards, that she was “as
pale as a corpse.” She then bent her head reverently, before the ikon in
the corner, and left the room.

A torrent of voices greeted her appearance at the front door. The crowd
whistled, clapped its hands, and laughed and shouted; but in a moment or
two isolated voices were distinguishable.

“What a beauty!” cried one.

“Well, she isn’t the first in the world, nor the last,” said another.

“Marriage covers everything,” observed a third.

“I defy you to find another beauty like that,” said a fourth.

“She’s a real princess! I’d sell my soul for such a princess as that!”

Nastasia came out of the house looking as white as any handkerchief; but
her large dark eyes shone upon the vulgar crowd like blazing coals.
The spectators’ cries were redoubled, and became more exultant and
triumphant every moment. The door of the carriage was open, and Keller
had given his hand to the bride to help her in, when suddenly with
a loud cry she rushed from him, straight into the surging crowd. Her
friends about her were stupefied with amazement; the crowd parted as she
rushed through it, and suddenly, at a distance of five or six yards
from the carriage, appeared Rogojin. It was his look that had caught her
eyes.

Nastasia rushed to him like a madwoman, and seized both his hands.

“Save me!” she cried. “Take me away, anywhere you like, quick!”

Rogojin seized her in his arms and almost carried her to the carriage.
Then, in a flash, he tore a hundred-rouble note out of his pocket and
held it to the coachman.

“To the station, quick! If you catch the train you shall have another.
Quick!”

He leaped into the carriage after Nastasia and banged the door. The
coachman did not hesitate a moment; he whipped up the horses, and they
were off.

“One more second and I should have stopped him,” said Keller,
afterwards. In fact, he and Burdovsky jumped into another carriage and
set off in pursuit; but it struck them as they drove along that it was
not much use trying to bring Nastasia back by force.

