
Varia had quietly entered the room, and was holding out the portrait of
Nastasia Philipovna to her mother.

Nina Alexandrovna started, and examined the photograph intently, gazing
at it long and sadly. At last she looked up inquiringly at Varia.

“It’s a present from herself to him,” said Varia; “the question is to be
finally decided this evening.”

“This evening!” repeated her mother in a tone of despair, but softly,
as though to herself. “Then it’s all settled, of course, and there’s no
hope left to us. She has anticipated her answer by the present of her
portrait. Did he show it you himself?” she added, in some surprise.

“You know we have hardly spoken to each other for a whole month. Ptitsin
told me all about it; and the photo was lying under the table, and I
picked it up.”

“Prince,” asked Nina Alexandrovna, “I wanted to inquire whether you have
known my son long? I think he said that you had only arrived today from
somewhere.”

The prince gave a short narrative of what we have heard before, leaving
out the greater part. The two ladies listened intently.

“I did not ask about Gania out of curiosity,” said the elder, at last.
“I wish to know how much you know about him, because he said just now
that we need not stand on ceremony with you. What, exactly, does that
mean?”

At this moment Gania and Ptitsin entered the room together, and Nina
Alexandrovna immediately became silent again. The prince remained seated
next to her, but Varia moved to the other end of the room; the portrait
of Nastasia Philipovna remained lying as before on the work-table. Gania
observed it there, and with a frown of annoyance snatched it up and
threw it across to his writing-table, which stood at the other end of
the room.

“Is it today, Gania?” asked Nina Alexandrovna, at last.

“Is what today?” cried the former. Then suddenly recollecting himself,
he turned sharply on the prince. “Oh,” he growled, “I see, you are here,
that explains it! Is it a disease, or what, that you can’t hold your
tongue? Look here, understand once for all, prince--”

“I am to blame in this, Gania--no one else,” said Ptitsin.

Gania glanced inquiringly at the speaker.

“It’s better so, you know, Gania--especially as, from one point of view,
the matter may be considered as settled,” said Ptitsin; and sitting
down a little way from the table he began to study a paper covered with
pencil writing.

Gania stood and frowned, he expected a family scene. He never thought of
apologizing to the prince, however.

“If it’s all settled, Gania, then of course Mr. Ptitsin is right,” said
Nina Alexandrovna. “Don’t frown. You need not worry yourself, Gania;
I shall ask you no questions. You need not tell me anything you don’t
like. I assure you I have quite submitted to your will.” She said all
this, knitting away the while as though perfectly calm and composed.

Gania was surprised, but cautiously kept silence and looked at his
mother, hoping that she would express herself more clearly. Nina
Alexandrovna observed his cautiousness and added, with a bitter smile:

“You are still suspicious, I see, and do not believe me; but you may
be quite at your ease. There shall be no more tears, nor questions--not
from my side, at all events. All I wish is that you may be happy, you
know that. I have submitted to my fate; but my heart will always be
with you, whether we remain united, or whether we part. Of course I only
answer for myself--you can hardly expect your sister--”

“My sister again,” cried Gania, looking at her with contempt and almost
hate. “Look here, mother, I have already given you my word that I shall
always respect you fully and absolutely, and so shall everyone else in
this house, be it who it may, who shall cross this threshold.”

Gania was so much relieved that he gazed at his mother almost
affectionately.

“I was not at all afraid for myself, Gania, as you know well. It was not
for my own sake that I have been so anxious and worried all this time!
They say it is all to be settled to-day. What is to be settled?”

“She has promised to tell me tonight at her own house whether she
consents or not,” replied Gania.

“We have been silent on this subject for three weeks,” said his mother,
“and it was better so; and now I will only ask you one question. How can
she give her consent and make you a present of her portrait when you do
not love her? How can such a--such a--”

“Practised hand--eh?”

“I was not going to express myself so. But how could you so blind her?”

Nina Alexandrovna’s question betrayed intense annoyance. Gania waited a
moment and then said, without taking the trouble to conceal the irony of
his tone:

“There you are, mother, you are always like that. You begin by promising
that there are to be no reproaches or insinuations or questions, and
here you are beginning them at once. We had better drop the subject--we
had, really. I shall never leave you, mother; any other man would cut
and run from such a sister as this. See how she is looking at me at this
moment! Besides, how do you know that I am blinding Nastasia Philipovna?
As for Varia, I don’t care--she can do just as she pleases. There,
that’s quite enough!”

Gania’s irritation increased with every word he uttered, as he walked up
and down the room. These conversations always touched the family sores
before long.

“I have said already that the moment she comes in I go out, and I shall
keep my word,” remarked Varia.

“Out of obstinacy” shouted Gania. “You haven’t married, either, thanks
to your obstinacy. Oh, you needn’t frown at me, Varvara! You can go at
once for all I care; I am sick enough of your company. What, you are
going to leave us are you, too?” he cried, turning to the prince, who
was rising from his chair.

Gania’s voice was full of the most uncontrolled and uncontrollable
irritation.

The prince turned at the door to say something, but perceiving in
Gania’s expression that there was but that one drop wanting to make the
cup overflow, he changed his mind and left the room without a word.
A few minutes later he was aware from the noisy voices in the drawing
room, that the conversation had become more quarrelsome than ever after
his departure.

He crossed the salon and the entrance-hall, so as to pass down the
corridor into his own room. As he came near the front door he heard
someone outside vainly endeavouring to ring the bell, which was
evidently broken, and only shook a little, without emitting any sound.

The prince took down the chain and opened the door. He started back in
amazement--for there stood Nastasia Philipovna. He knew her at once from
her photograph. Her eyes blazed with anger as she looked at him. She
quickly pushed by him into the hall, shouldering him out of her way, and
said, furiously, as she threw off her fur cloak:

“If you are too lazy to mend your bell, you should at least wait in
the hall to let people in when they rattle the bell handle. There, now,
you’ve dropped my fur cloak--dummy!”

