
“Is there over there?”

“Yes--I saw an execution in France--at Lyons. Schneider took me over
with him to see it.”

“What, did they hang the fellow?”

“No, they cut off people’s heads in France.”

“What did the fellow do?--yell?”

“Oh no--it’s the work of an instant. They put a man inside a frame and
a sort of broad knife falls by machinery--they call the thing a
guillotine--it falls with fearful force and weight--the head springs
off so quickly that you can’t wink your eye in between. But all the
preparations are so dreadful. When they announce the sentence, you know,
and prepare the criminal and tie his hands, and cart him off to the
scaffold--that’s the fearful part of the business. The people all crowd
round--even women--though they don’t at all approve of women looking on.”

“No, it’s not a thing for women.”

“Of course not--of course not!--bah! The criminal was a fine intelligent
fearless man; Le Gros was his name; and I may tell you--believe it or
not, as you like--that when that man stepped upon the scaffold he _cried_,
he did indeed,--he was as white as a bit of paper. Isn’t it a dreadful
idea that he should have cried--cried! Whoever heard of a grown man
crying from fear--not a child, but a man who never had cried before--a
grown man of forty-five years. Imagine what must have been going on in
that man’s mind at such a moment; what dreadful convulsions his whole
spirit must have endured; it is an outrage on the soul that’s what it
is. Because it is said ‘thou shalt not kill,’ is he to be killed because
he murdered some one else? No, it is not right, it’s an impossible
theory. I assure you, I saw the sight a month ago and it’s dancing
before my eyes to this moment. I dream of it, often.”

The prince had grown animated as he spoke, and a tinge of colour
suffused his pale face, though his way of talking was as quiet as ever.
The servant followed his words with sympathetic interest. Clearly he
was not at all anxious to bring the conversation to an end. Who knows?
Perhaps he too was a man of imagination and with some capacity for
thought.

“Well, at all events it is a good thing that there’s no pain when the
poor fellow’s head flies off,” he remarked.

“Do you know, though,” cried the prince warmly, “you made that remark
now, and everyone says the same thing, and the machine is designed with
the purpose of avoiding pain, this guillotine I mean; but a thought came
into my head then: what if it be a bad plan after all? You may laugh at
my idea, perhaps--but I could not help its occurring to me all the same.
Now with the rack and tortures and so on--you suffer terrible pain of
course; but then your torture is bodily pain only (although no doubt you
have plenty of that) until you die. But _here_ I should imagine the
most terrible part of the whole punishment is, not the bodily pain at
all--but the certain knowledge that in an hour,--then in ten minutes,
then in half a minute, then now--this very _instant_--your soul must
quit your body and that you will no longer be a man--and that this
is certain, _certain_! That’s the point--the certainty of it. Just that
instant when you place your head on the block and hear the iron grate
over your head--then--that quarter of a second is the most awful of all.

“This is not my own fantastical opinion--many people have thought the
same; but I feel it so deeply that I’ll tell you what I think. I believe
that to execute a man for murder is to punish him immeasurably more
dreadfully than is equivalent to his crime. A murder by sentence is
far more dreadful than a murder committed by a criminal. The man who is
attacked by robbers at night, in a dark wood, or anywhere, undoubtedly
hopes and hopes that he may yet escape until the very moment of his
death. There are plenty of instances of a man running away, or imploring
for mercy--at all events hoping on in some degree--even after his throat
was cut. But in the case of an execution, that last hope--having which
it is so immeasurably less dreadful to die,--is taken away from the
wretch and _certainty_ substituted in its place! There is his sentence,
and with it that terrible certainty that he cannot possibly escape
death--which, I consider, must be the most dreadful anguish in the
world. You may place a soldier before a cannon’s mouth in battle, and
fire upon him--and he will still hope. But read to that same soldier his
death-sentence, and he will either go mad or burst into tears. Who dares
to say that any man can suffer this without going mad? No, no! it is
an abuse, a shame, it is unnecessary--why should such a thing exist?
Doubtless there may be men who have been sentenced, who have suffered
this mental anguish for a while and then have been reprieved; perhaps
such men may have been able to relate their feelings afterwards. Our
Lord Christ spoke of this anguish and dread. No! no! no! No man should
be treated so, no man, no man!”

The servant, though of course he could not have expressed all this
as the prince did, still clearly entered into it and was greatly
conciliated, as was evident from the increased amiability of his
expression. “If you are really very anxious for a smoke,” he remarked,
“I think it might possibly be managed, if you are very quick about it.
You see they might come out and inquire for you, and you wouldn’t be on
the spot. You see that door there? Go in there and you’ll find a little
room on the right; you can smoke there, only open the window, because I
ought not to allow it really, and--.” But there was no time, after all.

A young fellow entered the ante-room at this moment, with a bundle
of papers in his hand. The footman hastened to help him take off his
overcoat. The new arrival glanced at the prince out of the corners of
his eyes.

“This gentleman declares, Gavrila Ardalionovitch,” began the man,
confidentially and almost familiarly, “that he is Prince Muishkin and
a relative of Madame Epanchin’s. He has just arrived from abroad, with
nothing but a bundle by way of luggage--.”

The prince did not hear the rest, because at this point the servant
continued his communication in a whisper.

Gavrila Ardalionovitch listened attentively, and gazed at the prince
with great curiosity. At last he motioned the man aside and stepped
hurriedly towards the prince.

“Are you Prince Muishkin?” he asked, with the greatest courtesy and
amiability.

He was a remarkably handsome young fellow of some twenty-eight summers,
fair and of middle height; he wore a small beard, and his face was most
intelligent. Yet his smile, in spite of its sweetness, was a little
thin, if I may so call it, and showed his teeth too evenly; his
gaze though decidedly good-humoured and ingenuous, was a trifle too
inquisitive and intent to be altogether agreeable.

“Probably when he is alone he looks quite different, and hardly smiles
at all!” thought the prince.

He explained about himself in a few words, very much the same as he had
told the footman and Rogojin beforehand.

Gavrila Ardalionovitch meanwhile seemed to be trying to recall
something.

“Was it not you, then, who sent a letter a year or less ago--from
Switzerland, I think it was--to Elizabetha Prokofievna (Mrs. Epanchin)?”

“It was.”

“Oh, then, of course they will remember who you are. You wish to see
the general? I’ll tell him at once--he will be free in a minute; but
you--you had better wait in the ante-chamber,--hadn’t you? Why is he
here?” he added, severely, to the man.

“I tell you, sir, he wished it himself!”

At this moment the study door opened, and a military man, with a
portfolio under his arm, came out talking loudly, and after bidding
good-bye to someone inside, took his departure.

