which she had displayed at the beginning disappeared as the ballad
proceeded. She spoke the lines in so serious and exalted a manner, and
with so much taste, that she even seemed to justify the exaggerated
solemnity with which she had stepped forward. It was impossible to
discern in her now anything but a deep feeling for the spirit of the
poem which she had undertaken to interpret.

Her eyes were aglow with inspiration, and a slight tremor of rapture
passed over her lovely features once or twice. She continued to recite:

  “Once there came a vision glorious,
   Mystic, dreadful, wondrous fair;
   Burned itself into his spirit,
   And abode for ever there!

  “Never more--from that sweet moment--
   Gazéd he on womankind;
   He was dumb to love and wooing
   And to all their graces blind.

  “Full of love for that sweet vision,
   Brave and pure he took the field;
   With his blood he stained the letters
   N. P. B. upon his shield.

  “‘Lumen caeli, sancta Rosa!’
   Shouting on the foe he fell,
   And like thunder rang his war-cry
   O’er the cowering infidel.

  “Then within his distant castle,
   Home returned, he dreamed his days--
   Silent, sad,--and when death took him
   He was mad, the legend says.”

When recalling all this afterwards the prince could not for the life of
him understand how to reconcile the beautiful, sincere, pure nature of
the girl with the irony of this jest. That it was a jest there was no
doubt whatever; he knew that well enough, and had good reason, too,
for his conviction; for during her recitation of the ballad Aglaya had
deliberately changed the letters A. N. B. into N. P. B. He was quite
sure she had not done this by accident, and that his ears had not
deceived him. At all events her performance--which was a joke, of
course, if rather a crude one,--was premeditated. They had evidently
talked (and laughed) over the ‘poor knight’ for more than a month.

Yet Aglaya had brought out these letters N. P. B. not only without the
slightest appearance of irony, or even any particular accentuation, but
with so even and unbroken an appearance of seriousness that assuredly
anyone might have supposed that these initials were the original ones
written in the ballad. The thing made an uncomfortable impression upon
the prince. Of course Mrs. Epanchin saw nothing either in the change of
initials or in the insinuation embodied therein. General Epanchin only
knew that there was a recitation of verses going on, and took no further
interest in the matter. Of the rest of the audience, many had understood
the allusion and wondered both at the daring of the lady and at the
motive underlying it, but tried to show no sign of their feelings. But
Evgenie Pavlovitch (as the prince was ready to wager) both comprehended
and tried his best to show that he comprehended; his smile was too
mocking to leave any doubt on that point.

“How beautiful that is!” cried Mrs. Epanchin, with sincere admiration.
“Whose is it?”

“Pushkin’s, mama, of course! Don’t disgrace us all by showing your
ignorance,” said Adelaida.

“As soon as we reach home give it to me to read.”

“I don’t think we have a copy of Pushkin in the house.”

“There are a couple of torn volumes somewhere; they have been lying
about from time immemorial,” added Alexandra.

“Send Feodor or Alexey up by the very first train to buy a copy,
then.--Aglaya, come here--kiss me, dear, you recited beautifully! but,”
 she added in a whisper, “if you were sincere I am sorry for you. If it
was a joke, I do not approve of the feelings which prompted you to do
it, and in any case you would have done far better not to recite it at
all. Do you understand?--Now come along, young woman; we’ve sat here too
long. I’ll speak to you about this another time.”

Meanwhile the prince took the opportunity of greeting General Epanchin,
and the general introduced Evgenie Pavlovitch to him.

“I caught him up on the way to your house,” explained the general. “He
had heard that we were all here.”

“Yes, and I heard that you were here, too,” added Evgenie Pavlovitch;
“and since I had long promised myself the pleasure of seeking not only
your acquaintance but your friendship, I did not wish to waste time, but
came straight on. I am sorry to hear that you are unwell.”

“Oh, but I’m quite well now, thank you, and very glad to make your
acquaintance. Prince S. has often spoken to me about you,” said
Muishkin, and for an instant the two men looked intently into one
another’s eyes.

The prince remarked that Evgenie Pavlovitch’s plain clothes had
evidently made a great impression upon the company present, so much so
that all other interests seemed to be effaced before this surprising
fact.

His change of dress was evidently a matter of some importance. Adelaida
and Alexandra poured out a stream of questions; Prince S., a relative
of the young man, appeared annoyed; and Ivan Fedorovitch quite excited.
Aglaya alone was not interested. She merely looked closely at Evgenie
for a minute, curious perhaps as to whether civil or military clothes
became him best, then turned away and paid no more attention to him or
his costume. Lizabetha Prokofievna asked no questions, but it was clear
that she was uneasy, and the prince fancied that Evgenie was not in her
good graces.

“He has astonished me,” said Ivan Fedorovitch. “I nearly fell down with
surprise. I could hardly believe my eyes when I met him in Petersburg
just now. Why this haste? That’s what I want to know. He has always said
himself that there is no need to break windows.”

Evgenie Pavlovitch remarked here that he had spoken of his intention of
leaving the service long ago. He had, however, always made more or less
of a joke about it, so no one had taken him seriously. For that matter
he joked about everything, and his friends never knew what to believe,
especially if he did not wish them to understand him.

“I have only retired for a time,” said he, laughing. “For a few months;
at most for a year.”

“But there is no necessity for you to retire at all,” complained the
general, “as far as I know.”

“I want to go and look after my country estates. You advised me to do
that yourself,” was the reply. “And then I wish to go abroad.”

After a few more expostulations, the conversation drifted into other
channels, but the prince, who had been an attentive listener, thought
all this excitement about so small a matter very curious. “There must be
more in it than appears,” he said to himself.

“I see the ‘poor knight’ has come on the scene again,” said Evgenie
Pavlovitch, stepping to Aglaya’s side.

To the amazement of the prince, who overheard the remark, Aglaya looked
haughtily and inquiringly at the questioner, as though she would give
him to know, once for all, that there could be no talk between them
about the ‘poor knight,’ and that she did not understand his question.

“But not now! It is too late to send to town for a Pushkin now. It is
much too late, I say!” Colia was exclaiming in a loud voice. “I have
told you so at least a hundred times.”

