At this moment Lebedeff appeared, having just arrived from Petersburg.
He frowned when he saw the twenty-five rouble note in Keller’s hand, but
the latter, having got the money, went away at once. Lebedeff began to
abuse him.

“You are unjust; I found him sincerely repentant,” observed the prince,
after listening for a time.

“What is the good of repentance like that? It is the same exactly as
mine yesterday, when I said, ‘I am base, I am base,’--words, and nothing
more!”

“Then they were only words on your part? I thought, on the contrary...”

“Well, I don’t mind telling you the truth--you only! Because you see
through a man somehow. Words and actions, truth and falsehood, are all
jumbled up together in me, and yet I am perfectly sincere. I feel the
deepest repentance, believe it or not, as you choose; but words and lies
come out in the infernal craving to get the better of other people.
It is always there--the notion of cheating people, and of using my
repentant tears to my own advantage! I assure you this is the truth,
prince! I would not tell any other man for the world! He would laugh and
jeer at me--but you, you judge a man humanely.”

“Why, Keller said the same thing to me nearly word for word a few
minutes ago!” cried Muishkin. “And you both seem inclined to boast about
it! You astonish me, but I think he is more sincere than you, for you
make a regular trade of it. Oh, don’t put on that pathetic expression,
and don’t put your hand on your heart! Have you anything to say to me?
You have not come for nothing...”

Lebedeff grinned and wriggled.

“I have been waiting all day for you, because I want to ask you a
question; and, for once in your life, please tell me the truth at once.
Had you anything to do with that affair of the carriage yesterday?”

Lebedeff began to grin again, rubbed his hands, sneezed, but spoke not a
word in reply.

“I see you had something to do with it.”

“Indirectly, quite indirectly! I am speaking the truth--I am indeed!
I merely told a certain person that I had people in my house, and that
such and such personages might be found among them.”

“I am aware that you sent your son to that house--he told me so himself
just now, but what is this intrigue?” said the prince, impatiently.

“It is not my intrigue!” cried Lebedeff, waving his hand.

“It was engineered by other people, and is, properly speaking, rather a
fantasy than an intrigue!”

“But what is it all about? Tell me, for Heaven’s sake! Cannot you
understand how nearly it touches me? Why are they blackening Evgenie
Pavlovitch’s reputation?”

Lebedeff grimaced and wriggled again.

“Prince!” said he. “Excellency! You won’t let me tell you the whole
truth; I have tried to explain; more than once I have begun, but you
have not allowed me to go on...”

The prince gave no answer, and sat deep in thought. Evidently he was
struggling to decide.

“Very well! Tell me the truth,” he said, dejectedly.

“Aglaya Ivanovna...” began Lebedeff, promptly.

“Be silent! At once!” interrupted the prince, red with indignation, and
perhaps with shame, too. “It is impossible and absurd! All that has been
invented by you, or fools like you! Let me never hear you say a word
again on that subject!”

Late in the evening Colia came in with a whole budget of Petersburg and
Pavlofsk news. He did not dwell much on the Petersburg part of it, which
consisted chiefly of intelligence about his friend Hippolyte, but passed
quickly to the Pavlofsk tidings. He had gone straight to the Epanchins’
from the station.

“There’s the deuce and all going on there!” he said. “First of all about
the row last night, and I think there must be something new as well,
though I didn’t like to ask. Not a word about _you_, prince, the whole
time! The most interesting fact was that Aglaya had been quarrelling
with her people about Gania. Colia did not know any details, except that
it had been a terrible quarrel! Also Evgenie Pavlovitch had called, and
met with an excellent reception all round. And another curious thing:
Mrs. Epanchin was so angry that she called Varia to her--Varia was
talking to the girls--and turned her out of the house ‘once for all’ she
said. I heard it from Varia herself--Mrs. Epanchin was quite polite,
but firm; and when Varia said good-bye to the girls, she told them
nothing about it, and they didn’t know they were saying goodbye for the
last time. I’m sorry for Varia, and for Gania too; he isn’t half a bad
fellow, in spite of his faults, and I shall never forgive myself for not
liking him before! I don’t know whether I ought to continue to go to the
Epanchins’ now,” concluded Colia--“I like to be quite independent of
others, and of other people’s quarrels if I can; but I must think over
it.”

“I don’t think you need break your heart over Gania,” said the prince;
“for if what you say is true, he must be considered dangerous in the
Epanchin household, and if so, certain hopes of his must have been
encouraged.”

“What? What hopes?” cried Colia; “you surely don’t mean Aglaya?--oh,
no!--”

“You’re a dreadful sceptic, prince,” he continued, after a moment’s
silence. “I have observed of late that you have grown sceptical about
everything. You don’t seem to believe in people as you did, and are
always attributing motives and so on--am I using the word ‘sceptic’ in
its proper sense?”

“I believe so; but I’m not sure.”

“Well, I’ll change it, right or wrong; I’ll say that you are not
sceptical, but _jealous_. There! you are deadly jealous of Gania, over
a certain proud damsel! Come!” Colia jumped up, with these words, and
burst out laughing. He laughed as he had perhaps never laughed before,
and still more when he saw the prince flushing up to his temples. He was
delighted that the prince should be jealous about Aglaya. However, he
stopped immediately on seeing that the other was really hurt, and the
conversation continued, very earnestly, for an hour or more.

Next day the prince had to go to town, on business. Returning in the
afternoon, he happened upon General Epanchin at the station. The latter
seized his hand, glancing around nervously, as if he were afraid
of being caught in wrong-doing, and dragged him into a first-class
compartment. He was burning to speak about something of importance.

“In the first place, my dear prince, don’t be angry with me. I would
have come to see you yesterday, but I didn’t know how Lizabetha
Prokofievna would take it. My dear fellow, my house is simply a hell
just now, a sort of sphinx has taken up its abode there. We live in an
atmosphere of riddles; I can’t make head or tail of anything. As for
you, I feel sure you are the least to blame of any of us, though you
certainly have been the cause of a good deal of trouble. You see, it’s
all very pleasant to be a philanthropist; but it can be carried too far.
Of course I admire kind-heartedness, and I esteem my wife, but--”

The general wandered on in this disconnected way for a long time; it
was clear that he was much disturbed by some circumstance which he could
make nothing of.

“It is plain to me, that _you_ are not in it at all,” he continued, at
last, a little less vaguely, “but perhaps you had better not come to
our house for a little while. I ask you in the friendliest manner,
mind; just till the wind changes again. As for Evgenie Pavlovitch,” he
