“Rogojin was evidently by no means pleased to see me, and hinted,
delicately, that he saw no reason why our acquaintance should continue.
For all that, however, I spent a very interesting hour, and so, I dare
say, did he. There was so great a contrast between us that I am sure we
must both have felt it; anyhow, I felt it acutely. Here was I, with my
days numbered, and he, a man in the full vigour of life, living in
the present, without the slightest thought for ‘final convictions,’ or
numbers, or days, or, in fact, for anything but that which-which--well,
which he was mad about, if he will excuse me the expression--as a feeble
author who cannot express his ideas properly.

“In spite of his lack of amiability, I could not help seeing, in Rogojin
a man of intellect and sense; and although, perhaps, there was little in
the outside world which was of interest to him, still he was clearly a
man with eyes to see.

“I hinted nothing to him about my ‘final conviction,’ but it appeared
to me that he had guessed it from my words. He remained silent--he is
a terribly silent man. I remarked to him, as I rose to depart, that,
in spite of the contrast and the wide differences between us two,
les extremites se touchent [‘extremes meet,’ as I explained to him in
Russian); so that maybe he was not so far from my final conviction as
appeared.

“His only reply to this was a sour grimace. He rose and looked for
my cap, and placed it in my hand, and led me out of the house--that
dreadful gloomy house of his--to all appearances, of course, as though I
were leaving of my own accord, and he were simply seeing me to the
door out of politeness. His house impressed me much; it is like a
burial-ground, he seems to like it, which is, however, quite natural.
Such a full life as he leads is so overflowing with absorbing interests
that he has little need of assistance from his surroundings.

“The visit to Rogojin exhausted me terribly. Besides, I had felt ill
since the morning; and by evening I was so weak that I took to my bed,
and was in high fever at intervals, and even delirious. Colia sat with
me until eleven o’clock.

“Yet I remember all he talked about, and every word we said, though
whenever my eyes closed for a moment I could picture nothing but the
image of Surikoff just in the act of finding a million roubles. He could
not make up his mind what to do with the money, and tore his hair over
it. He trembled with fear that somebody would rob him, and at last
he decided to bury it in the ground. I persuaded him that, instead of
putting it all away uselessly underground, he had better melt it down
and make a golden coffin out of it for his starved child, and then dig
up the little one and put her into the golden coffin. Surikoff accepted
this suggestion, I thought, with tears of gratitude, and immediately
commenced to carry out my design.

“I thought I spat on the ground and left him in disgust. Colia told
me, when I quite recovered my senses, that I had not been asleep for a
moment, but that I had spoken to him about Surikoff the whole while.

“At moments I was in a state of dreadful weakness and misery, so that
Colia was greatly disturbed when he left me.

“When I arose to lock the door after him, I suddenly called to mind a
picture I had noticed at Rogojin’s in one of his gloomiest rooms, over
the door. He had pointed it out to me himself as we walked past it, and
I believe I must have stood a good five minutes in front of it. There
was nothing artistic about it, but the picture made me feel strangely
uncomfortable. It represented Christ just taken down from the cross. It
seems to me that painters as a rule represent the Saviour, both on the
cross and taken down from it, with great beauty still upon His face.
This marvellous beauty they strive to preserve even in His moments of
deepest agony and passion. But there was no such beauty in Rogojin’s
picture. This was the presentment of a poor mangled body which had
evidently suffered unbearable anguish even before its crucifixion, full
of wounds and bruises, marks of the violence of soldiers and people, and
of the bitterness of the moment when He had fallen with the cross--all
this combined with the anguish of the actual crucifixion.

“The face was depicted as though still suffering; as though the body,
only just dead, was still almost quivering with agony. The picture was
one of pure nature, for the face was not beautified by the artist, but
was left as it would naturally be, whosoever the sufferer, after such
anguish.

“I know that the earliest Christian faith taught that the Saviour
suffered actually and not figuratively, and that nature was allowed her
own way even while His body was on the cross.

“It is strange to look on this dreadful picture of the mangled corpse
of the Saviour, and to put this question to oneself: ‘Supposing that the
disciples, the future apostles, the women who had followed Him and stood
by the cross, all of whom believed in and worshipped Him--supposing
that they saw this tortured body, this face so mangled and bleeding and
bruised (and they _must_ have so seen it)--how could they have gazed upon
the dreadful sight and yet have believed that He would rise again?’

“The thought steps in, whether one likes it or no, that death is so
terrible and so powerful, that even He who conquered it in His miracles
during life was unable to triumph over it at the last. He who called
to Lazarus, ‘Lazarus, come forth!’ and the dead man lived--He was now
Himself a prey to nature and death. Nature appears to one, looking at
this picture, as some huge, implacable, dumb monster; or still better--a
stranger simile--some enormous mechanical engine of modern days which
has seized and crushed and swallowed up a great and invaluable Being,
a Being worth nature and all her laws, worth the whole earth, which was
perhaps created merely for the sake of the advent of that Being.

“This blind, dumb, implacable, eternal, unreasoning force is well shown
in the picture, and the absolute subordination of all men and things to
it is so well expressed that the idea unconsciously arises in the mind
of anyone who looks at it. All those faithful people who were gazing at
the cross and its mutilated occupant must have suffered agony of mind
that evening; for they must have felt that all their hopes and almost
all their faith had been shattered at a blow. They must have separated
in terror and dread that night, though each perhaps carried away with
him one great thought which was never eradicated from his mind for ever
afterwards. If this great Teacher of theirs could have seen Himself
after the Crucifixion, how could He have consented to mount the Cross
and to die as He did? This thought also comes into the mind of the man
who gazes at this picture. I thought of all this by snatches probably
between my attacks of delirium--for an hour and a half or so before
Colia’s departure.

“Can there be an appearance of that which has no form? And yet it seemed
to me, at certain moments, that I beheld in some strange and impossible
form, that dark, dumb, irresistibly powerful, eternal force.

“I thought someone led me by the hand and showed me, by the light of
a candle, a huge, loathsome insect, which he assured me was that very
force, that very almighty, dumb, irresistible Power, and laughed at
the indignation with which I received this information. In my room they
always light the little lamp before my icon for the night; it gives a
feeble flicker of light, but it is strong enough to see by dimly, and
if you sit just under it you can even read by it. I think it was about
twelve or a little past that night. I had not slept a wink, and was
lying with my eyes wide open, when suddenly the door opened, and in came
Rogojin.

“He entered, and shut the door behind him. Then he silently gazed at me
and went quickly to the corner of the room where the lamp was burning
and sat down underneath it.

“I was much surprised, and looked at him expectantly.

“Rogojin only leaned his elbow on the table and silently stared at me.
So passed two or three minutes, and I recollect that his silence hurt
and offended me very much. Why did he not speak?

“That his arrival at this time of night struck me as more or less
strange may possibly be the case; but I remember I was by no means
amazed at it. On the contrary, though I had not actually told him my
thought in the morning, yet I know he understood it; and this thought
was of such a character that it would not be anything very remarkable,
if one were to come for further talk about it at any hour of night,
however late.
