an astonishing psychological fact,” he cried, suddenly addressing
the prince, in a tone of the most intense surprise. “It is... it
is something quite inconceivable, prince,” he repeated with growing
animation, like a man regaining consciousness. “Take note of it,
prince, remember it; you collect, I am told, facts concerning capital
punishment... They told me so. Ha, ha! My God, how absurd!” He sat
down on the sofa, put his elbows on the table, and laid his head on
his hands. “It is shameful--though what does it matter to me if it is
shameful?

“Gentlemen, gentlemen! I am about to break the seal,” he continued, with
determination. “I--I--of course I don’t insist upon anyone listening if
they do not wish to.”

With trembling fingers he broke the seal and drew out several sheets of
paper, smoothed them out before him, and began sorting them.

“What on earth does all this mean? What’s he going to read?” muttered
several voices. Others said nothing; but one and all sat down and
watched with curiosity. They began to think something strange might
really be about to happen. Vera stood and trembled behind her father’s
chair, almost in tears with fright; Colia was nearly as much alarmed
as she was. Lebedeff jumped up and put a couple of candles nearer to
Hippolyte, so that he might see better.

“Gentlemen, this--you’ll soon see what this is,” began Hippolyte, and
suddenly commenced his reading.

“It’s headed, ‘A Necessary Explanation,’ with the motto, ‘_Après moi
le déluge!_’ Oh, deuce take it all! Surely I can never have seriously
written such a silly motto as that? Look here, gentlemen, I beg to give
notice that all this is very likely terrible nonsense. It is only a few
ideas of mine. If you think that there is anything mysterious coming--or
in a word--”

“Better read on without any more beating about the bush,” said Gania.

“Affectation!” remarked someone else.

“Too much talk,” said Rogojin, breaking the silence for the first time.

Hippolyte glanced at him suddenly, and when their eyes met Rogojin
showed his teeth in a disagreeable smile, and said the following strange
words: “That’s not the way to settle this business, my friend; that’s
not the way at all.”

Of course nobody knew what Rogojin meant by this; but his words made
a deep impression upon all. Everyone seemed to see in a flash the same
idea.

As for Hippolyte, their effect upon him was astounding. He trembled so
that the prince was obliged to support him, and would certainly have
cried out, but that his voice seemed to have entirely left him for the
moment. For a minute or two he could not speak at all, but panted and
stared at Rogojin. At last he managed to ejaculate:

“Then it was _you_ who came--_you_--_you?_”

“Came where? What do you mean?” asked Rogojin, amazed. But Hippolyte,
panting and choking with excitement, interrupted him violently.

“_You_ came to me last week, in the night, at two o’clock, the day I was
with you in the morning! Confess it was you!”

“Last week? In the night? Have you gone cracked, my good friend?”

Hippolyte paused and considered a moment. Then a smile of
cunning--almost triumph--crossed his lips.

“It was you,” he murmured, almost in a whisper, but with absolute
conviction. “Yes, it was you who came to my room and sat silently on a
chair at my window for a whole hour--more! It was between one and two
at night; you rose and went out at about three. It was you, you! Why you
should have frightened me so, why you should have wished to torment me
like that, I cannot tell--but you it was.”

There was absolute hatred in his eyes as he said this, but his look of
fear and his trembling had not left him.

“You shall hear all this directly, gentlemen. I--I--listen!”

He seized his paper in a desperate hurry; he fidgeted with it, and tried
to sort it, but for a long while his trembling hands could not collect
the sheets together. “He’s either mad or delirious,” murmured Rogojin.
At last he began.

For the first five minutes the reader’s voice continued to tremble,
and he read disconnectedly and unevenly; but gradually his voice
strengthened. Occasionally a violent fit of coughing stopped him, but
his animation grew with the progress of the reading--as did also the
disagreeable impression which it made upon his audience,--until it
reached the highest pitch of excitement.

Here is the article.

MY NECESSARY EXPLANATION.

“_Après moi le déluge._

“Yesterday morning the prince came to see me. Among other things he
asked me to come down to his villa. I knew he would come and persuade
me to this step, and that he would adduce the argument that it would be
easier for me to die ‘among people and green trees,’--as he expressed
it. But today he did not say ‘die,’ he said ‘live.’ It is pretty much
the same to me, in my position, which he says. When I asked him why he
made such a point of his ‘green trees,’ he told me, to my astonishment,
that he had heard that last time I was in Pavlofsk I had said that I had
come ‘to have a last look at the trees.’

“When I observed that it was all the same whether one died among trees
or in front of a blank brick wall, as here, and that it was not worth
making any fuss over a fortnight, he agreed at once. But he insisted
that the good air at Pavlofsk and the greenness would certainly cause a
physical change for the better, and that my excitement, and my _dreams_,
would be perhaps relieved. I remarked to him, with a smile, that he
spoke like a materialist, and he answered that he had always been one.
As he never tells a lie, there must be something in his words. His smile
is a pleasant one. I have had a good look at him. I don’t know whether
I like him or not; and I have no time to waste over the question. The
hatred which I felt for him for five months has become considerably
modified, I may say, during the last month. Who knows, perhaps I am
going to Pavlofsk on purpose to see him! But why do I leave my chamber?
Those who are sentenced to death should not leave their cells. If I
had not formed a final resolve, but had decided to wait until the last
minute, I should not leave my room, or accept his invitation to come
and die at Pavlofsk. I must be quick and finish this explanation before
tomorrow. I shall have no time to read it over and correct it, for I
must read it tomorrow to the prince and two or three witnesses whom I
shall probably find there.

“As it will be absolutely true, without a touch of falsehood, I am
curious to see what impression it will make upon me myself at the moment
when I read it out. This is my ‘last and solemn’--but why need I call
it that? There is no question about the truth of it, for it is not
worthwhile lying for a fortnight; a fortnight of life is not itself
worth having, which is a proof that I write nothing here but pure truth.

(“N.B.--Let me remember to consider; am I mad at this moment, or not? or
rather at these moments? I have been told that consumptives sometimes
do go out of their minds for a while in the last stages of the malady.
I can prove this tomorrow when I read it out, by the impression it
makes upon the audience. I must settle this question once and for all,
otherwise I can’t go on with anything.)

“I believe I have just written dreadful nonsense; but there’s no time
for correcting, as I said before. Besides that, I have made myself a
promise not to alter a single word of what I write in this paper, even
though I find that I am contradicting myself every five lines. I wish to
verify the working of the natural logic of my ideas tomorrow during the
reading--whether I am capable of detecting logical errors, and whether
