

“How extremely stupid!” cried Mrs. Epanchin, giving back the letter
abruptly. “It was not worth the trouble of reading. Why are you
smiling?”

“Confess that you are pleased to have read it.”

“What! Pleased with all that nonsense! Why, cannot you see that they are
all infatuated with pride and vanity?”

“He has acknowledged himself to be in the wrong. Don’t you see that the
greater his vanity, the more difficult this admission must have been on
his part? Oh, what a little child you are, Lizabetha Prokofievna!”

“Are you tempting me to box your ears for you, or what?”

“Not at all. I am only proving that you are glad about the letter. Why
conceal your real feelings? You always like to do it.”

“Never come near my house again!” cried Mrs. Epanchin, pale with rage.
“Don’t let me see as much as a _shadow_ of you about the place! Do you
hear?”

“Oh yes, and in three days you’ll come and invite me yourself. Aren’t
you ashamed now? These are your best feelings; you are only tormenting
yourself.”

“I’ll die before I invite you! I shall forget your very name! I’ve
forgotten it already!”

She marched towards the door.

“But I’m forbidden your house as it is, without your added threats!”
 cried the prince after her.

“What? Who forbade you?”

She turned round so suddenly that one might have supposed a needle had
been stuck into her.

The prince hesitated. He perceived that he had said too much now.

“_Who_ forbade you?” cried Mrs. Epanchin once more.

“Aglaya Ivanovna told me--”

“When? Speak--quick!”

“She sent to say, yesterday morning, that I was never to dare to come
near the house again.”

Lizabetha Prokofievna stood like a stone.

“What did she send? Whom? Was it that boy? Was it a message?--quick!”

“I had a note,” said the prince.

“Where is it? Give it here, at once.”

The prince thought a moment. Then he pulled out of his waistcoat pocket
an untidy slip of paper, on which was scrawled:


“PRINCE LEF NICOLAIEVITCH,--If you think fit, after all that has passed,
to honour our house with a visit, I can assure you you will not find me
among the number of those who are in any way delighted to see you.

“AGLAYA EPANCHIN.”


Mrs. Epanchin reflected a moment. The next minute she flew at the
prince, seized his hand, and dragged him after her to the door.

“Quick--come along!” she cried, breathless with agitation and
impatience. “Come along with me this moment!”

“But you declared I wasn’t--”

“Don’t be a simpleton. You behave just as though you weren’t a man at
all. Come on! I shall see, now, with my own eyes. I shall see all.”

“Well, let me get my hat, at least.”

“Here’s your miserable hat. He couldn’t even choose a respectable shape
for his hat! Come on! She did that because I took your part and said you
ought to have come--little vixen!--else she would never have sent you
that silly note. It’s a most improper note, I call it; most improper for
such an intelligent, well-brought-up girl to write. H’m! I dare say she
was annoyed that you didn’t come; but she ought to have known that one
can’t write like that to an idiot like you, for you’d be sure to take it
literally.” Mrs. Epanchin was dragging the prince along with her all
the time, and never let go of his hand for an instant. “What are you
listening for?” she added, seeing that she had committed herself a
little. “She wants a clown like you--she hasn’t seen one for some
time--to play with. That’s why she is anxious for you to come to the
house. And right glad I am that she’ll make a thorough good fool of you.
You deserve it; and she can do it--oh! she can, indeed!--as well as most
people.”




PART III

I.

The Epanchin family, or at least the more serious members of it, were
sometimes grieved because they seemed so unlike the rest of the world.
They were not quite certain, but had at times a strong suspicion that
things did not happen to them as they did to other people. Others led a
quiet, uneventful life, while they were subject to continual upheavals.
Others kept on the rails without difficulty; they ran off at the
slightest obstacle. Other houses were governed by a timid routine;
theirs was somehow different. Perhaps Lizabetha Prokofievna was alone
in making these fretful observations; the girls, though not wanting in
intelligence, were still young; the general was intelligent, too, but
narrow, and in any difficulty he was content to say, “H’m!” and leave
the matter to his wife. Consequently, on her fell the responsibility. It
was not that they distinguished themselves as a family by any particular
originality, or that their excursions off the track led to any breach of
the proprieties. Oh no.

There was nothing premeditated, there was not even any conscious purpose
in it all, and yet, in spite of everything, the family, although highly
respected, was not quite what every highly respected family ought to be.
For a long time now Lizabetha Prokofievna had had it in her mind that
all the trouble was owing to her “unfortunate character,” and this
added to her distress. She blamed her own stupid unconventional
“eccentricity.” Always restless, always on the go, she constantly seemed
to lose her way, and to get into trouble over the simplest and more
ordinary affairs of life.

We said at the beginning of our story, that the Epanchins were liked
and esteemed by their neighbours. In spite of his humble origin, Ivan
Fedorovitch himself was received everywhere with respect. He deserved
this, partly on account of his wealth and position, partly because,
though limited, he was really a very good fellow. But a certain
limitation of mind seems to be an indispensable asset, if not to all
public personages, at least to all serious financiers. Added to this,
his manner was modest and unassuming; he knew when to be silent, yet
never allowed himself to be trampled upon. Also--and this was more
important than all--he had the advantage of being under exalted
patronage.

As to Lizabetha Prokofievna, she, as the reader knows, belonged to an
aristocratic family. True, Russians think more of influential friends
than of birth, but she had both. She was esteemed and even loved by
people of consequence in society, whose example in receiving her was
therefore followed by others. It seems hardly necessary to remark that
