to bring about their object (namely, Gania’s attractiveness for Nastasia
Philipovna), stood out more and more prominently; the pourparlers had
commenced, and gradually even Totski began to believe in the possibility
of success.

Before long Nastasia and Gania had talked the matter over. Very
little was said--her modesty seemed to suffer under the infliction
of discussing such a question. But she recognized his love, on the
understanding that she bound herself to nothing whatever, and that
she reserved the right to say “no” up to the very hour of the marriage
ceremony. Gania was to have the same right of refusal at the last
moment.

It soon became clear to Gania, after scenes of wrath and quarrellings
at the domestic hearth, that his family were seriously opposed to the
match, and that Nastasia was aware of this fact was equally evident. She
said nothing about it, though he daily expected her to do so.

There were several rumours afloat, before long, which upset Totski’s
equanimity a good deal, but we will not now stop to describe them;
merely mentioning an instance or two. One was that Nastasia had entered
into close and secret relations with the Epanchin girls--a most unlikely
rumour; another was that Nastasia had long satisfied herself of the fact
that Gania was merely marrying her for money, and that his nature was
gloomy and greedy, impatient and selfish, to an extraordinary degree;
and that although he had been keen enough in his desire to achieve a
conquest before, yet since the two friends had agreed to exploit his
passion for their own purposes, it was clear enough that he had begun to
consider the whole thing a nuisance and a nightmare.

In his heart passion and hate seemed to hold divided sway, and although
he had at last given his consent to marry the woman (as he said), under
the stress of circumstances, yet he promised himself that he would “take
it out of her,” after marriage.

Nastasia seemed to Totski to have divined all this, and to be preparing
something on her own account, which frightened him to such an extent
that he did not dare communicate his views even to the general. But at
times he would pluck up his courage and be full of hope and good spirits
again, acting, in fact, as weak men do act in such circumstances.

However, both the friends felt that the thing looked rosy indeed when
one day Nastasia informed them that she would give her final answer on
the evening of her birthday, which anniversary was due in a very short
time.

A strange rumour began to circulate, meanwhile; no less than that
the respectable and highly respected General Epanchin was himself so
fascinated by Nastasia Philipovna that his feeling for her amounted
almost to passion. What he thought to gain by Gania’s marriage to
the girl it was difficult to imagine. Possibly he counted on Gania’s
complaisance; for Totski had long suspected that there existed some
secret understanding between the general and his secretary. At all
events the fact was known that he had prepared a magnificent present of
pearls for Nastasia’s birthday, and that he was looking forward to the
occasion when he should present his gift with the greatest excitement
and impatience. The day before her birthday he was in a fever of
agitation.

Mrs. Epanchin, long accustomed to her husband’s infidelities, had
heard of the pearls, and the rumour excited her liveliest curiosity and
interest. The general remarked her suspicions, and felt that a grand
explanation must shortly take place--which fact alarmed him much.

This is the reason why he was so unwilling to take lunch (on the morning
upon which we took up this narrative) with the rest of his family.
Before the prince’s arrival he had made up his mind to plead business,
and “cut” the meal; which simply meant running away.

He was particularly anxious that this one day should be
passed--especially the evening--without unpleasantness between himself
and his family; and just at the right moment the prince turned up--“as
though Heaven had sent him on purpose,” said the general to himself, as
he left the study to seek out the wife of his bosom.

V.

Mrs. General Epanchin was a proud woman by nature. What must her
feelings have been when she heard that Prince Muishkin, the last of
his and her line, had arrived in beggar’s guise, a wretched idiot, a
recipient of charity--all of which details the general gave out for
greater effect! He was anxious to steal her interest at the first swoop,
so as to distract her thoughts from other matters nearer home.

Mrs. Epanchin was in the habit of holding herself very straight, and
staring before her, without speaking, in moments of excitement.

She was a fine woman of the same age as her husband, with a slightly
hooked nose, a high, narrow forehead, thick hair turning a little grey,
and a sallow complexion. Her eyes were grey and wore a very curious
expression at times. She believed them to be most effective--a belief
that nothing could alter.

“What, receive him! Now, at once?” asked Mrs. Epanchin, gazing vaguely
at her husband as he stood fidgeting before her.

“Oh, dear me, I assure you there is no need to stand on ceremony with
him,” the general explained hastily. “He is quite a child, not to say
a pathetic-looking creature. He has fits of some sort, and has just
arrived from Switzerland, straight from the station, dressed like a
German and without a farthing in his pocket. I gave him twenty-five
roubles to go on with, and am going to find him some easy place in one
of the government offices. I should like you to ply him well with the
victuals, my dears, for I should think he must be very hungry.”

“You astonish me,” said the lady, gazing as before. “Fits, and hungry
too! What sort of fits?”

“Oh, they don’t come on frequently, besides, he’s a regular child,
though he seems to be fairly educated. I should like you, if possible,
my dears,” the general added, making slowly for the door, “to put him
through his paces a bit, and see what he is good for. I think you should
be kind to him; it is a good deed, you know--however, just as you like,
of course--but he is a sort of relation, remember, and I thought it
might interest you to see the young fellow, seeing that this is so.”

“Oh, of course, mamma, if we needn’t stand on ceremony with him, we must
give the poor fellow something to eat after his journey; especially as
he has not the least idea where to go to,” said Alexandra, the eldest of
the girls.

“Besides, he’s quite a child; we can entertain him with a little
hide-and-seek, in case of need,” said Adelaida.

“Hide-and-seek? What do you mean?” inquired Mrs. Epanchin.

“Oh, do stop pretending, mamma,” cried Aglaya, in vexation. “Send him
up, father; mother allows.”

The general rang the bell and gave orders that the prince should be
shown in.

“Only on condition that he has a napkin under his chin at lunch, then,”
 said Mrs. Epanchin, “and let Fedor, or Mavra, stand behind him while he
eats. Is he quiet when he has these fits? He doesn’t show violence, does
he?”

“On the contrary, he seems to be very well brought up. His manners
are excellent--but here he is himself. Here you are, prince--let me
introduce you, the last of the Muishkins, a relative of your own, my
dear, or at least of the same name. Receive him kindly, please. They’ll
bring in lunch directly, prince; you must stop and have some, but you
must excuse me. I’m in a hurry, I must be off--”

“We all know where _you_ must be off to!” said Mrs. Epanchin, in a meaning
voice.

“Yes, yes--I must hurry away, I’m late! Look here, dears, let him
write you something in your albums; you’ve no idea what a wonderful
caligraphist he is, wonderful talent! He has just written out ‘Abbot
