Sure enough the cloak was lying on the ground. Nastasia had thrown it
off her towards the prince, expecting him to catch it, but the prince
had missed it.

“Now then--announce me, quick!”

The prince wanted to say something, but was so confused and astonished
that he could not. However, he moved off towards the drawing-room with
the cloak over his arm.

“Now then, where are you taking my cloak to? Ha, ha, ha! Are you mad?”

The prince turned and came back, more confused than ever. When she burst
out laughing, he smiled, but his tongue could not form a word as yet. At
first, when he had opened the door and saw her standing before him, he
had become as pale as death; but now the red blood had rushed back to
his cheeks in a torrent.

“Why, what an idiot it is!” cried Nastasia, stamping her foot with
irritation. “Go on, do! Whom are you going to announce?”

“Nastasia Philipovna,” murmured the prince.

“And how do you know that?” she asked him, sharply.

“I have never seen you before!”

“Go on, announce me--what’s that noise?”

“They are quarrelling,” said the prince, and entered the drawing-room,
just as matters in there had almost reached a crisis. Nina Alexandrovna
had forgotten that she had “submitted to everything!” She was defending
Varia. Ptitsin was taking her part, too. Not that Varia was afraid of
standing up for herself. She was by no means that sort of a girl; but
her brother was becoming ruder and more intolerable every moment. Her
usual practice in such cases as the present was to say nothing, but
stare at him, without taking her eyes off his face for an instant. This
manoeuvre, as she well knew, could drive Gania distracted.

Just at this moment the door opened and the prince entered, announcing:

“Nastasia Philipovna!”

IX.

Silence immediately fell on the room; all looked at the prince as though
they neither understood, nor hoped to understand. Gania was motionless
with horror.

Nastasia’s arrival was a most unexpected and overwhelming event to all
parties. In the first place, she had never been before. Up to now she
had been so haughty that she had never even asked Gania to introduce her
to his parents. Of late she had not so much as mentioned them. Gania was
partly glad of this; but still he had put it to her debit in the account
to be settled after marriage.

He would have borne anything from her rather than this visit. But one
thing seemed to him quite clear--her visit now, and the present of her
portrait on this particular day, pointed out plainly enough which way
she intended to make her decision!

The incredulous amazement with which all regarded the prince did not
last long, for Nastasia herself appeared at the door and passed in,
pushing by the prince again.

“At last I’ve stormed the citadel! Why do you tie up your bell?” she
said, merrily, as she pressed Gania’s hand, the latter having rushed
up to her as soon as she made her appearance. “What are you looking so
upset about? Introduce me, please!”

The bewildered Gania introduced her first to Varia, and both women,
before shaking hands, exchanged looks of strange import. Nastasia,
however, smiled amiably; but Varia did not try to look amiable, and kept
her gloomy expression. She did not even vouchsafe the usual courteous
smile of etiquette. Gania darted a terrible glance of wrath at her
for this, but Nina Alexandrovna mended matters a little when Gania
introduced her at last. Hardly, however, had the old lady begun about
her “highly gratified feelings,” and so on, when Nastasia left her, and
flounced into a chair by Gania’s side in the corner by the window, and
cried: “Where’s your study? and where are the--the lodgers? You do take
in lodgers, don’t you?”

Gania looked dreadfully put out, and tried to say something in reply,
but Nastasia interrupted him:

“Why, where are you going to squeeze lodgers in here? Don’t you use
a study? Does this sort of thing pay?” she added, turning to Nina
Alexandrovna.

“Well, it is troublesome, rather,” said the latter; “but I suppose it
will ‘pay’ pretty well. We have only just begun, however--”

Again Nastasia Philipovna did not hear the sentence out. She glanced at
Gania, and cried, laughing, “What a face! My goodness, what a face you
have on at this moment!”

Indeed, Gania did not look in the least like himself. His bewilderment
and his alarmed perplexity passed off, however, and his lips now
twitched with rage as he continued to stare evilly at his laughing
guest, while his countenance became absolutely livid.

There was another witness, who, though standing at the door motionless
and bewildered himself, still managed to remark Gania’s death-like
pallor, and the dreadful change that had come over his face. This
witness was the prince, who now advanced in alarm and muttered to Gania:

“Drink some water, and don’t look like that!”

It was clear that he came out with these words quite spontaneously, on
the spur of the moment. But his speech was productive of much--for
it appeared that all Gania’s rage now overflowed upon the prince. He
seized him by the shoulder and gazed with an intensity of loathing and
revenge at him, but said nothing--as though his feelings were too strong
to permit of words.

General agitation prevailed. Nina Alexandrovna gave a little cry of
anxiety; Ptitsin took a step forward in alarm; Colia and Ferdishenko
stood stock still at the door in amazement;--only Varia remained coolly
watching the scene from under her eyelashes. She did not sit down,
but stood by her mother with folded hands. However, Gania recollected
himself almost immediately. He let go of the prince and burst out
laughing.

“Why, are you a doctor, prince, or what?” he asked, as naturally as
possible. “I declare you quite frightened me! Nastasia Philipovna, let
me introduce this interesting character to you--though I have only known
him myself since the morning.”

Nastasia gazed at the prince in bewilderment. “Prince? He a Prince? Why,
I took him for the footman, just now, and sent him in to announce me!
Ha, ha, ha, isn’t that good!”

“Not bad that, not bad at all!” put in Ferdishenko, “_se non è vero_--”

“I rather think I pitched into you, too, didn’t I? Forgive me--do! Who
is he, did you say? What prince? Muishkin?” she added, addressing Gania.

“He is a lodger of ours,” explained the latter.

“An idiot!”--the prince distinctly heard the word half whispered from
behind him. This was Ferdishenko’s voluntary information for Nastasia’s
benefit.

“Tell me, why didn’t you put me right when I made such a dreadful
mistake just now?” continued the latter, examining the prince from head
to foot without the slightest ceremony. She awaited the answer as though
convinced that it would be so foolish that she must inevitably fail to
restrain her laughter over it.

“I was astonished, seeing you so suddenly--” murmured the prince.
