“Very likely, extremely likely, and you must be a very close observer to
detect the fact that perhaps I did not intend to come up to _you_ at all.”

So saying he smiled strangely; but suddenly and excitedly he began
again:

“Don’t remind me of what I have done or said. Don’t! I am very much
ashamed of myself, I--”

“Why, what have you done? I don’t understand you.”

“I see you are ashamed of me, Evgenie Pavlovitch; you are blushing for
me; that’s a sign of a good heart. Don’t be afraid; I shall go away
directly.”

“What’s the matter with him? Do his fits begin like that?” said
Lizabetha Prokofievna, in a high state of alarm, addressing Colia.

“No, no, Lizabetha Prokofievna, take no notice of me. I am not going to
have a fit. I will go away directly; but I know I am afflicted. I was
twenty-four years an invalid, you see--the first twenty-four years of my
life--so take all I do and say as the sayings and actions of an
invalid. I’m going away directly, I really am--don’t be afraid. I am
not blushing, for I don’t think I need blush about it, need I? But I see
that I am out of place in society--society is better without me. It’s
not vanity, I assure you. I have thought over it all these last three
days, and I have made up my mind that I ought to unbosom myself candidly
before you at the first opportunity. There are certain things, certain
great ideas, which I must not so much as approach, as Prince S. has
just reminded me, or I shall make you all laugh. I have no sense of
proportion, I know; my words and gestures do not express my ideas--they
are a humiliation and abasement of the ideas, and therefore, I have no
right--and I am too sensitive. Still, I believe I am beloved in this
household, and esteemed far more than I deserve. But I can’t help
knowing that after twenty-four years of illness there must be some trace
left, so that it is impossible for people to refrain from laughing at me
sometimes; don’t you think so?”

He seemed to pause for a reply, for some verdict, as it were, and looked
humbly around him.

All present stood rooted to the earth with amazement at this unexpected
and apparently uncalled-for outbreak; but the poor prince’s painful and
rambling speech gave rise to a strange episode.

“Why do you say all this here?” cried Aglaya, suddenly. “Why do you talk
like this to _them?_”

She appeared to be in the last stages of wrath and irritation; her eyes
flashed. The prince stood dumbly and blindly before her, and suddenly
grew pale.

“There is not one of them all who is worthy of these words of yours,”
 continued Aglaya. “Not one of them is worth your little finger, not one
of them has heart or head to compare with yours! You are more honest
than all, and better, nobler, kinder, wiser than all. There are some
here who are unworthy to bend and pick up the handkerchief you have just
dropped. Why do you humiliate yourself like this, and place yourself
lower than these people? Why do you debase yourself before them? Why
have you no pride?”

“My God! Who would ever have believed this?” cried Mrs. Epanchin,
wringing her hands.

“Hurrah for the ‘poor knight’!” cried Colia.

“Be quiet! How dare they laugh at me in your house?” said Aglaya,
turning sharply on her mother in that hysterical frame of mind that
rides recklessly over every obstacle and plunges blindly through
proprieties. “Why does everyone, everyone worry and torment me? Why have
they all been bullying me these three days about you, prince? I will
not marry you--never, and under no circumstances! Know that once and for
all; as if anyone could marry an absurd creature like you! Just look in
the glass and see what you look like, this very moment! Why, _why_ do they
torment me and say I am going to marry you? You must know it; you are in
the plot with them!”

“No one ever tormented you on the subject,” murmured Adelaida, aghast.

“No one ever thought of such a thing! There has never been a word said
about it!” cried Alexandra.

“Who has been annoying her? Who has been tormenting the child? Who
could have said such a thing to her? Is she raving?” cried Lizabetha
Prokofievna, trembling with rage, to the company in general.

“Every one of them has been saying it--every one of them--all these
three days! And I will never, never marry him!”

So saying, Aglaya burst into bitter tears, and, hiding her face in her
handkerchief, sank back into a chair.

“But he has never even--”

“I have never asked you to marry me, Aglaya Ivanovna!” said the prince,
of a sudden.

“_What?_” cried Mrs. Epanchin, raising her hands in horror. “_What’s_
that?”

She could not believe her ears.

“I meant to say--I only meant to say,” said the prince, faltering,
“I merely meant to explain to Aglaya Ivanovna--to have the honour to
explain, as it were--that I had no intention--never had--to ask the
honour of her hand. I assure you I am not guilty, Aglaya Ivanovna, I
am not, indeed. I never did wish to--I never thought of it at all--and
never shall--you’ll see it yourself--you may be quite assured of it.
Some wicked person has been maligning me to you; but it’s all right.
Don’t worry about it.”

So saying, the prince approached Aglaya.

She took the handkerchief from her face, glanced keenly at him, took
in what he had said, and burst out laughing--such a merry, unrestrained
laugh, so hearty and gay, that Adelaida could not contain herself. She,
too, glanced at the prince’s panic-stricken countenance, then rushed at
her sister, threw her arms round her neck, and burst into as merry a
fit of laughter as Aglaya’s own. They laughed together like a couple of
school-girls. Hearing and seeing this, the prince smiled happily, and in
accents of relief and joy, he exclaimed “Well, thank God--thank God!”

Alexandra now joined in, and it looked as though the three sisters were
going to laugh on for ever.

“They are insane,” muttered Lizabetha Prokofievna. “Either they frighten
one out of one’s wits, or else--”

But Prince S. was laughing now, too, so was Evgenie Pavlovitch, so was
Colia, and so was the prince himself, who caught the infection as he
looked round radiantly upon the others.

“Come along, let’s go out for a walk!” cried Adelaida. “We’ll all go
together, and the prince must absolutely go with us. You needn’t go
away, you dear good fellow! _Isn’t_ he a dear, Aglaya? Isn’t he, mother? I
must really give him a kiss for--for his explanation to Aglaya just now.
Mother, dear, I may kiss him, mayn’t I? Aglaya, may I kiss _your_ prince?”
 cried the young rogue, and sure enough she skipped up to the prince and
kissed his forehead.

He seized her hands, and pressed them so hard that Adelaida nearly cried
out; he then gazed with delight into her eyes, and raising her right
hand to his lips with enthusiasm, kissed it three times.

“Come along,” said Aglaya. “Prince, you must walk with me. May he,
mother? This young cavalier, who won’t have me? You said you would _never_
have me, didn’t you, prince? No--no, not like that; _that’s_ not the way
to give your arm. Don’t you know how to give your arm to a lady yet?
There--so. Now, come along, you and I will lead the way. Would you like
to lead the way with me alone, tête-à-tête?”
