all that I have meditated over during the last six months be true, or
nothing but delirium.

“If two months since I had been called upon to leave my room and the
view of Meyer’s wall opposite, I verily believe I should have been
sorry. But now I have no such feeling, and yet I am leaving this room
and Meyer’s brick wall _for ever_. So that my conclusion, that it is not
worth while indulging in grief, or any other emotion, for a fortnight,
has proved stronger than my very nature, and has taken over the
direction of my feelings. But is it so? Is it the case that my nature
is conquered entirely? If I were to be put on the rack now, I should
certainly cry out. I should not say that it is not worth while to yell
and feel pain because I have but a fortnight to live.

“But is it true that I have but a fortnight of life left to me? I know I
told some of my friends that Doctor B. had informed me that this was the
case; but I now confess that I lied; B. has not even seen me. However,
a week ago, I called in a medical student, Kislorodoff, who is a
Nationalist, an Atheist, and a Nihilist, by conviction, and that is why
I had him. I needed a man who would tell me the bare truth without any
humbug or ceremony--and so he did--indeed, almost with pleasure (which I
thought was going a little too far).

“Well, he plumped out that I had about a month left me; it might be a
little more, he said, under favourable circumstances, but it might
also be considerably less. According to his opinion I might die quite
suddenly--tomorrow, for instance--there had been such cases. Only a day
or two since a young lady at Colomna who suffered from consumption, and
was about on a par with myself in the march of the disease, was going
out to market to buy provisions, when she suddenly felt faint, lay down
on the sofa, gasped once, and died.

“Kislorodoff told me all this with a sort of exaggerated devil-may-care
negligence, and as though he did me great honour by talking to me
so, because it showed that he considered me the same sort of exalted
Nihilistic being as himself, to whom death was a matter of no
consequence whatever, either way.

“At all events, the fact remained--a month of life and no more! That he
is right in his estimation I am absolutely persuaded.

“It puzzles me much to think how on earth the prince guessed yesterday
that I have had bad dreams. He said to me, ‘Your excitement and dreams
will find relief at Pavlofsk.’ Why did he say ‘dreams’? Either he is a
doctor, or else he is a man of exceptional intelligence and wonderful
powers of observation. (But that he is an ‘idiot,’ at bottom there can
be no doubt whatever.) It so happened that just before he arrived I had
a delightful little dream; one of a kind that I have hundreds of just
now. I had fallen asleep about an hour before he came in, and dreamed
that I was in some room, not my own. It was a large room, well
furnished, with a cupboard, chest of drawers, sofa, and my bed, a fine
wide bed covered with a silken counterpane. But I observed in the room
a dreadful-looking creature, a sort of monster. It was a little like a
scorpion, but was not a scorpion, but far more horrible, and especially
so, because there are no creatures anything like it in nature, and
because it had appeared to me for a purpose, and bore some mysterious
signification. I looked at the beast well; it was brown in colour and
had a shell; it was a crawling kind of reptile, about eight inches long,
and narrowed down from the head, which was about a couple of fingers in
width, to the end of the tail, which came to a fine point. Out of its
trunk, about a couple of inches below its head, came two legs at an
angle of forty-five degrees, each about three inches long, so that the
beast looked like a trident from above. It had eight hard needle-like
whiskers coming out from different parts of its body; it went along like
a snake, bending its body about in spite of the shell it wore, and its
motion was very quick and very horrible to look at. I was dreadfully
afraid it would sting me; somebody had told me, I thought, that it
was venomous; but what tormented me most of all was the wondering and
wondering as to who had sent it into my room, and what was the mystery
which I felt it contained.

“It hid itself under the cupboard and under the chest of drawers, and
crawled into the corners. I sat on a chair and kept my legs tucked
under me. Then the beast crawled quietly across the room and disappeared
somewhere near my chair. I looked about for it in terror, but I still
hoped that as my feet were safely tucked away it would not be able to
touch me.

“Suddenly I heard behind me, and about on a level with my head, a sort
of rattling sound. I turned sharp round and saw that the brute had
crawled up the wall as high as the level of my face, and that its
horrible tail, which was moving incredibly fast from side to side, was
actually touching my hair! I jumped up--and it disappeared. I did not
dare lie down on my bed for fear it should creep under my pillow. My
mother came into the room, and some friends of hers. They began to hunt
for the reptile and were more composed than I was; they did not seem to
be afraid of it. But they did not understand as I did.

“Suddenly the monster reappeared; it crawled slowly across the room and
made for the door, as though with some fixed intention, and with a slow
movement that was more horrible than ever.

“Then my mother opened the door and called my dog, Norma. Norma was a
great Newfoundland, and died five years ago.

“She sprang forward and stood still in front of the reptile as if she
had been turned to stone. The beast stopped too, but its tail and
claws still moved about. I believe animals are incapable of feeling
supernatural fright--if I have been rightly informed,--but at this
moment there appeared to me to be something more than ordinary about
Norma’s terror, as though it must be supernatural; and as though she
felt, just as I did myself, that this reptile was connected with some
mysterious secret, some fatal omen.

“Norma backed slowly and carefully away from the brute, which followed
her, creeping deliberately after her as though it intended to make a
sudden dart and sting her.

“In spite of Norma’s terror she looked furious, though she trembled in
all her limbs. At length she slowly bared her terrible teeth, opened
her great red jaws, hesitated--took courage, and seized the beast in her
mouth. It seemed to try to dart out of her jaws twice, but Norma caught
at it and half swallowed it as it was escaping. The shell cracked in her
teeth; and the tail and legs stuck out of her mouth and shook about in
a horrible manner. Suddenly Norma gave a piteous whine; the reptile had
bitten her tongue. She opened her mouth wide with the pain, and I saw
the beast lying across her tongue, and out of its body, which was almost
bitten in two, came a hideous white-looking substance, oozing out into
Norma’s mouth; it was of the consistency of a crushed black-beetle. Just
then I awoke and the prince entered the room.”

“Gentlemen!” said Hippolyte, breaking off here, “I have not done yet,
but it seems to me that I have written down a great deal here that is
unnecessary,--this dream--”

“You have indeed!” said Gania.

“There is too much about myself, I know, but--” As Hippolyte said this
his face wore a tired, pained look, and he wiped the sweat off his brow.

“Yes,” said Lebedeff, “you certainly think a great deal too much about
yourself.”

“Well--gentlemen--I do not force anyone to listen! If any of you are
unwilling to sit it out, please go away, by all means!”

“He turns people out of a house that isn’t his own,” muttered Rogojin.

“Suppose we all go away?” said Ferdishenko suddenly.

Hippolyte clutched his manuscript, and gazing at the last speaker with
glittering eyes, said: “You don’t like me at all!” A few laughed at
this, but not all.

“Hippolyte,” said the prince, “give me the papers, and go to bed like a
sensible fellow. We’ll have a good talk tomorrow, but you really mustn’t
go on with this reading; it is not good for you!”

“How can I? How can I?” cried Hippolyte, looking at him in amazement.
“Gentlemen! I was a fool! I won’t break off again. Listen, everyone who
