nonsense it is! You would not let her come near your daughters, says
Nina Alexandrovna. What next, I wonder? I don’t see how she can fail
to--to understand--”

“Her own position?” prompted Gania. “She does understand. Don’t be
annoyed with her. I have warned her not to meddle in other people’s
affairs. However, although there’s comparative peace at home at present,
the storm will break if anything is finally settled tonight.”

The prince heard the whole of the foregoing conversation, as he sat at
the table, writing. He finished at last, and brought the result of his
labour to the general’s desk.

“So this is Nastasia Philipovna,” he said, looking attentively and
curiously at the portrait. “How wonderfully beautiful!” he immediately
added, with warmth. The picture was certainly that of an unusually
lovely woman. She was photographed in a black silk dress of simple
design, her hair was evidently dark and plainly arranged, her eyes were
deep and thoughtful, the expression of her face passionate, but proud.
She was rather thin, perhaps, and a little pale. Both Gania and the
general gazed at the prince in amazement.

“How do you know it’s Nastasia Philipovna?” asked the general; “you
surely don’t know her already, do you?”

“Yes, I do! I have only been one day in Russia, but I have heard of
the great beauty!” And the prince proceeded to narrate his meeting with
Rogojin in the train and the whole of the latter’s story.

“There’s news!” said the general in some excitement, after listening to
the story with engrossed attention.

“Oh, of course it’s nothing but humbug!” cried Gania, a little
disturbed, however. “It’s all humbug; the young merchant was pleased
to indulge in a little innocent recreation! I have heard something of
Rogojin!”

“Yes, so have I!” replied the general. “Nastasia Philipovna told us
all about the earrings that very day. But now it is quite a different
matter. You see the fellow really has a million of roubles, and he is
passionately in love. The whole story smells of passion, and we all
know what this class of gentry is capable of when infatuated. I am much
afraid of some disagreeable scandal, I am indeed!”

“You are afraid of the million, I suppose,” said Gania, grinning and
showing his teeth.

“And you are _not_, I presume, eh?”

“How did he strike you, prince?” asked Gania, suddenly. “Did he seem to
be a serious sort of a man, or just a common rowdy fellow? What was your
own opinion about the matter?”

While Gania put this question, a new idea suddenly flashed into his
brain, and blazed out, impatiently, in his eyes. The general, who was
really agitated and disturbed, looked at the prince too, but did not
seem to expect much from his reply.

“I really don’t quite know how to tell you,” replied the prince, “but
it certainly did seem to me that the man was full of passion, and not,
perhaps, quite healthy passion. He seemed to be still far from well.
Very likely he will be in bed again in a day or two, especially if he
lives fast.”

“No! do you think so?” said the general, catching at the idea.

“Yes, I do think so!”

“Yes, but the sort of scandal I referred to may happen at any moment. It
may be this very evening,” remarked Gania to the general, with a smile.

“Of course; quite so. In that case it all depends upon what is going on
in her brain at this moment.”

“You know the kind of person she is at times.”

“How? What kind of person is she?” cried the general, arrived at the
limits of his patience. “Look here, Gania, don’t you go annoying her
tonight. What you are to do is to be as agreeable towards her as ever you
can. Well, what are you smiling at? You must understand, Gania, that
I have no interest whatever in speaking like this. Whichever way the
question is settled, it will be to my advantage. Nothing will move
Totski from his resolution, so I run no risk. If there is anything I
desire, you must know that it is your benefit only. Can’t you trust me?
You are a sensible fellow, and I have been counting on you; for, in this
matter, that, that--”

“Yes, that’s the chief thing,” said Gania, helping the general out of
his difficulties again, and curling his lips in an envenomed smile,
which he did not attempt to conceal. He gazed with his fevered eyes
straight into those of the general, as though he were anxious that the
latter might read his thoughts.

The general grew purple with anger.

“Yes, of course it is the chief thing!” he cried, looking sharply at
Gania. “What a very curious man you are, Gania! You actually seem to
be _glad_ to hear of this millionaire fellow’s arrival--just as though you
wished for an excuse to get out of the whole thing. This is an affair in
which you ought to act honestly with both sides, and give due warning,
to avoid compromising others. But, even now, there is still time. Do
you understand me? I wish to know whether you desire this arrangement or
whether you do not? If not, say so,--and--and welcome! No one is trying
to force you into the snare, Gavrila Ardalionovitch, if you see a snare
in the matter, at least.”

“I do desire it,” murmured Gania, softly but firmly, lowering his eyes;
and he relapsed into gloomy silence.

The general was satisfied. He had excited himself, and was evidently
now regretting that he had gone so far. He turned to the prince, and
suddenly the disagreeable thought of the latter’s presence struck
him, and the certainty that he must have heard every word of the
conversation. But he felt at ease in another moment; it only needed one
glance at the prince to see that in that quarter there was nothing to
fear.

“Oh!” cried the general, catching sight of the prince’s specimen of
caligraphy, which the latter had now handed him for inspection. “Why,
this is simply beautiful; look at that, Gania, there’s real talent
there!”

On a sheet of thick writing-paper the prince had written in medieval
characters the legend:

“The gentle Abbot Pafnute signed this.”

“There,” explained the prince, with great delight and animation, “there,
that’s the abbot’s real signature--from a manuscript of the fourteenth
century. All these old abbots and bishops used to write most
beautifully, with such taste and so much care and diligence. Have you no
copy of Pogodin, general? If you had one I could show you another type.
Stop a bit--here you have the large round writing common in France
during the eighteenth century. Some of the letters are shaped quite
differently from those now in use. It was the writing current then, and
employed by public writers generally. I copied this from one of them,
and you can see how good it is. Look at the well-rounded a and d. I
have tried to translate the French character into the Russian letters--a
difficult thing to do, but I think I have succeeded fairly. Here is a
fine sentence, written in a good, original hand--‘Zeal triumphs over
all.’ That is the script of the Russian War Office. That is how official
documents addressed to important personages should be written. The
letters are round, the type black, and the style somewhat remarkable. A
stylist would not allow these ornaments, or attempts at flourishes--just
look at these unfinished tails!--but it has distinction and really
depicts the soul of the writer. He would like to give play to his
imagination, and follow the inspiration of his genius, but a soldier is
only at ease in the guard-room, and the pen stops half-way, a slave
to discipline. How delightful! The first time I met an example of this
handwriting, I was positively astonished, and where do you think I
