 and as a public nuisance. Defendants have violated the San Francisco Housing Code. 

 . By maintaining the property at -V Lombard Street as substandard housing, 

 and as a public nuisance, Defendants have violated the San Francisco Health Code. 

 . By maintaining the property at -V Lombard Street in violation of numerous 

 provisions of state and local law, and as a public nuisance. Defendants are engaging in unfair and 

 __ 


COMPLAINT/INJUNCTIVE RELIEF, CCSF V. T. K. PATEL, TRUSTEE 


n:\codenfvli\i.doc 






 unlawful business practices in violation of Business and Professions Code Sections -  (the 

 “Unfair Competition Law” or "UCL"). 

 PARTIES AND SUBJECT PROPERTY 

 . Plaintiff City and County of San Francisco is a municipal corporation organized and 

 existing under and by virtue of the laws of the State of California. 

 . The City and County of San Francisco brings this action under Civil Code Sections 

 , , , , and Code of Civil Procedure Section , and Health and Safety Code 

 Sections - and  -. 

 . The People of the State of California, by and through San Francisco City Attorney 

 Dennis J. Herrera, bring this action pursuant to Civil Code Sections , , , , Code of 

  Civil Procedure Section   , and the Unfair Competition Law. 

 . The property is a building operated as a single resident occupancy hotel ("SRO"), 

 commonly known as the Bridge Motel (the "Bridge Motel"), located at -V Lombard Street, 

 Block , Lots  and , in the City and County of San Francisco, State of California (the "Property") 

  and more particularly described in Exhibit A, which is attached hereto and incorporated as part of this 

 Complaint. 

 . Plaintiffs are informed and believe, and therefore allege, that at all times herein 

  mentioned, Defendant Mohammed Shaikh and Nasir Shaikh have been the lessees of the Property and 

 as owners, managers, and operators of the SRO operating as the Bridge Motel. 

 . Plaintiffs are informed and believe, and therefore allege, that at all times herein 

 mentioned Mohammed Shaikh and Nasir Shaikh personally managed and made business decisions 

 concerning the operation of the Bridge Motel. 

 . Plaintiffs are informed and believe, and therefore allege, that at all times herein 

 mentioned Tarunkumar K. Patel, as Trustee, or any Successor Trustee(s) of the Patel Family 

 Revocable Trust dated December , ; Vinodkumar R. Patel and Sangita V. Patel, as Trustees of 

 The Vinodkumar R. Patel and Sangita V. Patel Living Trust, dated August ,  ; Vyomesh R. 

 Patel, as Trustee of The Vyomesh R. Patel Living Trust, dated August ,  have been the owners 

 of the Property at all times pertinent to this complaint. 

 


COMPLAINT/INJUNCTIVE RELIEF, CCSF V. T. K. PATEL, TRUSTEE 


n:\codenM\\.doc 


 


 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 


. Defendants Doe One through Doe Fifty are sued herein under fictitious names. 

Plaintiffs do not at this time know the true names or capacities of said Defendants, but pray that the 
same may be inserted herein when ascertained. 

. At all times herein mentioned, each Defendant was an agent, servant, employee, 
partner, franchisee or joint venturer of each other Defendant and at all times was acting within the 
