
 

 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 



. As described above, Defendants are now, and for a considerable period of time, 
and all times pertinent to the allegations in this Complaint has been, maintaining the Property in 
such a manner as to constitute a continuing public nuisance within the meaning of Civil Code 
Sections  and . The practices described above are injurious to the health and safety of 
the residents and the community, are offensive to the senses, and interfere with the comfortable 
enjoyment of life and property. The practices described above also affect a considerable 
number of persons and an entire community or neighborhood. 

. At all times herein mentioned, Defendants knew or should have known that the 
Property was being maintained as a public nuisance, as alleged in the Complaint, but failed and 
refused to take reasonable steps to abate the nuisance. 

. Unless enjoined, Defendants will continue to operate the Property in the above- 
described condition as a public nuisance. 

. Plaintiffs have no adequate remedy at law in that damages are insufficient to 
protect the public from the present danger and harm caused by the conditions described above. 
Unless injunctive relief is granted to enjoin Defendant, the public will suffer irreparable injury 
and damage. 

 . Unless this nuisance is abated, the community, neighborhood, and the residents 
and citizens of the State of California and the City and County of San Francisco will suffer 
irreparable injury and damage, in that said conditions will continue to be injurious to the 
enjoyment and the free use of the life and property of said residents and citizens of the State of 
California and the City and County of San Francisco. 

THIRD CAUSE OF ACTION FOR UNLAWFUL AND UNFAIR 
BUSINESS PRACTICES BROUGHT BY PLAINTIFF THE PEOPLE 
OF THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA AGAINST ALL DEFENDANTS 
(Business and Professions Code Sections -) 

. Plaintiff hereby incorporates by reference Paragraphs  through  and makes 
them a part of this Fourth Cause of Action, as though fully set forth. 

 


COMPLAINT FOR INJUNCTIVE RELIEF, CCSF, et al. v. WONG, et al. 


N:^COOENP\UI\ISMW»TUX)C 


 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 



. Plaintiff, acting to protect the public as consumers and competitors from 
unlawful practices, brings this cause of action in the public interest in the name of the People of 
the State of California, pursuant to Business and Professions Code Section -. 

. Defendants own residential real property within the City and County of San 
Francisco, State of California. The violations of law described herein have been and are being 
carried out wholly or in part within the City and County of San Francisco. 

. The actions of Defendants are in violation of the laws and public policies of the 
City and County of San Francisco and the State of California and are inimical to the rights and 
interest of the general public. Unless enjoined and restrained by an order of this Court, 
Defendants will continue to engage in the unlawful and unfair acts and courses of conduct 
described herein. 

. Through the conduct described above, Defendants have engaged in the following 
unlawful and unfair business practices prohibited by Business and Professions Code Sections 
-: 

A. Violating the State Housing Law by renting out substandard property that is 
endangering the life, limb, health, property, safety and welfare of the occupants 
of that property, the occupants of the neighboring properties, and the public; 

B. Violating the San Francisco Housing Code; 

C. Violating the San Francisco Building Code; 

D. Violating the San Francisco Plumbing Code; 

E. Violating the San Francisco Electrical Code; 

F. Creating and maintaining a public nuisance at the Property; and 
