I I Professional negligence () 

I I Other non-PI/PD/WD tort () 
Employment 

 I Wrongful termination () 

 I Other employment () 


Unlawful Detainer 

  Commercial () 

I I Residential () 

□ Drugs () 

Judicial Review 
 I Asset forfeiture () 

[ " " I Petition re: arbitration award () 

  Writ of mandate () 


Provisionally Complex Civil Litigation 
(Cal. Rules of Court, rules .-.) 

  Antitrust/Trade regulation () 

[ I Construction defect () 

  Mass tort () 

  Securities litigation () 

 I Environmental/Toxic tort () 

I  Insurance coverage claims arising from the 
above listed provisionally complex case 
types () 

Enforcement of Judgment 
I  Enforcement of judgment () 
Miscellaneous Civil Complaint 

I I RICO () 

I x  Other complaint (not specified above) () 
Miscellaneous Civil Petition 
  Partnership and corporate governance ( ) 

I I Other petition (not specified above) () 



 I Other employment () I  Other judicial review () 


. This case  I is  x I is not complex under rule . of the California Rules of Court, if the case is complex, mark the 
fac tors r equiring exceptional judicial management: 

a. I  Large number of separately represented parties d. I I Large number of witnesses 

b. I I Extensive motion practice raising difficult or novel e. I I Coordination with related actions pending in one or more courts 

issues that will be time-consuming to resolve in other counties, states, or countries, or in a federal court 

c | | subgfeHtfgj amount of documentar y evi dence f. I I Substantial postjudgment judicial supervision 

. Remedies sought (check all that apply): a. I x I monetary b. I x l nonmonetary; declaratory or injunctive relief c. I I punitive 

. Number of causes of action (specify): Three 

. This case I I is I x I is not a class action suit. 

. If there are any known related cases, file and serve a notice of related case. (You may use form CM-.) 

Date: November J'j , k 

MICHAEL WEISS , Deputy City Attorney f 

(TYPE OR PRINT NAME) (SIGNATURE OF PARTY OR ATTORNEY FOR PARTY) 


NOTICE 

• Plaintiff must file this cover sheet with the first paper filed in the action or proceeding (except small claims cases or cases filed 
under the Probate Code, Family Code, or Welfare and Institutions Code). (Cal. Rules of Court, rule ..) Failure to file may result 
in sanctions. 

• File this cover sheet in addition to any cover sheet required by local court rule. 

• If this case is complex under rule . et seq. of the California Rules of Court, you must serve a copy of this cover sheet on all 
other parties to the action or proceeding. 

• Unless this is a collections case under rule . or a complex case, this cover sheet will be used for statistical purposes only. 

Page  of  


Form Adopted for Mandatory Use 
Judicial Council of California 
CM- [Rev. July ,] 


CIVIL CASE COVER SHEET Legal 

SoluCrons 


J Cal. Rules of Court, rules ., ., .-., .; 
ins' Cal- Standards of Judicial Administration, std. . 




CM- 


INSTRUCTIONS ON HOW TO COMPLETE THE COVER SHEET 

To Plaintiff and Others Filing First Papers. If you are filing a first paper (for example, a complaint) in a civil case, you must 
complete and file, along with your first paper, the Civil Case Cover Sheet contained on page  . This information will be used to compile 
statistics about the types and numbers of cases filed. You must complete items  through  on the sheet. In item , you must check 
one box for the case type that best describes the case. If the case fits both a general and a more specific type of case listed in item  , 
check the more specific one. If the case has multiple causes of action, check the box that best indicates the primary cause of action. 
To assist you in completing the sheet, examples of the cases that belong under each case type in item  are provided below. A cover 
sheet must be filed only with your initial paper. Failure to file a cover sheet with the first paper filed in a civil case may subject a party, its 
counsel, or both to sanctions under rules . and . of the California Rules of Court. 

To Parties in Rule . Collections Cases. A "collections case" under rule . is defined as an action for recovery of money owed 
in a sum stated to be certain that is not more than $,, exclusive of interest and attorney's fees, arising from a transaction in which 
property, services, or money was acquired on credit. A collections case does not include an action seeking the following: () tort 
damages, () punitive damages, () recovery of real property, () recovery of personal property, or () a prejudgment writ of attachment. 
The identification of a case as a rule . collections case on this form means that it will be exempt from the general time-for-service 
requirements and case management rules, unless a defendant files a responsive pleading. A rule . collections case will be subject 
to the requirements for service and obtaining a judgment in rule .. 

To Parties in Complex Cases. In complex cases only, parties must also use the Civil Case Cover Sheet to designate whether the 
case is complex. If a plaintiff believes the case is complex under rule . of the California Rules of Court, this must be indicated by 
completing the appropriate boxes in items  and . If a plaintiff designates a case as complex, the cover sheet must be served with the 
complaint on all parties to the action. A defendant may file and serve no later than the time of its first appearance a joinder in the 
plaintiffs designation, a counter-designation that the case is not complex, or, if the plaintiff has made no designation, a designation that 

the case is complex. CASE types and examples 


Auto Tort 
