course and scope of said agency, service, employment, partnership, franchise, or joint venture. 

. Whenever reference is made in this Complaint to any act of "Defendants," each such 
allegation shall mean that each defendant acted both individually and jointly with the other 
Defendants. Actions taken by or omissions made by Defendants' employees or agents in the course of 
their employment or agency are considered to be actions or omissions of Defendants for the purposes 
of this Complaint. 

GENERAL ALLEGATIONS 

. Defendants now are, and for a considerable period of time heretofore and at all times 
herein mentioned have been using, maintaining, and/or permitting use of the Property as a SRO that 
repeatedly operates as a public nuisance in violation of the state and local law. Representative 

examples of Defendants using or permitting the Property to be operated unlawfully are listed below. 

I. CRIMINAL ACTIVITY ASSOCIATED TO THE BRIDGE MOTEL 

. Since April, , the San Francisco Police Department ("SFPD") has had  calls for 
service to respond to the Bridge Motel relating to trespass, fights, suspicious persons, persons with 
knives, domestic violence, grand theft, threats, disturbance, assault with a deadly weapon, persons 
with guns and other nuisance and illegal activity. 

 . Since August of , the SFPD have made multiple arrests at the Bridge Motel. 

. On August , , the SFPD arrested a suspect at the Bridge Motel for burglary, 
forcible entry, stolen property, parole violation, and possession of a stolen vehicle. 

. On December , , SFPD arrested a female Bridge Motel resident of Room  for 
a warrant arrest to an outside jurisdiction. 

. On December  , , SFPD arrested a male Bridge Motel resident of Room  for a 

warrant arrest to an outside jurisdiction. 

 _ 

COMPLAINT/INJUNCTIVE RELIEF, CCSF V. T. K. PATEL, TRUSTEE n:\codenN iO\i\O.doc 


 . On December , , SFPD arrested a Bridge Motel resident of Room  for a 

 warrant arrest to an outside jurisdiction. 

 . On December   , , SFPD arrested a Bridge Motel resident of Room  for theft. 

 . On December , , SFPD arrested a Bridge Motel resident of Room , a known 

 sex offender, for failure to register for sexual assault of adult, and parole violation (not to be alone 

 with a female but had a woman in his room). 

 . On December , , SFPD arrested a Bridge Motel resident of Room  for robbery 

 with a knife and resisting/obstructing a peace officer's duty. 

 . On February   , , SFPD arrested a Bridge Motel resident of Room  for 

  possession of property relating to a local automobile burglary, probation violation, possession of a 

  controlled substance, and throwing hypodermic needles from a window of the motel into neighboring 

 yards. 

  . On February , , SFPD arrested the same Bridge Motel resident of Room  for 

 stolen property from a local automobile burglary, fraudulent use of an automated teller card, and 

  possession of heroin and hypodermic needles. 

 . On March  , , SFPD arrested a Bridge Motel resident of Room   for drug sales 

 and parole violation. The reporting officer noted that "The Bridge Motel is plagued with criminal 

  activities, primarily narcotics, possession, sale and use. [. . .] It should also be noted that I have made 

  numerous arrest of subjects within the motel and of subjects who reside in the motel." 

 . On March  , , SFPD arrested a Bridge Motel resident of Room  for counterfeit 

 currency. 

 . On March , , SFPD arrested a Bridge Motel resident of Room  for 

 methamphetamine offense, narcotics paraphernalia and probation violation. 

 . On April   , , SFPD arrested a Bridge resident of Room  who was swinging a 

 golf club in the hallway and throwing glass bottles from second story window onto the street. 

 . On April , , SFPD arrested a man for drug sales. The man had been allowed 

 into the building through a rear emergency exit by a Bridge resident of Room   . 

 


COMPLAINT/rNJUNCTIVE RELIEF, CCSF V. T. K. PATEL, TRUSTEE 


n:\eodenf'li\  \.doc 


 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 

 

 

 

