
. On June , , DPH, after a room-to-room inspection, notified Bridge Motel 
management of cockroach infestation in  rooms and common hallways, broken sinks in three rooms, 
broken windows, and carpets in need of cleaning. 

. On July , , DPH notified Bridge Motel management of the need to replace 
carpet, paint one room, cockroach abatement, and overflowing garbage in the motel's parking lot 
garbage dumpster. 

. On August , , DPH notified Bridge Motel management of need for additional 
garbage service due to overflowing garbage in parking lot dumpster. 

. On November , , DPH notified Bridge Motel management of live and dead 
cockroaches found in one room. 

. On December , , DPH notified Bridge Motel management of garbage being 
thrown from rooms at the Bridge into netting between the Bridge and the neighboring Wal green's 
structure. 

. On July , , DPH notified Bridge Motel management of overflowing garbage in 
the motel's parking lot dumpster. 

. On July , , DPH performed a room-to-room inspection of the property and found 
rooms with the following: lack of running water, leaking sink and drain, low hot water pressure, 
bedbugs and mold in common shows. 

 . On August , , DPH notified Bridge Motel management of overflowing garbage 
in the motel’s parking lot garbage dumpster and garbage being reportedly thrown by Bridge tenants 
into the backyard a neighboring property. 

 


COMPLAINT/INJUNCTIVE RELIEF, CCSF V. T, K. PATEL, TRUSTEE 


n:\codenf\li\\.doc 



***** 


 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 


. On September , , DPH notified Bridge management that they must provide 
additional pest control treatment for bedbugs in three rooms. 

. On October , , DPH notified Bridge Motel management of excess garbage in the 
parking lot and overflowing garbage in the motel’s dumpster. 

. On April , , DPH notified Bridge Motel management that they must replace 
carpeting in one room based on foul odor. 

. On June , , DPH notified Bridge Motel management that they must provide proof 

of pest control treatment for bedbug issues in three rooms. 

C. San Francisco Fire Department 

. Beginning in , the San Francisco Fire Department ("SFFD”) has inspected the 
Property and found violations of the San Francisco Fire Code. 

. On June  , , SFFD issued a Notice of Violation because the Property had blocked 
exit stairways, lack of proof of current annual fire alarm certification, hazardous accumulation of 
combustible materials, trash accumulation, electrical extension cords used in lieu of permanent wiring, 
and lack of working smoke detectors in sleeping areas. 

. On December , , SFFD issued a Notice of Violation to repair the fire alarm, 
provide proof of current fire alarm UL certification, repair wall/ceiling penetrations, and provide an 
approved pennit for the fire alarm. 

. On July , , SFFD instructed Bridge Motel management to correct a double-sided 
lock at rear of building, which was in violation of the San Francisco Fire Code. 

FIRST CAUSE OF ACTION FOR PUBLIC NUISANCE BROUGHT 
BY PLAINTIFFS AGAINST ALL DEFENDANTS 

COUNT ONE: GENERAL PUBLIC NUISANCE STATUTE 
(Civil Code Sections , ) 

. Plaintiffs hereby incorporate by reference paragraphs  through  above, as though 
fully set forth herein. 

 . By permitting the above described and other injurious and illegal activities to exist at 
the Motel, Defendants now are, and for a considerable period of time heretofore and at all times herein 
mentioned have been, causing and maintaining a continuing public nuisance within the meaning of 

 __ 

COMPLAINT/INJUNCTIVE RELIEF, CCSF V. T. K. PATEL, TRUSTEE n:\codenf\U\i\.doc 


/•**’<* 



 
