
 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 


Civil Code Sections  and . The condition giving rise to this public nuisance is Defendants' 
use of the Property as a SRO in violation of state and local law, including those that ensure public 
safety. The manner in which Defendants maintain the Property is injurious to the health and safety of 
the public, is dangerous to human life and is offensive to the senses so as to interfere with the 
comfortable enjoyment of life or property of an entire community or neighborhood. 

. At all times herein mentioned, Defendants have had notice and knowledge that the 
Property constituted a public nuisance. 

. Plaintiffs have no adequate remedy at law in that damages are insufficient to protect the 
public from the present danger and harm caused by the conditions described herein. 

. Unless said nuisance is abated, the surrounding community and neighborhood, and the 
residents and citizens of the City and County of San Francisco, will suffer irreparable injury and 
damage, in that said conditions will continue to be injurious to the health and safety of the public, 
dangerous to human life and offensive to the senses so as to interfere with the comfortable enjoyment 

of life or property of the citizens and residents of the City and County of San Francisco. 

COUNT TWO: PUBLIC NUISANCE PER SE 
(San Francisco Housing, Fire and Health Codes) 

. Plaintiffs hereby incorporate by reference paragraphs  through  above, as though 
fully set forth herein. 

. Plaintiff City and County of San Francisco brings this cause of action pursuant to San 
Francisco Housing Code Sections (c)(), , , San Francisco Fire Code Sections .., and 
San Francisco Health Code Sections . 

. Defendants have for a considerable period of time, and at all times herein mentioned, 
been maintaining the Property in violation of the San Francisco Housing Code. Pursuant to Housing 
Code Section , any condition that is dangerous to human life or is detrimental to health or is a fire 
hazard, or any building that has insufficient ventilation or illumination or inadequate or unsanitary 
sewage or plumbing facilities, or any substandard building, is a per se public nuisance. 

. Defendants have, and for a considerable period of time, and at all times herein 
mentioned, been maintaining the Property in violation of the San Francisco Fire Code. Pursuant to 

 


COMPLAINT/INJUNCTIVE RELIEF, CCSF V. T. K. PATEL, TRUSTEE 


n:.codenf\l!\  \.doc 


 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 
