
 

 

 



FIRST ORDER OF ABATEMENT 

 . Defendant failed to comply with the First NOV. On October   , , DBI 
issued a Notice of Director's Hearing (“First Notice of Hearing”). A Director's Hearing is a 
hearing before the Director of Building Inspection or the Director's designee, to determine 
whether the property owner has complied with the NOV. The hearing was scheduled for 
November , . A true and correct copy of the First Notice of Hearing is attached hereto as 
Exhibit C, and incorporated as part of this Complaint. 

. On or about November  , , DBI sent a copy of the First Notice of Hearing 
by certified mail to Defendants at their address of record. On or about November , , DBI 
posted the First Notice of Hearing in a conspicuous spot on the Property. True and correct 
copies of the Declarations of Mailing and Posting are attached hereto, collectively, as Exhibit D, 
and incorporated as part of this Complaint. 

 . On or about November  , , Building Inspection held the Director’s 
Hearing, at which the owners were represented. On or about November  , , DBI issued 
an Order of Abatement ("First Order"). The First Order declared the Property a public nuisance 
and ordered Defendants to obtain appropriate plumbing, electrical, and building permits and 
complete all work in seven days. A true and correct copy of the First Order is attached hereto as 
Exhibit E and incorporated as part of this Complaint. 

. On or about December  , , DBI sent a copy of the First Order by certified 
mail to Defendants at their address of record. On or about December , , DBI posted the 
First Order in a conspicuous spot on the Property. True and correct copies of the Declarations 
of Mailing and Posting are attached hereto, collectively, as Exhibit F, and incorporated as part 
of this Complaint. 

. Defendants did not appeal the First Order to the San Francisco Abatement 
Appeals Board. 

. As of November , , the violations pertaining to unpermitted hotel use and 
illegally constructed basement and attic rooms remain outstanding. 

 


COMPLAINT FOR INJUNCTIVE RELIEF, CCSF, et al. v. WONG. « «L 


N:'££N?\Ui«l!MM)*TJUK>C 


 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 



SECOND NOTICE OF VIOLATION 

. On December , , following a reinspection related to the First NOV, DBI 
issued another Notice of Violation ("Second NOV") for multiple violations of the San Francisco 
Housing Code including, but not limited to: lack of handrails on both sides of front stairway, 
rodent infestation, nonfunctioning electrical outlets, leaky roof, and illegal cooking on hot plates in 
guestrooms. The Second NOV identified the violations and required Defendant to complete all 
repair work within   days. DBI mailed a copy of the First NOV to Defendants at their address of 
record. A true and correct copy of the Second NOV is attached hereto as Exhibit G, and 
incorporated as part of this Complaint. 

EMERGENCY ORDER 

. On December , , the Director of DBI issued an Emergency Order for 
serious and immediate hazards constituting an imminent and substantial hazard to life, health or 
safety due to: lack of gas and water service to the building for nonpayment or closure of utility 
accounts. The Emergency Order directed Defendants to return gas and water service to the 
building within  hours. The Emergency Order further provided that failure to comply would 
result in forfeiture of the right to abate the nuisance, and DBI would use its Repair and 
Demolition Fund to abate the nuisance and restore services. The Emergency Order further 
provided that any expenditure of the City’s fund would become a tax lien against the subject 
property. On December , , the Emergency Order was recorded at the San Francisco 
Assessor/Recorder’s Office. Defendants failed to comply with the Emergency Order and DBI 
used its funds to restore the gas and water services, for which they have not been reimbursed. A 
true and correct copy of the Emergency Order is attached hereto as Exhibit H and incorporated 
as part of this Complaint. 

SECOND ORDER OF ABATEMENT 

. Defendants failed to comply with the Second NOV. On or about February  , 

, DBI issued a Notice of Director's Hearing ("Second Hearing Notice"). The Second 

Hearing was scheduled for February , . A true and correct copy of the Second Hearing 

✓ 

Notice is attached hereto as Exhibit I, and incorporated as part of this Complaint. 

 


COMPLAINT FOR INJUNCTIVE RELIEF, CCSF, et al. v. WONG, et al. 
