 

 

 

 

 

 

 


practice of unlawful acts and courses of conduct constituting unfair business practices and unfair 
competition as prohibited by the Unfair Competition Law. 

. Asa direct and proximate result of the foregoing acts and practices, Defendants have 
received or will receive income, profits, and other benefits, which they would not have received if they 
had not engaged in the violations of the Unfair Competition Law described in this Complaint. 

. Asa direct and proximate result of the foregoing acts and practices, Defendants have 
obtained a competitive unfair advantage over similar businesses that have not engaged in such 
practices. 

 . Plaintiff has no adequate remedy at law in that damages are insufficient to protect the 
public from the present danger and harm caused by the conditions described in this Complaint. 

. Unless injunctive relief is granted to enjoin the unfair and unlawful business practices 
of Defendants, Plaintiff will suffer irreparable injury and damage. 

. By engaging in unfair and unlawful business practices described herein, Defendants are 
subject to civil penalties in the amount of $, per violation, pursuant to Business and Professions 
Code Section . 

WHEREFORE, PLAINTIFFS PRAY: 

 . that the Property and structures located at -V Lombard Street, together with 
the fixtures and moveable property therein and thereon, be declared a public nuisance in violation of 
Civil Code Sections  and , Health and Safety Code Section   , and the San Francisco 
Housing, Health and Fire Codes; 

. the public nuisance at the Property be abated; 

. that all Defendants, and each of them, their agents, officers, managers, representatives, 
employees, and anyone acting on their behalf, and their heirs and assignees be enjoined from 
operating, conducting, using, occupying, or in any way permitting the use of the property and 
structures at -V Lombard Street, as a public nuisance pursuant to Civil Code Sections , 
, , and , Code of Civil Procedure Section , and Business and Professions Code 
Sections - and Health and Safety Code Sections -; 

 


COMPLAINT/INJUNCTIVE RELIEF, CCSF V. T. K. PATEL, TRUSTEE 


n:\codenf\H\  \.doc 


 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 




. that Defendants be declared to have engaged in unfair and unlawful business acts and 
practices in violation of Business and Professions Code Sections -; 

. that, pursuant to Business and Professions Code Sections -, Defendants, 
their agents, officers, managers, representatives, employees, and anyone acting on their behalf, and 
their heirs, successors, and assignees be enjoined from operating, conducting, using, occupying, or in 
any way permitting the use of the Property in violation of the Civil Code Sections  and , 
Health and Safety Code Sections   - , or otherwise engaging in the unfair and unlawful 
business practices described in this Complaint; 

. Defendants, and each of them, inclusive, be enjoined from spending, transferring, 
encumbering, or removing from California any money received from the Property or in payment for 
the unfair and unlawful acts alleged in the Complaint; 

. pursuant to Health and Safety Code Section , Defendants be ordered to pay civil 
penalties of $, for violation of Health and Safety Code Section ; 

. pursuant to California Health and Safety Code Section  (c)() Defendants be 
ordered to pay damages in an amount equal to the fair market rental value of the Property for one year 
to the City and County of San Francisco for the purpose of carrying out drug prevention and 
education; 

. pursuant to Business and Professions Code Section , Defendants be ordered to 
pay a civil penalty of $, for each act of unfair and unlawful competition in violation of Business 
and Professions Code Section ; 

. pursuant to Business and Professions Code Section ., Defendants be ordered to 
pay an additional civil penalty of $, for each act of unfair and unlawful business practice that 
affected one or more elderly or disabled persons; 

  . pursuant to Business and Professions Code Section  , that the Court order 
restitution of all money or property acquired by Defendants as a result of the unlawful business 
practices to Motel patrons during all times relevant to the Complaint; 
