
 


Fire Code Section .., any condition that is dangerous to human life or is detrimental to health or 
is a fire hazard, is a per se public nuisance. 

. Defendants have, and for a considerable period of time, and at all times herein 
mentioned, been maintaining the Property in violation of the San Francisco Health Code. Pursuant to 
Health Code Section , a violation of its provisions prohibiting, among other things, unsanitary 
conditions, pest harborage, accumulation of trash, and accumulation of debris, is a per se public 
nuisance. 

 . At all times herein mentioned. Defendants had notice and knowledge that the Property 
constituted a public nuisance and an unsafe building or structure because they were notified by 
warnings, administrative notices and orders issued by DBI, SFFD, and DPH, but failed to take 
reasonable steps to abate the nuisance. 

 . Plaintiff has no adequate remedy at law in that damages are insufficient to protect the 
public from the present danger and harm caused by the conditions described above. 

. Unless said nuisance is abated, the residents of the Property, the residents of adjacent 
properties, and the residents and citizens of the City and County of San Francisco, will suffer 
irreparable injury and damage, in that said conditions will continue to be injurious to the continuous 
enjoyment of life and the free use of property of said residents of the City and County of San 
Francisco and the People of the State of California. 

. By maintaining the Property in a manner violating the San Francisco Housing Code, 
Defendants have violated, disobeyed, omitted, neglected, and refused to comply with the San 
Francisco Housing Code and the notices and orders issued by DBI, and Defendants are thus subject to 
civil penalties up to $, per day for each day that such violations existed and were permitted to 

continue as set forth in Housing Code Section (c)(). 

SECOND CAUSE OF ACTION FOR PUBLIC NUISANCE 
BROUGHT BY PLAINTIFF PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA AGAINST ALL 

DEFENDANTS BASED ON THE 
STORAGE AND SALE OF NARCOTICS AT THE PROPERTY 
(Health and Safety Code Sections  -) 

 . Plaintiff the People of the State of California hereby incorporates by reference 
Paragraphs -, as though fully set forth herein. 

 


COMPLAINT/INJUNCTIVE RELIEF, CCSF V. T. K. PATEL, TRUSTEE 


n:\codenfJi\\.doc 




 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 


. The Property is being, and for a considerable period of time prior to commencement of 
this action has been, used for the purposes of unlawfully selling, serving, storing, possessing, 
manufacturing, consuming or giving away controlled substances. Section  of the California 
Health and Safety Code deems such conduct a nuisance as a matter of law. 

. The Defendants, as owners, lessees, managers and lien holders of the Property, and 
employees and agents of the same, are and for a considerable period of time prior to commencement 
of this action have been, directly or indirectly maintaining or permitting the Property to be used for the 
unlawful sale, service, storage, possession, manufacture, consumption or distribution of controlled 
substances, resulting in a public nuisance. 

. Unless the Defendants are enjoined by an order of this court to close the Property for 
one year pursuant to California Health and Safety Code Section  (b); and, to pay civil penalties of 
$, for violation of Health and Safety Code Section    pursuant to Health and Safety Code 
Section  ; or, if closure may create a public nuisance or may otherwise harm the community, to 
pay damages in an amount equal to the fair market rental value of the Property for one year to the City 
and County of San Francisco for the purpose of carrying out drug prevention and education programs 
pursuant to California Health and Safety Code Section  (c)(), the Defendants will continue to 
directly and indirectly use, permit and maintain said Property as a public nuisance, and by such 
conduct, continue to cause irreparable injury to the People of California and the residents of the City 
and County of San Francisco. 

. Plaintiffs have no adequate remedy at law in that damages alone are insufficient to 
protect the public from the present injury and harm caused by the conduct described above. 

THIRD CAUSE OF ACTION FOR UNFAIR AND UNLAWFUL BUSINESS PRACTICES 
BROUGHT BY PLAINTIFF PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF 
CALIFORNIA AGAINST ALL DEFENDANTS 
(Business and Professions Code Sections -) 

. Plaintiff the People of the State of California hereby incorporates by reference 
paragraphs  through  above, as though fully set forth herein. 

. Plaintiff brings this cause of action in the name of the People of the State of California 
pursuant to Business and Professions Code Sections - in order to protect the public as 

 


COMPLAINT/INJUNCTIVE RELIEF, CCSF V. T, K. PATEL, TRUSTEE 

