 

 

 


. On May , , SFPD held a Bridge Motel resident of Room  for investigative 
detention and threatening an officer. 

. On June , , SFPD arrested a Bridge Motel resident of Room   for terrorist 
threats, malicious mischief, vandalism to property and vehicle, battery, under the influence, and 
throwing bottles and furniture out of room window into the neighboring parking lot. SFPD noted they 
had responded twice before on this individual, once for a fight. 

. On July , , SFPD responded to a fight and a report of past domestic violence 

within the Bridge Motel relating to the resident in Room   . 

. On July  , , SFPD held for mental health detention a Bridge Motel resident of 
Room  for being a danger to himself or others. 

. On July , , SFPD arrested a Bridge Motel resident of Room  for a warrant for 

an outstanding felony. 

 . On August ,  SFPD held for mental health detention a Bridge Motel resident of 

Room  for being a danger to himself or others. 

. On October  , , SFPD arrested a Bridge Motel resident of Room  for 

methamphetamine possession for sale and parole violation. 

IL VIOLATIONS OF LOCAL CODES AT THE BRIDGE MOTEL 
A. Department of Building Inspection 

. Beginning in , the San Francisco Department of Building Inspection ("DBI") has 
inspected the Property, found violations, and issued Notices of Violations ("NOV") of the San 
Francisco Housing Code. 

. On February  , , DBI issued a NOV for an expired permit to repair fire damage 
and to maintain a one-hour, fire-restrictive barrier between the commercial and residential portions of 

the building. 

. On February , , DBI issued a NOV for a community shower locked from the 
outside denying residents access. 

. On October , , DBI issued a NOV for lack of permit to operate the building's 

boiler. 

_ 

COMPLAINT/TNJUNCTIvE RFLIEfTcCSF V. T. K. PATEL, TRUSTEE n:\codenf\li\\.doc 




 . On January , , DBI issued a NOV to recharge all fire extinguishers and to 

 replace a missing fire extinguisher on the second floor. 

 . On February , , DBI issued a NOV to repair or replace the building's boiler as 

 there was no heat in the rooms. 

 . On March , , DBI issued a NOV for lack of required number of bathrooms, as 

 three community bathrooms were locked in a manner that denied residents access. 

 . On March   , , DBI issued a NOV for malfunctioning fire alarm and failure to 

 provide proper closure and latching of the front door to the building 

 . On April   , , DBI issued a NOV for locking a community bathroom in a manner 

 that denied residents access. 

 . On April , , DBI issued a NOV for garbage and debris at the property. 

 . On July , , DBI issued a NOV for a broken sink. 

 . On June , , DBI issued a NOV for failure to repair and maintain fire escape drop 

 ladder, broken skylight, failure to restore fire sprinkler head to garbage chute, missing smoke 

  detectors, unsafe extension cords, clogged toilets, broken sinks and faucets, water leak, refuse 

 throughout building, cockroach infestation, an illegally constructed storage closet, broken window and 

  sash frame, and broken sash cords. 

  . On August , , DBI issued a NOV for cockroach infestation, a broken sash cord 

 and sash frame, leak from ceiling, and replacement of carpet smelling of urine. 

 . On September , , DBI issued a NOV for an unrepaired garbage chute fire 

 sprinkler head, broken smoke detector, and damaged walls. 

 . On October   , , DBI, after a duly noticed hearing, the Director of the Department 

 of Building Inspection issued an Order of Abatement which declared the Property a public nuisance 

 and instructed Defendants abate any remaining nuisance at the Property. 

 . On December , , DBI issued a NOV for lack of heat to one room. 

 . On February , , DBI issued a NOV for lack of daily reports and room receipts as 

 required by Chapter  of the San Francisco Administrative Code and Section  (c) of the San 

 Francisco Housing Code. 

 


COMPLAINT/INJUNCTIVE RELIEF, CCSF V. T. K. PATEL, TRUSTEE 


n:\codenf\H\  ‘ doc 




 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

