

N:VCOOENFVlil\»Zmn»TMJX)C 


 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 



. On or about February , , DBI sent the Second Hearing Notice by certified 
mail to Defendants at their address of record. On February , , DBI posted the Second 
Hearing Notice in a conspicuous place on the Property. True and correct copies of the 
Declarations of Mailing and Posting are attached hereto as Exhibit J and incorporated as part of 
this Complaint. 

. On or about February , , DBI held the Director’s Hearing at which the 
owners were represented. Following the hearing, the Director of DBI issued an Order of 
Abatement ("Second Order"). The Second Order declared the Property a public nuisance and 
ordered Defendants to cure the violations within seven days. A true and correct copy of the 
Second Order is attached hereto as Exhibit K, and incorporated as part of this Complaint. 

. On or about March   , , DBI sent a copy of the Second Order by certified 
mail to Defendants at their address of record. On or about April , , DBI posted a copy of 
the Second Order in a conspicuous spot at the Property. True and correct copies of the 
Declarations of Mailing and Posting are attached hereto, collectively, as Exhibit L and 
incorporated as part of this Complaint. 

  . Defendant did not appeal the Second Order to the Abatement Appeals Board. 

. As of November , , the violations regarding illegal cooking facilities/illegal 
hot plates in guest rooms remain outstanding. 

THIRD NOTICE OF VIOLATION 

. On or about January   , , DBI issued another Notice of Violation ("Third 
NOV), amending the First NOV to clarify that the illegal dwelling units in the basement consisted 
of a three room guestroom including a kitchen, three one-room guestrooms, one storage room and 
a full bathroom. The Third NOV required Defendants to file for building, plumbing and electrical 
permits (with plans) to dismantle or legalize the unpermitted work within  days, obtain the 
permits within  days and complete all work within  days, including final inspections and sign 
offs. A true and correct copy of the Third NOV is attached hereto as Exhibit M and incorporated 
as part of this Complaint. 

 


i 


COMPLAINT FOR INJUNCTIVE RELIEF, CCSF, et al. v. WONG, et al. 


N:'COOBOT\UI«\V}IJX>C 


 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 

 

 
