 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 


. On February  , , DBI issued a NOV for missing intermittent guardrails at the top 
of the interior stairs, and lack of self closing devices and dead latch locks on the side exit door. 

 . On March , , DBI issued a NOV for bedbug infestation and a window in need of 

glazing seal. 

. On May , , DBI issued a NOV for broken window, sash frame, toilet seat and 
tank cover in community toilet, dangling light socket, provide heat to two rooms, and repair doors. 

. On May , , DBI issued a NOV for two broken windows. 

. On May , , DBI issued a NOV for rodent infestation, plant overgrowth and 

deteriorated concrete which created an egress obstruction. 

. On June , , DBI issued a NOV for leaking sink drain, refuse accumulation in 

garbage storage area, repair and paint damaged walls, and repair or replace floor covering. 

. On November , , after a duly noticed hearing, the Director of the Department of 
Building Inspection issued an Order of Abatement which declared the Property a public nuisance and 

instructed Defendants abate any remaining nuisance at the property. 

. On September , , DBI issued a NOV for lack of required fire sprinkler head at 
bottom of garbage chute, accumulation of rubbish, broken garbage chute, broken toilet seat, and need 
to replace weather proofing. 

. On December , , DBI issued a NOV for garbage chute clogged with rubbish, 
refuse accumulation on side stairway, garbage storage area and roof ledges, and broken front door 
lock. 

. On May , , DBI issued a NOV for broken window and broken sash frame, and 
accumulation of rubbish on window ledge. 

. On June , , after a duly noticed hearing, the Director of the Department of 
Building Inspection issued an Order of Abatement which declared the Property a public nuisance and 

instiucted Defendants abate any remaining nuisance at the property. 

 On July  , , DBI issued a NOV for a broken window, inoperable hot water faucet, 

and to replace a hollow core door with a solid core door. 


 


COMPLAINT/INJUNCTIVE RELIEF, CCSF V. T. K. PATEL, TRUSTEE 


n :c ode nf\l i\  b          . doc 


 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 


. On August , , DBI issued a NOV to remove rubbish and trash from rear yard, 
ledge above rear yard, loose and abandoned items on roof, including ducts, pipes, abandoned satellite 

dishes, air-conditioning units, tarps, and cinder blocks. 

B. Department of Public Health 

. Beginning in , the San Francisco Department of Public Health ("DPH") has 
inspected the Property and found corrections were necessary to bring the Property into compliance 
with the San Francisco Health Code. 
