
n:\codenf\U\?  '.doc 







 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 


consumers and competitors from unlawful and unfair practices committed by Defendants in the 
commercial use and operation of the Property as a public nuisance and in violation of the law within 
the City and County of San Francisco, State of California. 

. Defendants transact business by operating a commercial business within the City and 
County of San Francisco, State of California. 

. The violations of law described herein have been and are being carried out wholly or in 
part within the City and County of San Francisco. The actions of Defendants are in violation of the 
laws and public policies of the City and County of San Francisco and the State of California, and are 
inimical to the rights and interest of the general public. 

. Defendants have and are engaging in the following unfair and unlawful business 
practices prohibited by the Unfair Competition Law: 

A. creating and maintaining a public nuisance within the meaning of Civil Code 
Sections  and ; 

B. violating and creating and maintaining a public nuisance within the meaning of the 
State Housing Law; 

C. violating and creating and maintaining a public nuisance within the meaning of the 
State Drug Abatement Act; 

D. violating and creating and maintaining a public nuisance within the meaning of the 
San Francisco Housing Code; 

E. violating and creating and maintaining a public nuisance within the meaning of the 
San Francisco Health Code; 

F. violating and creating and maintaining a public nuisance within the meaning of the 
San Francisco Fire Code. 

. As described in Paragraphs - above, Defendants, in the course of their business as 
the owners, lessees, managers, and/or maintainers of commercial property that violates the San 
Francisco Municipal Code and State nuisance and other laws, are now and for a considerable period of 
time heretofore and at all times herein mentioned, have engaged and are engaging in a pattern and 

 


COMPLAINT/INJUNCTIVE RELIEF, CCSF V. T. K. PATEL, TRUSTEE 


n:\codenf.ii\\.doc 


 


 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
