
Thus, there had come to the Reverend Mr. Dimmesdale--as to most
men, in their various spheres, though seldom recognised until
they see it far behind them--an epoch of life more brilliant and
full of triumph than any previous one, or than any which could
hereafter be.  He stood, at this moment, on the very proudest
eminence of superiority, to which the gifts or intellect, rich
lore, prevailing eloquence, and a reputation of whitest
sanctity, could exalt a clergyman in New England's earliest
days, when the professional character was of itself a lofty
pedestal.  Such was the position which the minister occupied, as
he bowed his head forward on the cushions of the pulpit at the
close of his Election Sermon.  Meanwhile Hester Prynne was
standing beside the scaffold of the pillory, with the scarlet
letter still burning on her breast!

Now was heard again the clamour of the music, and the measured
tramp of the military escort issuing from the church door.  The
procession was to be marshalled thence to the town hall, where a
solemn banquet would complete the ceremonies of the day.

Once more, therefore, the train of venerable and majestic
fathers were seen moving through a broad pathway of the people,
who drew back reverently, on either side, as the Governor and
magistrates, the old and wise men, the holy ministers, and all
that were eminent and renowned, advanced into the midst of them.
When they were fairly in the marketplace, their presence was
greeted by a shout.  This--though doubtless it might acquire
additional force and volume from the child-like loyalty which
the age awarded to its rulers--was felt to be an irrepressible
outburst of enthusiasm kindled in the auditors by that high
strain of eloquence which was yet reverberating in their ears.
Each felt the impulse in himself, and in the same breath, caught
it from his neighbour.  Within the church, it had hardly been
kept down; beneath the sky it pealed upward to the zenith.  There
were human beings enough, and enough of highly wrought and
symphonious feeling to produce that more impressive sound than
the organ tones of the blast, or the thunder, or the roar of the
sea; even that mighty swell of many voices, blended into one
great voice by the universal impulse which makes likewise one
vast heart out of the many.  Never, from the soil of New England
had gone up such a shout!  Never, on New England soil had stood
the man so honoured by his mortal brethren as the preacher!

How fared it with him, then?  Were there not the brilliant
particles of a halo in the air about his head?  So etherealised
by spirit as he was, and so apotheosised by worshipping
admirers, did his footsteps, in the procession, really tread
upon the dust of earth?

As the ranks of military men and civil fathers moved onward, all
eyes were turned towards the point where the minister was seen
to approach among them.  The shout died into a murmur, as one
portion of the crowd after another obtained a glimpse of him.
How feeble and pale he looked, amid all his triumph!  The
energy--or say, rather, the inspiration which had held him up,
until he should have delivered the sacred message that had
brought its own strength along with it from heaven--was
withdrawn, now that it had so faithfully performed its office.
The glow, which they had just before beheld burning on his
cheek, was extinguished, like a flame that sinks down hopelessly
among the late decaying embers.  It seemed hardly the face of a
man alive, with such a death-like hue: it was hardly a man with
life in him, that tottered on his path so nervously, yet
tottered, and did not fall!

One of his clerical brethren--it was the venerable John
Wilson--observing the state in which Mr. Dimmesdale was left by
the retiring wave of intellect and sensibility, stepped forward
hastily to offer his support.  The minister tremulously, but
decidedly, repelled the old man's arm.  He still walked onward,
if that movement could be so described, which rather resembled
the wavering effort of an infant, with its mother's arms in
view, outstretched to tempt him forward.  And now, almost
imperceptible as were the latter steps of his progress, he had
come opposite the well-remembered and weather-darkened scaffold,
where, long since, with all that dreary lapse of time between,
Hester Prynne had encountered the world's ignominious stare.
There stood Hester, holding little Pearl by the hand!  And there
was the scarlet letter on her breast!  The minister here made a
pause; although the music still played the stately and rejoicing
march to which the procession moved.  It summoned him
onward--inward to the festival!--but here he made a pause.

Bellingham, for the last few moments, had kept an anxious eye
upon him.  He now left his own place in the procession, and
advanced to give assistance judging, from Mr. Dimmesdale's
aspect that he must otherwise inevitably fall.  But there was
something in the latter's expression that warned back the
magistrate, although a man not readily obeying the vague
intimations that pass from one spirit to another.  The crowd,
meanwhile, looked on with awe and wonder.  This earthly
faintness, was, in their view, only another phase of the
minister's celestial strength; nor would it have seemed a
miracle too high to be wrought for one so holy, had he ascended
before their eyes, waxing dimmer and brighter, and fading at
last into the light of heaven!

He turned towards the scaffold, and stretched forth his arms.

"Hester," said he, "come hither!  Come, my little Pearl!"

It was a ghastly look with which he regarded them; but there was
something at once tender and strangely triumphant in it.  The
child, with the bird-like motion, which was one of her
characteristics, flew to him, and clasped her arms about his
knees.  Hester Prynne--slowly, as if impelled by inevitable fate,
and against her strongest will--likewise drew near, but paused
before she reached him.  At this instant old Roger Chillingworth
thrust himself through the crowd--or, perhaps, so dark,
disturbed, and evil was his look, he rose up out of some nether
region--to snatch back his victim from what he sought to do!  Be
that as it might, the old man rushed forward, and caught the
minister by the arm.

"Madman, hold!  what is your purpose?" whispered he.  "Wave back
that woman!  Cast off this child!  All shall be well!  Do not
blacken your fame, and perish in dishonour!  I can yet save you!
Would you bring infamy on your sacred profession?"

"Ha, tempter!  Methinks thou art too late!" answered the
minister, encountering his eye, fearfully, but firmly.  "Thy
power is not what it was!  With God's help, I shall escape thee
now!"

He again extended his hand to the woman of the scarlet letter.

"Hester Prynne," cried he, with a piercing earnestness, "in the
name of Him, so terrible and so merciful, who gives me grace, at
this last moment, to do what--for my own heavy sin and miserable
agony--I withheld myself from doing seven years ago, come hither
now, and twine thy strength about me!  Thy strength, Hester; but
let it be guided by the will which God hath granted me!  This
wretched and wronged old man is opposing it with all his
might!--with all his own might, and the fiend's!  Come,
Hester--come!  Support me up yonder scaffold."

The crowd was in a tumult.  The men of rank and dignity, who
stood more immediately around the clergyman, were so taken by
surprise, and so perplexed as to the purport of what they
saw--unable to receive the explanation which most readily
presented itself, or to imagine any other--that they remained
silent and inactive spectators of the judgement which Providence
seemed about to work.  They beheld the minister, leaning on
Hester's shoulder, and supported by her arm around him, approach
the scaffold, and ascend its steps; while still the little hand
of the sin-born child was clasped in his.  Old Roger
Chillingworth followed, as one intimately connected with the
drama of guilt and sorrow in which they had all been actors, and
well entitled, therefore to be present at its closing scene.
