give me a final answer. He gave me no answer, and said he would think it
over. But this morning, instead of an answer, I received an invitation
from Countess Lidia Ivanovna for this evening."

"Ah, so that’s it, that’s it!" said Princess Myakaya gleefully, "they’re
going to ask Landau what he’s to say."

"Ask Landau? What for? Who or what’s Landau?"

"What! you don’t know Jules Landau, _le fameux Jules Landau, le
clairvoyant_? He’s crazy too, but on him your sister’s fate depends. See
what comes of living in the provinces—you know nothing about anything.
Landau, do you see, was a _commis_ in a shop in Paris, and he went to a
doctor’s; and in the doctor’s waiting room he fell asleep, and in his
sleep he began giving advice to all the patients. And wonderful advice
it was! Then the wife of Yury Meledinsky—you know, the invalid?—heard of
this Landau, and had him to see her husband. And he cured her husband,
though I can’t say that I see he did him much good, for he’s just as
feeble a creature as ever he was, but they believed in him, and took him
along with them and brought him to Russia. Here there’s been a general
rush to him, and he’s begun doctoring everyone. He cured Countess
Bezzubova, and she took such a fancy to him that she adopted him."

"Adopted him?"

"Yes, as her son. He’s not Landau any more now, but Count Bezzubov.
That’s neither here nor there, though; but Lidia—I’m very fond of her,
but she has a screw loose somewhere—has lost her heart to this Landau
now, and nothing is settled now in her house or Alexey Alexandrovitch’s
without him, and so your sister’s fate is now in the hands of Landau,
_alias_ Count Bezzubov."



Chapter 


After a capital dinner and a great deal of cognac drunk at
Bartnyansky’s, Stepan Arkadyevitch, only a little later than the
appointed time, went in to Countess Lidia Ivanovna’s.

"Who else is with the countess?—a Frenchman?" Stepan Arkadyevitch asked
the hall porter, as he glanced at the familiar overcoat of Alexey
Alexandrovitch and a queer, rather artless-looking overcoat with clasps.

"Alexey Alexandrovitch Karenin and Count Bezzubov," the porter answered
severely.

"Princess Myakaya guessed right," thought Stepan Arkadyevitch, as he
went upstairs. "Curious! It would be quite as well, though, to get on
friendly terms with her. She has immense influence. If she would say a
word to Pomorsky, the thing would be a certainty."

It was still quite light out-of-doors, but in Countess Lidia Ivanovna’s
little drawing room the blinds were drawn and the lamps lighted. At a
round table under a lamp sat the countess and Alexey Alexandrovitch,
talking softly. A short, thinnish man, very pale and handsome, with
feminine hips and knock-kneed legs, with fine brilliant eyes and long
hair lying on the collar of his coat, was standing at the end of the
room gazing at the portraits on the wall. After greeting the lady of the
house and Alexey Alexandrovitch, Stepan Arkadyevitch could not resist
glancing once more at the unknown man.

"Monsieur Landau!" the countess addressed him with a softness and
caution that impressed Oblonsky. And she introduced them.

Landau looked round hurriedly, came up, and smiling, laid his moist,
lifeless hand in Stepan Arkadyevitch’s outstretched hand and immediately
walked away and fell to gazing at the portraits again. The countess and
Alexey Alexandrovitch looked at each other significantly.

"I am very glad to see you, particularly today," said Countess Lidia
Ivanovna, pointing Stepan Arkadyevitch to a seat beside Karenin.

"I introduced you to him as Landau," she said in a soft voice, glancing
at the Frenchman and again immediately after at Alexey Alexandrovitch,
"but he is really Count Bezzubov, as you’re probably aware. Only he does
not like the title."

"Yes, I heard so," answered Stepan Arkadyevitch; "they say he completely
cured Countess Bezzubova."

"She was here today, poor thing!" the countess said, turning to Alexey
Alexandrovitch. "This separation is awful for her. It’s such a blow to
her!"

"And he positively is going?" queried Alexey Alexandrovitch.

"Yes, he’s going to Paris. He heard a voice yesterday," said Countess
Lidia Ivanovna, looking at Stepan Arkadyevitch.

"Ah, a voice!" repeated Oblonsky, feeling that he must be as circumspect
as he possibly could in this society, where something peculiar was going
on, or was to go on, to which he had not the key.

A moment’s silence followed, after which Countess Lidia Ivanovna, as
though approaching the main topic of conversation, said with a fine
smile to Oblonsky:

"I’ve known you for a long while, and am very glad to make a closer
acquaintance with you. _Les amis de nos amis sont nos amis._ But to be a
true friend, one must enter into the spiritual state of one’s friend,
and I fear that you are not doing so in the case of Alexey
Alexandrovitch. You understand what I mean?" she said, lifting her fine
pensive eyes.

"In part, countess, I understand the position of Alexey
Alexandrovitch..." said Oblonsky. Having no clear idea what they were
talking about, he wanted to confine himself to generalities.

"The change is not in his external position," Countess Lidia Ivanovna
said sternly, following with eyes of love the figure of Alexey
Alexandrovitch as he got up and crossed over to Landau; "his heart is
changed, a new heart has been vouchsafed him, and I fear you don’t fully
apprehend the change that has taken place in him."

"Oh, well, in general outlines I can conceive the change. We have always
been friendly, and now..." said Stepan Arkadyevitch, responding with a
sympathetic glance to the expression of the countess, and mentally
balancing the question with which of the two ministers she was most
intimate, so as to know about which to ask her to speak for him.

"The change that has taken place in him cannot lessen his love for his
neighbors; on the contrary, that change can only intensify love in his
heart. But I am afraid you do not understand me. Won’t you have some
tea?" she said, with her eyes indicating the footman, who was handing
round tea on a tray.

"Not quite, countess. Of course, his misfortune..."

"Yes, a misfortune which has proved the highest happiness, when his
heart was made new, was filled full of it," she said, gazing with eyes
full of love at Stepan Arkadyevitch.

"I do believe I might ask her to speak to both of them," thought Stepan
Arkadyevitch.

"Oh, of course, countess," he said; "but I imagine such changes are a
matter so private that no one, even the most intimate friend, would care
to speak of them."

"On the contrary! We ought to speak freely and help one another."

"Yes, undoubtedly so, but there is such a difference of convictions, and
besides..." said Oblonsky with a soft smile.

"There can be no difference where it is a question of holy truth."

"Oh, no, of course; but..." and Stepan Arkadyevitch paused in confusion.
He understood at last that they were talking of religion.
