
Seryozha, with radiant eyes and smiles, holding his mother by one hand
and his nurse by the other, pattered on the rug with his fat little bare
feet. The tenderness shown by his beloved nurse to his mother threw him
into an ecstasy.

"Mother! She often comes to see me, and when she comes..." he was
beginning, but he stopped, noticing that the nurse was saying something
in a whisper to his mother, and that in his mother’s face there was a
look of dread and something like shame, which was so strangely
unbecoming to her.

She went up to him.

"My sweet!" she said.

She could not say _good-bye_, but the expression on her face said it,
and he understood. "Darling, darling Kootik!" she used the name by which
she had called him when he was little, "you won’t forget me? You..." but
she could not say more.

How often afterwards she thought of words she might have said. But now
she did not know how to say it, and could say nothing. But Seryozha knew
all she wanted to say to him. He understood that she was unhappy and
loved him. He understood even what the nurse had whispered. He had
caught the words "always at nine o’clock," and he knew that this was
said of his father, and that his father and mother could not meet. That
he understood, but one thing he could not understand—why there should be
a look of dread and shame in her face?... She was not in fault, but she
was afraid of him and ashamed of something. He would have liked to put a
question that would have set at rest this doubt, but he did not dare; he
saw that she was miserable, and he felt for her. Silently he pressed
close to her and whispered, "Don’t go yet. He won’t come just yet."

The mother held him away from her to see what he was thinking, what to
say to him, and in his frightened face she read not only that he was
speaking of his father, but, as it were, asking her what he ought to
think about his father.

"Seryozha, my darling," she said, "love him; he’s better and kinder than
I am, and I have done him wrong. When you grow up you will judge."

"There’s no one better than you!..." he cried in despair through his
tears, and, clutching her by the shoulders, he began squeezing her with
all his force to him, his arms trembling with the strain.

"My sweet, my little one!" said Anna, and she cried as weakly and
childishly as he.

At that moment the door opened. Vassily Lukitch came in.

At the other door there was the sound of steps, and the nurse in a
scared whisper said, "He’s coming," and gave Anna her hat.

Seryozha sank onto the bed and sobbed, hiding his face in his hands.
Anna removed his hands, once more kissed his wet face, and with rapid
steps went to the door. Alexey Alexandrovitch walked in, meeting her.
Seeing her, he stopped short and bowed his head.

Although she had just said he was better and kinder than she, in the
rapid glance she flung at him, taking in his whole figure in all its
details, feelings of repulsion and hatred for him and jealousy over her
son took possession of her. With a swift gesture she put down her veil,
and, quickening her pace, almost ran out of the room.

She had not time to undo, and so carried back with her, the parcel of
toys she had chosen the day before in a toy shop with such love and
sorrow.



Chapter 


As intensely as Anna had longed to see her son, and long as she had been
thinking of it and preparing herself for it, she had not in the least
expected that seeing him would affect her so deeply. On getting back to
her lonely rooms in the hotel she could not for a long while understand
why she was there. "Yes, it’s all over, and I am again alone," she said
to herself, and without taking off her hat she sat down in a low chair
by the hearth. Fixing her eyes on a bronze clock standing on a table
between the windows, she tried to think.

The French maid brought from abroad came in to suggest she should dress.
She gazed at her wonderingly and said, "Presently." A footman offered
her coffee. "Later on," she said.

The Italian nurse, after having taken the baby out in her best, came in
with her, and brought her to Anna. The plump, well-fed little baby, on
seeing her mother, as she always did, held out her fat little hands, and
with a smile on her toothless mouth, began, like a fish with a float,
bobbing her fingers up and down the starched folds of her embroidered
skirt, making them rustle. It was impossible not to smile, not to kiss
the baby, impossible not to hold out a finger for her to clutch, crowing
and prancing all over; impossible not to offer her a lip which she
sucked into her little mouth by way of a kiss. And all this Anna did,
and took her in her arms and made her dance, and kissed her fresh little
cheek and bare little elbows; but at the sight of this child it was
plainer than ever to her that the feeling she had for her could not be
called love in comparison with what she felt for Seryozha. Everything in
this baby was charming, but for some reason all this did not go deep to
her heart. On her first child, though the child of an unloved father,
had been concentrated all the love that had never found satisfaction.
Her baby girl had been born in the most painful circumstances and had
not had a hundredth part of the care and thought which had been
concentrated on her first child. Besides, in the little girl everything
was still in the future, while Seryozha was by now almost a personality,
and a personality dearly loved. In him there was a conflict of thought
and feeling; he understood her, he loved her, he judged her, she
thought, recalling his words and his eyes. And she was forever—not
physically only but spiritually—divided from him, and it was impossible
to set this right.

She gave the baby back to the nurse, let her go, and opened the locket
in which there was Seryozha’s portrait when he was almost of the same
age as the girl. She got up, and, taking off her hat, took up from a
little table an album in which there were photographs of her son at
different ages. She wanted to compare them, and began taking them out of
the album. She took them all out except one, the latest and best
photograph. In it he was in a white smock, sitting astride a chair, with
frowning eyes and smiling lips. It was his best, most characteristic
expression. With her little supple hands, her white, delicate fingers,
that moved with a peculiar intensity today, she pulled at a corner of
the photograph, but the photograph had caught somewhere, and she could
not get it out. There was no paper knife on the table, and so, pulling
out the photograph that was next to her son’s (it was a photograph of
Vronsky taken at Rome in a round hat and with long hair), she used it to
push out her son’s photograph. "Oh, here is he!" she said, glancing at
the portrait of Vronsky, and she suddenly recalled that he was the cause
of her present misery. She had not once thought of him all the morning.
But now, coming all at once upon that manly, noble face, so familiar and
so dear to her, she felt a sudden rush of love for him.

"But where is he? How is it he leaves me alone in my misery?" she
thought all at once with a feeling of reproach, forgetting she had
herself kept from him everything concerning her son. She sent to ask him
to come to her immediately; with a throbbing heart she awaited him,
rehearsing to herself the words in which she would tell him all, and the
expressions of love with which he would console her. The messenger
returned with the answer that he had a visitor with him, but that he
would come immediately, and that he asked whether she would let him
bring with him Prince Yashvin, who had just arrived in Petersburg. "He’s
not coming alone, and since dinner yesterday he has not seen me," she
thought; "he’s not coming so that I could tell him everything, but
coming with Yashvin." And all at once a strange idea came to her: what
if he had ceased to love her?

And going over the events of the last few days, it seemed to her that
she saw in everything a confirmation of this terrible idea. The fact
that he had not dined at home yesterday, and the fact that he had
