Alexey Alexandrovitch and his name seemed to meet him everywhere. He
could not begin to talk of anything without the conversation turning on
Alexey Alexandrovitch; he could not go anywhere without risk of meeting
him. So at least it seemed to Vronsky, just as it seems to a man with a
sore finger that he is continually, as though on purpose, grazing his
sore finger on everything.

Their stay in Petersburg was the more painful to Vronsky that he
perceived all the time a sort of new mood that he could not understand
in Anna. At one time she would seem in love with him, and then she would
become cold, irritable, and impenetrable. She was worrying over
something, and keeping something back from him, and did not seem to
notice the humiliations which poisoned his existence, and for her, with
her delicate intuition, must have been still more unbearable.



Chapter 


One of Anna’s objects in coming back to Russia had been to see her son.
From the day she left Italy the thought of it had never ceased to
agitate her. And as she got nearer to Petersburg, the delight and
importance of this meeting grew ever greater in her imagination. She did
not even put to herself the question how to arrange it. It seemed to her
natural and simple to see her son when she should be in the same town
with him. But on her arrival in Petersburg she was suddenly made
distinctly aware of her present position in society, and she grasped the
fact that to arrange this meeting was no easy matter.

She had now been two days in Petersburg. The thought of her son never
left her for a single instant, but she had not yet seen him. To go
straight to the house, where she might meet Alexey Alexandrovitch, that
she felt she had no right to do. She might be refused admittance and
insulted. To write and so enter into relations with her husband—that it
made her miserable to think of doing; she could only be at peace when
she did not think of her husband. To get a glimpse of her son out
walking, finding out where and when he went out, was not enough for her;
she had so looked forward to this meeting, she had so much she must say
to him, she so longed to embrace him, to kiss him. Seryozha’s old nurse
might be a help to her and show her what to do. But the nurse was not
now living in Alexey Alexandrovitch’s house. In this uncertainty, and in
efforts to find the nurse, two days had slipped by.

Hearing of the close intimacy between Alexey Alexandrovitch and Countess
Lidia Ivanovna, Anna decided on the third day to write to her a letter,
which cost her great pains, and in which she intentionally said that
permission to see her son must depend on her husband’s generosity. She
knew that if the letter were shown to her husband, he would keep up his
character of magnanimity, and would not refuse her request.

The commissionaire who took the letter had brought her back the most
cruel and unexpected answer, that there was no answer. She had never
felt so humiliated as at the moment when, sending for the
commissionaire, she heard from him the exact account of how he had
waited, and how afterwards he had been told there was no answer. Anna
felt humiliated, insulted, but she saw that from her point of view
Countess Lidia Ivanovna was right. Her suffering was the more poignant
that she had to bear it in solitude. She could not and would not share
it with Vronsky. She knew that to him, although he was the primary cause
of her distress, the question of her seeing her son would seem a matter
of very little consequence. She knew that he would never be capable of
understanding all the depth of her suffering, that for his cool tone at
any allusion to it she would begin to hate him. And she dreaded that
more than anything in the world, and so she hid from him everything that
related to her son. Spending the whole day at home she considered ways
of seeing her son, and had reached a decision to write to her husband.
She was just composing this letter when she was handed the letter from
Lidia Ivanovna. The countess’s silence had subdued and depressed her,
but the letter, all that she read between the lines in it, so
exasperated her, this malice was so revolting beside her passionate,
legitimate tenderness for her son, that she turned against other people
and left off blaming herself.

"This coldness—this pretense of feeling!" she said to herself. "They
must needs insult me and torture the child, and I am to submit to it!
Not on any consideration! She is worse than I am. I don’t lie, anyway."
And she decided on the spot that next day, Seryozha’s birthday, she
would go straight to her husband’s house, bribe or deceive the servants,
but at any cost see her son and overturn the hideous deception with
which they were encompassing the unhappy child.

She went to a toy shop, bought toys and thought over a plan of action.
She would go early in the morning at eight o’clock, when Alexey
Alexandrovitch would be certain not to be up. She would have money in
her hand to give the hall porter and the footman, so that they should
let her in, and not raising her veil, she would say that she had come
from Seryozha’s godfather to congratulate him, and that she had been
charged to leave the toys at his bedside. She had prepared everything
but the words she should say to her son. Often as she had dreamed of it,
she could never think of anything.

The next day, at eight o’clock in the morning, Anna got out of a hired
sledge and rang at the front entrance of her former home.

"Run and see what’s wanted. Some lady," said Kapitonitch, who, not yet
dressed, in his overcoat and galoshes, had peeped out of the window and
seen a lady in a veil standing close up to the door. His assistant, a
lad Anna did not know, had no sooner opened the door to her than she
came in, and pulling a three-rouble note out of her muff put it
hurriedly into his hand.

"Seryozha—Sergey Alexeitch," she said, and was going on. Scrutinizing
the note, the porter’s assistant stopped her at the second glass door.

"Whom do you want?" he asked.

She did not hear his words and made no answer.

Noticing the embarrassment of the unknown lady, Kapitonitch went out to
her, opened the second door for her, and asked her what she was pleased
to want.

"From Prince Skorodumov for Sergey Alexeitch," she said.

"His honor’s not up yet," said the porter, looking at her attentively.

Anna had not anticipated that the absolutely unchanged hall of the house
where she had lived for nine years would so greatly affect her. Memories
sweet and painful rose one after another in her heart, and for a moment
she forgot what she was here for.

"Would you kindly wait?" said Kapitonitch, taking off her fur cloak.

As he took off the cloak, Kapitonitch glanced at her face, recognized
her, and made her a low bow in silence.

"Please walk in, your excellency," he said to her.

She tried to say something, but her voice refused to utter any sound;
with a guilty and imploring glance at the old man she went with light,
swift steps up the stairs. Bent double, and his galoshes catching in the
steps, Kapitonitch ran after her, trying to overtake her.

"The tutor’s there; maybe he’s not dressed. I’ll let him know."

Anna still mounted the familiar staircase, not understanding what the
old man was saying.

"This way, to the left, if you please. Excuse its not being tidy. His
honor’s in the old parlor now," the hall porter said, panting. "Excuse
me, wait a little, your excellency; I’ll just see," he said, and
overtaking her, he opened the high door and disappeared behind it. Anna
stood still waiting. "He’s only just awake," said the hall porter,
coming out. And at the very instant the porter said this, Anna caught
the sound of a childish yawn. From the sound of this yawn alone she knew
her son and seemed to see him living before her eyes.

"Let me in; go away!" she said, and went in through the high doorway. On
the right of the door stood a bed, and sitting up in the bed was the
