honestly," said Stepan Arkadyevitch with emphasis.

But the Moscow significance of the word "honest" was lost on Alexey
Alexandrovitch.

"Honesty is only a negative qualification," he said.

"Well, you’ll do me a great service, anyway," said Stepan Arkadyevitch,
"by putting in a word to Pomorsky—just in the way of conversation...."

"But I fancy it’s more in Volgarinov’s hands," said Alexey
Alexandrovitch.

"Volgarinov has fully assented, as far as he’s concerned," said Stepan
Arkadyevitch, turning red. Stepan Arkadyevitch reddened at the mention
of that name, because he had been that morning at the Jew Volgarinov’s,
and the visit had left an unpleasant recollection.

Stepan Arkadyevitch believed most positively that the committee in which
he was trying to get an appointment was a new, genuine, and honest
public body, but that morning when Volgarinov had—intentionally, beyond
a doubt—kept him two hours waiting with other petitioners in his waiting
room, he had suddenly felt uneasy.

Whether he was uncomfortable that he, a descendant of Rurik, Prince
Oblonsky, had been kept for two hours waiting to see a Jew, or that for
the first time in his life he was not following the example of his
ancestors in serving the government, but was turning off into a new
career, anyway he was very uncomfortable. During those two hours in
Volgarinov’s waiting room Stepan Arkadyevitch, stepping jauntily about
the room, pulling his whiskers, entering into conversation with the
other petitioners, and inventing an epigram on his position, assiduously
concealed from others, and even from himself, the feeling he was
experiencing.

But all the time he was uncomfortable and angry, he could not have said
why—whether because he could not get his epigram just right, or from
some other reason. When at last Volgarinov had received him with
exaggerated politeness and unmistakable triumph at his humiliation, and
had all but refused the favor asked of him, Stepan Arkadyevitch had made
haste to forget it all as soon as possible. And now, at the mere
recollection, he blushed.



Chapter 


"Now there is something I want to talk about, and you know what it is.
About Anna," Stepan Arkadyevitch said, pausing for a brief space, and
shaking off the unpleasant impression.

As soon as Oblonsky uttered Anna’s name, the face of Alexey
Alexandrovitch was completely transformed; all the life was gone out of
it, and it looked weary and dead.

"What is it exactly that you want from me?" he said, moving in his chair
and snapping his pince-nez.

"A definite settlement, Alexey Alexandrovitch, some settlement of the
position. I’m appealing to you" ("not as an injured husband," Stepan
Arkadyevitch was going to say, but afraid of wrecking his negotiation by
this, he changed the words) "not as a statesman" (which did not sound _à
propos_), "but simply as a man, and a good-hearted man and a Christian.
You must have pity on her," he said.

"That is, in what way precisely?" Karenin said softly.

"Yes, pity on her. If you had seen her as I have!—I have been spending
all the winter with her—you would have pity on her. Her position is
awful, simply awful!"

"I had imagined," answered Alexey Alexandrovitch in a higher, almost
shrill voice, "that Anna Arkadyevna had everything she had desired for
herself."

"Oh, Alexey Alexandrovitch, for heaven’s sake, don’t let us indulge in
recriminations! What is past is past, and you know what she wants and is
waiting for—divorce."

"But I believe Anna Arkadyevna refuses a divorce, if I make it a
condition to leave me my son. I replied in that sense, and supposed that
the matter was ended. I consider it at an end," shrieked Alexey
Alexandrovitch.

"But, for heaven’s sake, don’t get hot!" said Stepan Arkadyevitch,
touching his brother-in-law’s knee. "The matter is not ended. If you
will allow me to recapitulate, it was like this: when you parted, you
were as magnanimous as could possibly be; you were ready to give her
everything—freedom, divorce even. She appreciated that. No, don’t think
that. She did appreciate it—to such a degree that at the first moment,
feeling how she had wronged you, she did not consider and could not
consider everything. She gave up everything. But experience, time, have
shown that her position is unbearable, impossible."

"The life of Anna Arkadyevna can have no interest for me," Alexey
Alexandrovitch put in, lifting his eyebrows.

"Allow me to disbelieve that," Stepan Arkadyevitch replied gently. "Her
position is intolerable for her, and of no benefit to anyone whatever.
She has deserved it, you will say. She knows that and asks you for
nothing; she says plainly that she dare not ask you. But I, all of us,
her relatives, all who love her, beg you, entreat you. Why should she
suffer? Who is any the better for it?"

"Excuse me, you seem to put me in the position of the guilty party,"
observed Alexey Alexandrovitch.

"Oh, no, oh, no, not at all! please understand me," said Stepan
Arkadyevitch, touching his hand again, as though feeling sure this
physical contact would soften his brother-in-law. "All I say is this:
her position is intolerable, and it might be alleviated by you, and you
will lose nothing by it. I will arrange it all for you, so that you’ll
not notice it. You did promise it, you know."

"The promise was given before. And I had supposed that the question of
my son had settled the matter. Besides, I had hoped that Anna Arkadyevna
had enough generosity..." Alexey Alexandrovitch articulated with
difficulty, his lips twitching and his face white.

"She leaves it all to your generosity. She begs, she implores one thing
of you—to extricate her from the impossible position in which she is
placed. She does not ask for her son now. Alexey Alexandrovitch, you are
a good man. Put yourself in her position for a minute. The question of
divorce for her in her position is a question of life and death. If you
had not promised it once, she would have reconciled herself to her
position, she would have gone on living in the country. But you promised
it, and she wrote to you, and moved to Moscow. And here she’s been for
six months in Moscow, where every chance meeting cuts her to the heart,
every day expecting an answer. Why, it’s like keeping a condemned
criminal for six months with the rope round his neck, promising him
perhaps death, perhaps mercy. Have pity on her, and I will undertake to
arrange everything. _Vos scrupules_..."

"I am not talking about that, about that..." Alexey Alexandrovitch
interrupted with disgust. "But, perhaps, I promised what I had no right
to promise."

"So you go back from your promise?"

"I have never refused to do all that is possible, but I want time to
consider how much of what I promised is possible."

"No, Alexey Alexandrovitch!" cried Oblonsky, jumping up, "I won’t
believe that! She’s unhappy as only an unhappy woman can be, and you
cannot refuse in such..."

"As much of what I promised as is possible. _Vous professez d’être libre
penseur._ But I as a believer cannot, in a matter of such gravity, act
in opposition to the Christian law."
