fear of waking the baby. At last the little hand ceased waving, and the
eyes closed. Only from time to time, as he went on sucking, the baby
raised his long, curly eyelashes and peeped at his mother with wet eyes,
that looked black in the twilight. The nurse had left off fanning, and
was dozing. From above came the peals of the old prince’s voice, and the
chuckle of Katavasov.

"They have got into talk without me," thought Kitty, "but still it’s
vexing that Kostya’s out. He’s sure to have gone to the bee house again.
Though it’s a pity he’s there so often, still I’m glad. It distracts his
mind. He’s become altogether happier and better now than in the spring.
He used to be so gloomy and worried that I felt frightened for him. And
how absurd he is!" she whispered, smiling.

She knew what worried her husband. It was his unbelief. Although, if she
had been asked whether she supposed that in the future life, if he did
not believe, he would be damned, she would have had to admit that he
would be damned, his unbelief did not cause her unhappiness. And she,
confessing that for an unbeliever there can be no salvation, and loving
her husband’s soul more than anything in the world, thought with a smile
of his unbelief, and told herself that he was absurd.

"What does he keep reading philosophy of some sort for all this year?"
she wondered. "If it’s all written in those books, he can understand
them. If it’s all wrong, why does he read them? He says himself that he
would like to believe. Then why is it he doesn’t believe? Surely from
his thinking so much? And he thinks so much from being solitary. He’s
always alone, alone. He can’t talk about it all to us. I fancy he’ll be
glad of these visitors, especially Katavasov. He likes discussions with
them," she thought, and passed instantly to the consideration of where
it would be more convenient to put Katavasov, to sleep alone or to share
Sergey Ivanovitch’s room. And then an idea suddenly struck her, which
made her shudder and even disturb Mitya, who glanced severely at her. "I
do believe the laundress hasn’t sent the washing yet, and all the best
sheets are in use. If I don’t see to it, Agafea Mihalovna will give
Sergey Ivanovitch the wrong sheets," and at the very idea of this the
blood rushed to Kitty’s face.

"Yes, I will arrange it," she decided, and going back to her former
thoughts, she remembered that some spiritual question of importance had
been interrupted, and she began to recall what. "Yes, Kostya, an
unbeliever," she thought again with a smile.

"Well, an unbeliever then! Better let him always be one than like Madame
Stahl, or what I tried to be in those days abroad. No, he won’t ever
sham anything."

And a recent instance of his goodness rose vividly to her mind. A
fortnight ago a penitent letter had come from Stepan Arkadyevitch to
Dolly. He besought her to save his honor, to sell her estate to pay his
debts. Dolly was in despair, she detested her husband, despised him,
pitied him, resolved on a separation, resolved to refuse, but ended by
agreeing to sell part of her property. After that, with an irrepressible
smile of tenderness, Kitty recalled her husband’s shamefaced
embarrassment, his repeated awkward efforts to approach the subject, and
how at last, having thought of the one means of helping Dolly without
wounding her pride, he had suggested to Kitty—what had not occurred to
her before—that she should give up her share of the property.

"He an unbeliever indeed! With his heart, his dread of offending anyone,
even a child! Everything for others, nothing for himself. Sergey
Ivanovitch simply considers it as Kostya’s duty to be his steward. And
it’s the same with his sister. Now Dolly and her children are under his
guardianship; all these peasants who come to him every day, as though he
were bound to be at their service."

"Yes, only be like your father, only like him," she said, handing Mitya
over to the nurse, and putting her lips to his cheek.



Chapter 


Ever since, by his beloved brother’s deathbed, Levin had first glanced
into the questions of life and death in the light of these new
convictions, as he called them, which had during the period from his
twentieth to his thirty-fourth year imperceptibly replaced his childish
and youthful beliefs—he had been stricken with horror, not so much of
death, as of life, without any knowledge of whence, and why, and how,
and what it was. The physical organization, its decay, the
indestructibility of matter, the law of the conservation of energy,
evolution, were the words which usurped the place of his old belief.
These words and the ideas associated with them were very well for
intellectual purposes. But for life they yielded nothing, and Levin felt
suddenly like a man who has changed his warm fur cloak for a muslin
garment, and going for the first time into the frost is immediately
convinced, not by reason, but by his whole nature that he is as good as
naked, and that he must infallibly perish miserably.

From that moment, though he did not distinctly face it, and still went
on living as before, Levin had never lost this sense of terror at his
lack of knowledge.

He vaguely felt, too, that what he called his new convictions were not
merely lack of knowledge, but that they were part of a whole order of
ideas, in which no knowledge of what he needed was possible.

At first, marriage, with the new joys and duties bound up with it, had
completely crowded out these thoughts. But of late, while he was staying
in Moscow after his wife’s confinement, with nothing to do, the question
that clamored for solution had more and more often, more and more
insistently, haunted Levin’s mind.

The question was summed up for him thus: "If I do not accept the answers
Christianity gives to the problems of my life, what answers do I
accept?" And in the whole arsenal of his convictions, so far from
finding any satisfactory answers, he was utterly unable to find anything
at all like an answer.

He was in the position of a man seeking food in toy shops and tool
shops.

Instinctively, unconsciously, with every book, with every conversation,
with every man he met, he was on the lookout for light on these
questions and their solution.

What puzzled and distracted him above everything was that the majority
of men of his age and circle had, like him, exchanged their old beliefs
for the same new convictions, and yet saw nothing to lament in this, and
were perfectly satisfied and serene. So that, apart from the principal
question, Levin was tortured by other questions too. Were these people
sincere? he asked himself, or were they playing a part? or was it that
they understood the answers science gave to these problems in some
different, clearer sense than he did? And he assiduously studied both
these men’s opinions and the books which treated of these scientific
explanations.

One fact he had found out since these questions had engrossed his mind,
was that he had been quite wrong in supposing from the recollections of
the circle of his young days at college, that religion had outlived its
day, and that it was now practically non-existent. All the people
nearest to him who were good in their lives were believers. The old
prince, and Lvov, whom he liked so much, and Sergey Ivanovitch, and all
the women believed, and his wife believed as simply as he had believed
in his earliest childhood, and ninety-nine hundredths of the Russian
people, all the working people for whose life he felt the deepest
respect, believed.

Another fact of which he became convinced, after reading many scientific
books, was that the men who shared his views had no other construction
to put on them, and that they gave no explanation of the questions which
he felt he could not live without answering, but simply ignored their
existence and attempted to explain other questions of no possible
interest to him, such as the evolution of organisms, the materialistic
theory of consciousness, and so forth.

Moreover, during his wife’s confinement, something had happened that
seemed extraordinary to him. He, an unbeliever, had fallen into praying,
and at the moment he prayed, he believed. But that moment had passed,
