_"O sancta simplicitas!"_ said Stepan Arkadyevitch, and briefly and
clearly he explained it to Levin. If, as at previous elections, all the
districts asked the marshal of the province to stand, then he would be
elected without a ballot. That must not be. Now eight districts had
agreed to call upon him: if two refused to do so, Snetkov might decline
to stand at all; and then the old party might choose another of their
party, which would throw them completely out in their reckoning. But if
only one district, Sviazhsky’s, did not call upon him to stand, Snetkov
would let himself be balloted for. They were even, some of them, going
to vote for him, and purposely to let him get a good many votes, so that
the enemy might be thrown off the scent, and when a candidate of the
other side was put up, they too might give him some votes. Levin
understood to some extent, but not fully, and would have put a few more
questions, when suddenly everyone began talking and making a noise and
they moved towards the big room.

"What is it? eh? whom?" "No guarantee? whose? what?" "They won’t pass
him?" "No guarantee?" "They won’t let Flerov in?" "Eh, because of the
charge against him?" "Why, at this rate, they won’t admit anyone. It’s a
swindle!" "The law!" Levin heard exclamations on all sides, and he moved
into the big room together with the others, all hurrying somewhere and
afraid of missing something. Squeezed by the crowding noblemen, he drew
near the high table where the marshal of the province, Sviazhsky, and
the other leaders were hotly disputing about something.



Chapter 


Levin was standing rather far off. A nobleman breathing heavily and
hoarsely at his side, and another whose thick boots were creaking,
prevented him from hearing distinctly. He could only hear the soft voice
of the marshal faintly, then the shrill voice of the malignant
gentleman, and then the voice of Sviazhsky. They were disputing, as far
as he could make out, as to the interpretation to be put on the act and
the exact meaning of the words: "liable to be called up for trial."

The crowd parted to make way for Sergey Ivanovitch approaching the
table. Sergey Ivanovitch, waiting till the malignant gentleman had
finished speaking, said that he thought the best solution would be to
refer to the act itself, and asked the secretary to find the act. The
act said that in case of difference of opinion, there must be a ballot.

Sergey Ivanovitch read the act and began to explain its meaning, but at
that point a tall, stout, round-shouldered landowner, with dyed
whiskers, in a tight uniform that cut the back of his neck, interrupted
him. He went up to the table, and striking it with his finger ring, he
shouted loudly: "A ballot! Put it to the vote! No need for more
talking!" Then several voices began to talk all at once, and the tall
nobleman with the ring, getting more and more exasperated, shouted more
and more loudly. But it was impossible to make out what he said.

He was shouting for the very course Sergey Ivanovitch had proposed; but
it was evident that he hated him and all his party, and this feeling of
hatred spread through the whole party and roused in opposition to it the
same vindictiveness, though in a more seemly form, on the other side.
Shouts were raised, and for a moment all was confusion, so that the
marshal of the province had to call for order.

"A ballot! A ballot! Every nobleman sees it! We shed our blood for our
country!... The confidence of the monarch.... No checking the accounts
of the marshal; he’s not a cashier.... But that’s not the point....
Votes, please! Beastly!..." shouted furious and violent voices on all
sides. Looks and faces were even more violent and furious than their
words. They expressed the most implacable hatred. Levin did not in the
least understand what was the matter, and he marveled at the passion
with which it was disputed whether or not the decision about Flerov
should be put to the vote. He forgot, as Sergey Ivanovitch explained to
him afterwards, this syllogism: that it was necessary for the public
good to get rid of the marshal of the province; that to get rid of the
marshal it was necessary to have a majority of votes; that to get a
majority of votes it was necessary to secure Flerov’s right to vote;
that to secure the recognition of Flerov’s right to vote they must
decide on the interpretation to be put on the act.

"And one vote may decide the whole question, and one must be serious and
consecutive, if one wants to be of use in public life," concluded Sergey
Ivanovitch. But Levin forgot all that, and it was painful to him to see
all these excellent persons, for whom he had a respect, in such an
unpleasant and vicious state of excitement. To escape from this painful
feeling he went away into the other room where there was nobody except
the waiters at the refreshment bar. Seeing the waiters busy over washing
up the crockery and setting in order their plates and wine glasses,
seeing their calm and cheerful faces, Levin felt an unexpected sense of
relief as though he had come out of a stuffy room into the fresh air. He
began walking up and down, looking with pleasure at the waiters. He
particularly liked the way one gray-whiskered waiter, who showed his
scorn for the other younger ones and was jeered at by them, was teaching
them how to fold up napkins properly. Levin was just about to enter into
conversation with the old waiter, when the secretary of the court of
wardship, a little old man whose specialty it was to know all the
noblemen of the province by name and patronymic, drew him away.

"Please come, Konstantin Dmitrievitch," he said, "your brother’s looking
for you. They are voting on the legal point."

Levin walked into the room, received a white ball, and followed his
brother, Sergey Ivanovitch, to the table where Sviazhsky was standing
with a significant and ironical face, holding his beard in his fist and
sniffing at it. Sergey Ivanovitch put his hand into the box, put the
ball somewhere, and making room for Levin, stopped. Levin advanced, but
utterly forgetting what he was to do, and much embarrassed, he turned to
Sergey Ivanovitch with the question, "Where am I to put it?" He asked
this softly, at a moment when there was talking going on near, so that
he had hoped his question would not be overheard. But the persons
speaking paused, and his improper question was overheard. Sergey
Ivanovitch frowned.

"That is a matter for each man’s own decision," he said severely.

Several people smiled. Levin crimsoned, hurriedly thrust his hand under
the cloth, and put the ball to the right as it was in his right hand.
Having put it in, he recollected that he ought to have thrust his left
hand too, and so he thrust it in though too late, and, still more
overcome with confusion, he beat a hasty retreat into the background.

"A hundred and twenty-six for admission! Ninety-eight against!" sang out
the voice of the secretary, who could not pronounce the letter _r_. Then
there was a laugh; a button and two nuts were found in the box. The
nobleman was allowed the right to vote, and the new party had conquered.

But the old party did not consider themselves conquered. Levin heard
that they were asking Snetkov to stand, and he saw that a crowd of
noblemen was surrounding the marshal, who was saying something. Levin
went nearer. In reply Snetkov spoke of the trust the noblemen of the
province had placed in him, the affection they had shown him, which he
did not deserve, as his only merit had been his attachment to the
nobility, to whom he had devoted twelve years of service. Several times
he repeated the words: "I have served to the best of my powers with
truth and good faith, I value your goodness and thank you," and suddenly
he stopped short from the tears that choked him, and went out of the
room. Whether these tears came from a sense of the injustice being done
him, from his love for the nobility, or from the strain of the position
he was placed in, feeling himself surrounded by enemies, his emotion
infected the assembly, the majority were touched, and Levin felt a
tenderness for Snetkov.

In the doorway the marshal of the province jostled against Levin.

"Beg pardon, excuse me, please," he said as to a stranger, but
recognizing Levin, he smiled timidly. It seemed to Levin that he would
have liked to say something, but could not speak for emotion. His face
and his whole figure in his uniform with the crosses, and white trousers
striped with braid, as he moved hurriedly along, reminded Levin of some
hunted beast who sees that he is in evil case. This expression in the
marshal’s face was particularly touching to Levin, because, only the day
before, he had been at his house about his trustee business and had seen
him in all his grandeur, a kind-hearted, fatherly man. The big house
with the old family furniture; the rather dirty, far from stylish, but
