respectfully. Snetkov, now.... We may be of use, or we may not, but
we’re the growth of a thousand years. If we’re laying out a garden,
planning one before the house, you know, and there you’ve a tree that’s
stood for centuries in the very spot.... Old and gnarled it may be, and
yet you don’t cut down the old fellow to make room for the flowerbeds,
but lay out your beds so as to take advantage of the tree. You won’t
grow him again in a year," he said cautiously, and he immediately
changed the conversation. "Well, and how is your land doing?"

"Oh, not very well. I make five per cent."

"Yes, but you don’t reckon your own work. Aren’t you worth something
too? I’ll tell you my own case. Before I took to seeing after the land,
I had a salary of three hundred pounds from the service. Now I do more
work than I did in the service, and like you I get five per cent. on the
land, and thank God for that. But one’s work is thrown in for nothing."

"Then why do you do it, if it’s a clear loss?"

"Oh, well, one does it! What would you have? It’s habit, and one knows
it’s how it should be. And what’s more," the landowner went on, leaning
his elbows on the window and chatting on, "my son, I must tell you, has
no taste for it. There’s no doubt he’ll be a scientific man. So there’ll
be no one to keep it up. And yet one does it. Here this year I’ve
planted an orchard."

"Yes, yes," said Levin, "that’s perfectly true. I always feel there’s no
real balance of gain in my work on the land, and yet one does it....
It’s a sort of duty one feels to the land."

"But I tell you what," the landowner pursued; "a neighbor of mine, a
merchant, was at my place. We walked about the fields and the garden.
‘No,’ said he, ‘Stepan Vassilievitch, everything’s well looked after,
but your garden’s neglected.’ But, as a fact, it’s well kept up. ‘To my
thinking, I’d cut down that lime-tree. Here you’ve thousands of limes,
and each would make two good bundles of bark. And nowadays that bark’s
worth something. I’d cut down the lot.’"

"And with what he made he’d increase his stock, or buy some land for a
trifle, and let it out in lots to the peasants," Levin added, smiling.
He had evidently more than once come across those commercial
calculations. "And he’d make his fortune. But you and I must thank God
if we keep what we’ve got and leave it to our children."

"You’re married, I’ve heard?" said the landowner.

"Yes," Levin answered, with proud satisfaction. "Yes, it’s rather
strange," he went on. "So we live without making anything, as though we
were ancient vestals set to keep in a fire."

The landowner chuckled under his white mustaches.

"There are some among us, too, like our friend Nikolay Ivanovitch, or
Count Vronsky, that’s settled here lately, who try to carry on their
husbandry as though it were a factory; but so far it leads to nothing
but making away with capital on it."

"But why is it we don’t do like the merchants? Why don’t we cut down our
parks for timber?" said Levin, returning to a thought that had struck
him.

"Why, as you said, to keep the fire in. Besides that’s not work for a
nobleman. And our work as noblemen isn’t done here at the elections, but
yonder, each in our corner. There’s a class instinct, too, of what one
ought and oughtn’t to do. There’s the peasants, too, I wonder at them
sometimes; any good peasant tries to take all the land he can. However
bad the land is, he’ll work it. Without a return too. At a simple loss."

"Just as we do," said Levin. "Very, very glad to have met you," he
added, seeing Sviazhsky approaching him.

"And here we’ve met for the first time since we met at your place," said
the landowner to Sviazhsky, "and we’ve had a good talk too."

"Well, have you been attacking the new order of things?" said Sviazhsky
with a smile.

"That we’re bound to do."

"You’ve relieved your feelings?"



Chapter 


Sviazhsky took Levin’s arm, and went with him to his own friends. This
time there was no avoiding Vronsky. He was standing with Stepan
Arkadyevitch and Sergey Ivanovitch, and looking straight at Levin as he
drew near.

"Delighted! I believe I’ve had the pleasure of meeting you ... at
Princess Shtcherbatskaya’s," he said, giving Levin his hand.

"Yes, I quite remember our meeting," said Levin, and blushing crimson,
he turned away immediately, and began talking to his brother.

With a slight smile Vronsky went on talking to Sviazhsky, obviously
without the slightest inclination to enter into conversation with Levin.
But Levin, as he talked to his brother, was continually looking round at
Vronsky, trying to think of something to say to him to gloss over his
rudeness.

"What are we waiting for now?" asked Levin, looking at Sviazhsky and
Vronsky.

"For Snetkov. He has to refuse or to consent to stand," answered
Sviazhsky.

"Well, and what has he done, consented or not?"

"That’s the point, that he’s done neither," said Vronsky.

"And if he refuses, who will stand then?" asked Levin, looking at
Vronsky.

"Whoever chooses to," said Sviazhsky.

"Shall you?" asked Levin.

"Certainly not I," said Sviazhsky, looking confused, and turning an
alarmed glance at the malignant gentleman, who was standing beside
Sergey Ivanovitch.

"Who then? Nevyedovsky?" said Levin, feeling he was putting his foot
into it.

But this was worse still. Nevyedovsky and Sviazhsky were the two
candidates.

"I certainly shall not, under any circumstances," answered the malignant
gentleman.

This was Nevyedovsky himself. Sviazhsky introduced him to Levin.

"Well, you find it exciting too?" said Stepan Arkadyevitch, winking at
Vronsky. "It’s something like a race. One might bet on it."

"Yes, it is keenly exciting," said Vronsky. "And once taking the thing
up, one’s eager to see it through. It’s a fight!" he said, scowling and
setting his powerful jaws.

"What a capable fellow Sviazhsky is! Sees it all so clearly."

"Oh, yes!" Vronsky assented indifferently.

A silence followed, during which Vronsky—since he had to look at
something—looked at Levin, at his feet, at his uniform, then at his
face, and noticing his gloomy eyes fixed upon him, he said, in order to
say something:
