"Oh, well, you’ve not many sins on your conscience."

"Alas! all the same," said Levin, "when with loathing I go over my life,
I shudder and curse and bitterly regret it.... Yes."

"What would you have? The world’s made so," said Stepan Arkadyevitch.

"The one comfort is like that prayer, which I always liked: ‘Forgive me
not according to my unworthiness, but according to Thy lovingkindness.’
That’s the only way she can forgive me."



Chapter 


Levin emptied his glass, and they were silent for a while.

"There’s one other thing I ought to tell you. Do you know Vronsky?"
Stepan Arkadyevitch asked Levin.

"No, I don’t. Why do you ask?"

"Give us another bottle," Stepan Arkadyevitch directed the Tatar, who
was filling up their glasses and fidgeting round them just when he was
not wanted.

"Why you ought to know Vronsky is that he’s one of your rivals."

"Who’s Vronsky?" said Levin, and his face was suddenly transformed from
the look of childlike ecstasy which Oblonsky had just been admiring to
an angry and unpleasant expression.

"Vronsky is one of the sons of Count Kirill Ivanovitch Vronsky, and one
of the finest specimens of the gilded youth of Petersburg. I made his
acquaintance in Tver when I was there on official business, and he came
there for the levy of recruits. Fearfully rich, handsome, great
connections, an aide-de-camp, and with all that a very nice,
good-natured fellow. But he’s more than simply a good-natured fellow, as
I’ve found out here—he’s a cultivated man, too, and very intelligent;
he’s a man who’ll make his mark."

Levin scowled and was dumb.

"Well, he turned up here soon after you’d gone, and as I can see, he’s
over head and ears in love with Kitty, and you know that her mother..."

"Excuse me, but I know nothing," said Levin, frowning gloomily. And
immediately he recollected his brother Nikolay and how hateful he was to
have been able to forget him.

"You wait a bit, wait a bit," said Stepan Arkadyevitch, smiling and
touching his hand. "I’ve told you what I know, and I repeat that in this
delicate and tender matter, as far as one can conjecture, I believe the
chances are in your favor."

Levin dropped back in his chair; his face was pale.

"But I would advise you to settle the thing as soon as may be," pursued
Oblonsky, filling up his glass.

"No, thanks, I can’t drink any more," said Levin, pushing away his
glass. "I shall be drunk.... Come, tell me how are you getting on?" he
went on, obviously anxious to change the conversation.

"One word more: in any case I advise you to settle the question soon.
Tonight I don’t advise you to speak," said Stepan Arkadyevitch. "Go
round tomorrow morning, make an offer in due form, and God bless you..."

"Oh, do you still think of coming to me for some shooting? Come next
spring, do," said Levin.

Now his whole soul was full of remorse that he had begun this
conversation with Stepan Arkadyevitch. A feeling such as his was
profaned by talk of the rivalry of some Petersburg officer, of the
suppositions and the counsels of Stepan Arkadyevitch.

Stepan Arkadyevitch smiled. He knew what was passing in Levin’s soul.

"I’ll come some day," he said. "But women, my boy, they’re the pivot
everything turns upon. Things are in a bad way with me, very bad. And
it’s all through women. Tell me frankly now," he pursued, picking up a
cigar and keeping one hand on his glass; "give me your advice."

"Why, what is it?"

"I’ll tell you. Suppose you’re married, you love your wife, but you’re
fascinated by another woman..."

"Excuse me, but I’m absolutely unable to comprehend how ... just as I
can’t comprehend how I could now, after my dinner, go straight to a
baker’s shop and steal a roll."

Stepan Arkadyevitch’s eyes sparkled more than usual.

"Why not? A roll will sometimes smell so good one can’t resist it."

    "Himmlisch ist’s, wenn ich bezwungen
    Meine irdische Begier;
    Aber doch wenn’s nich gelungen
    Hatt’ ich auch recht huebsch Plaisir!"

As he said this, Stepan Arkadyevitch smiled subtly. Levin, too, could
not help smiling.

"Yes, but joking apart," resumed Stepan Arkadyevitch, "you must
understand that the woman is a sweet, gentle loving creature, poor and
lonely, and has sacrificed everything. Now, when the thing’s done, don’t
you see, can one possibly cast her off? Even supposing one parts from
her, so as not to break up one’s family life, still, can one help
feeling for her, setting her on her feet, softening her lot?"

"Well, you must excuse me there. You know to me all women are divided
into two classes ... at least no ... truer to say: there are women and
there are ... I’ve never seen exquisite fallen beings, and I never shall
see them, but such creatures as that painted Frenchwoman at the counter
with the ringlets are vermin to my mind, and all fallen women are the
same."

"But the Magdalen?"

"Ah, drop that! Christ would never have said those words if He had known
how they would be abused. Of all the Gospel those words are the only
ones remembered. However, I’m not saying so much what I think, as what I
feel. I have a loathing for fallen women. You’re afraid of spiders, and
I of these vermin. Most likely you’ve not made a study of spiders and
don’t know their character; and so it is with me."

"It’s very well for you to talk like that; it’s very much like that
gentleman in Dickens who used to fling all difficult questions over his
right shoulder. But to deny the facts is no answer. What’s to be
done—you tell me that, what’s to be done? Your wife gets older, while
you’re full of life. Before you’ve time to look round, you feel that you
can’t love your wife with love, however much you may esteem her. And
then all at once love turns up, and you’re done for, done for," Stepan
Arkadyevitch said with weary despair.

Levin half smiled.

"Yes, you’re done for," resumed Oblonsky. "But what’s to be done?"

"Don’t steal rolls."

Stepan Arkadyevitch laughed outright.

"Oh, moralist! But you must understand, there are two women; one insists
only on her rights, and those rights are your love, which you can’t give
her; and the other sacrifices everything for you and asks for nothing.
What are you to do? How are you to act? There’s a fearful tragedy in
it."
