
"I fancy he will fall asleep immediately," said Alexey Alexandrovitch in
a whisper full of meaning, going up to Lidia Ivanovna.

Stepan Arkadyevitch looked round. Landau was sitting at the window,
leaning on his elbow and the back of his chair, his head drooping.
Noticing that all eyes were turned on him he raised his head and smiled
a smile of childlike artlessness.

"Don’t take any notice," said Lidia Ivanovna, and she lightly moved a
chair up for Alexey Alexandrovitch. "I have observed..." she was
beginning, when a footman came into the room with a letter. Lidia
Ivanovna rapidly ran her eyes over the note, and excusing herself, wrote
an answer with extraordinary rapidity, handed it to the man, and came
back to the table. "I have observed," she went on, "that Moscow people,
especially the men, are more indifferent to religion than anyone."

"Oh, no, countess, I thought Moscow people had the reputation of being
the firmest in the faith," answered Stepan Arkadyevitch.

"But as far as I can make out, you are unfortunately one of the
indifferent ones," said Alexey Alexandrovitch, turning to him with a
weary smile.

"How anyone can be indifferent!" said Lidia Ivanovna.

"I am not so much indifferent on that subject as I am waiting in
suspense," said Stepan Arkadyevitch, with his most deprecating smile. "I
hardly think that the time for such questions has come yet for me."

Alexey Alexandrovitch and Lidia Ivanovna looked at each other.

"We can never tell whether the time has come for us or not," said Alexey
Alexandrovitch severely. "We ought not to think whether we are ready or
not ready. God’s grace is not guided by human considerations: sometimes
it comes not to those that strive for it, and comes to those that are
unprepared, like Saul."

"No, I believe it won’t be just yet," said Lidia Ivanovna, who had been
meanwhile watching the movements of the Frenchman. Landau got up and
came to them.

"Do you allow me to listen?" he asked.

"Oh, yes; I did not want to disturb you," said Lidia Ivanovna, gazing
tenderly at him; "sit here with us."

"One has only not to close one’s eyes to shut out the light," Alexey
Alexandrovitch went on.

"Ah, if you knew the happiness we know, feeling His presence ever in our
hearts!" said Countess Lidia Ivanovna with a rapturous smile.

"But a man may feel himself unworthy sometimes to rise to that height,"
said Stepan Arkadyevitch, conscious of hypocrisy in admitting this
religious height, but at the same time unable to bring himself to
acknowledge his free-thinking views before a person who, by a single
word to Pomorsky, might procure him the coveted appointment.

"That is, you mean that sin keeps him back?" said Lidia Ivanovna. "But
that is a false idea. There is no sin for believers, their sin has been
atoned for. _Pardon,_" she added, looking at the footman, who came in
again with another letter. She read it and gave a verbal answer:
"Tomorrow at the Grand Duchess’s, say." "For the believer sin is not,"
she went on.

"Yes, but faith without works is dead," said Stepan Arkadyevitch,
recalling the phrase from the catechism, and only by his smile clinging
to his independence.

"There you have it—from the epistle of St. James," said Alexey
Alexandrovitch, addressing Lidia Ivanovna, with a certain
reproachfulness in his tone. It was unmistakably a subject they had
discussed more than once before. "What harm has been done by the false
interpretation of that passage! Nothing holds men back from belief like
that misinterpretation. ‘I have not works, so I cannot believe,’ though
all the while that is not said. But the very opposite is said."

"Striving for God, saving the soul by fasting," said Countess Lidia
Ivanovna, with disgusted contempt, "those are the crude ideas of our
monks.... Yet that is nowhere said. It is far simpler and easier," she
added, looking at Oblonsky with the same encouraging smile with which at
court she encouraged youthful maids of honor, disconcerted by the new
surroundings of the court.

"We are saved by Christ who suffered for us. We are saved by faith,"
Alexey Alexandrovitch chimed in, with a glance of approval at her words.

_"Vous comprenez l’anglais?"_ asked Lidia Ivanovna, and receiving a
reply in the affirmative, she got up and began looking through a shelf
of books.

"I want to read him ‘Safe and Happy,’ or ‘Under the Wing,’" she said,
looking inquiringly at Karenin. And finding the book, and sitting down
again in her place, she opened it. "It’s very short. In it is described
the way by which faith can be reached, and the happiness, above all
earthly bliss, with which it fills the soul. The believer cannot be
unhappy because he is not alone. But you will see." She was just
settling herself to read when the footman came in again. "Madame
Borozdina? Tell her, tomorrow at two o’clock. Yes," she said, putting
her finger in the place in the book, and gazing before her with her fine
pensive eyes, "that is how true faith acts. You know Marie Sanina? You
know about her trouble? She lost her only child. She was in despair. And
what happened? She found this comforter, and she thanks God now for the
death of her child. Such is the happiness faith brings!"

"Oh, yes, that is most..." said Stepan Arkadyevitch, glad they were
going to read, and let him have a chance to collect his faculties. "No,
I see I’d better not ask her about anything today," he thought. "If only
I can get out of this without putting my foot in it!"

"It will be dull for you," said Countess Lidia Ivanovna, addressing
Landau; "you don’t know English, but it’s short."

"Oh, I shall understand," said Landau, with the same smile, and he
closed his eyes. Alexey Alexandrovitch and Lidia Ivanovna exchanged
meaningful glances, and the reading began.



Chapter 


Stepan Arkadyevitch felt completely nonplussed by the strange talk which
he was hearing for the first time. The complexity of Petersburg, as a
rule, had a stimulating effect on him, rousing him out of his Moscow
stagnation. But he liked these complications, and understood them only
in the circles he knew and was at home in. In these unfamiliar
surroundings he was puzzled and disconcerted, and could not get his
bearings. As he listened to Countess Lidia Ivanovna, aware of the
beautiful, artless—or perhaps artful, he could not decide which—eyes of
Landau fixed upon him, Stepan Arkadyevitch began to be conscious of a
peculiar heaviness in his head.

The most incongruous ideas were in confusion in his head. "Marie Sanina
is glad her child’s dead.... How good a smoke would be now!... To be
saved, one need only believe, and the monks don’t know how the thing’s
to be done, but Countess Lidia Ivanovna does know.... And why is my head
so heavy? Is it the cognac, or all this being so queer? Anyway, I fancy
I’ve done nothing unsuitable so far. But anyway, it won’t do to ask her
now. They say they make one say one’s prayers. I only hope they won’t
make me! That’ll be too imbecile. And what stuff it is she’s reading!
but she has a good accent. Landau—Bezzubov—what’s he Bezzubov for?" All
at once Stepan Arkadyevitch became aware that his lower jaw was
uncontrollably forming a yawn. He pulled his whiskers to cover the yawn,
and shook himself together. But soon after he became aware that he was
dropping asleep and on the very point of snoring. He recovered himself
at the very moment when the voice of Countess Lidia Ivanovna was saying
"he’s asleep." Stepan Arkadyevitch started with dismay, feeling guilty
and caught. But he was reassured at once by seeing that the words "he’s
