jarred upon him then, and now her trivial cares and anxieties jarred
upon him several times. But he saw that this was essential for her. And,
loving her as he did, though he did not understand the reason of them,
and jeered at these domestic pursuits, he could not help admiring them.
He jeered at the way in which she arranged the furniture they had
brought from Moscow; rearranged their room; hung up curtains; prepared
rooms for visitors; a room for Dolly; saw after an abode for her new
maid; ordered dinner of the old cook; came into collision with Agafea
Mihalovna, taking from her the charge of the stores. He saw how the old
cook smiled, admiring her, and listening to her inexperienced,
impossible orders, how mournfully and tenderly Agafea Mihalovna shook
her head over the young mistress’s new arrangements. He saw that Kitty
was extraordinarily sweet when, laughing and crying, she came to tell
him that her maid, Masha, was used to looking upon her as her young
lady, and so no one obeyed her. It seemed to him sweet, but strange, and
he thought it would have been better without this.

He did not know how great a sense of change she was experiencing; she,
who at home had sometimes wanted some favorite dish, or sweets, without
the possibility of getting either, now could order what she liked, buy
pounds of sweets, spend as much money as she liked, and order any
puddings she pleased.

She was dreaming with delight now of Dolly’s coming to them with her
children, especially because she would order for the children their
favorite puddings and Dolly would appreciate all her new housekeeping.
She did not know herself why and wherefore, but the arranging of her
house had an irresistible attraction for her. Instinctively feeling the
approach of spring, and knowing that there would be days of rough
weather too, she built her nest as best she could, and was in haste at
the same time to build it and to learn how to do it.

This care for domestic details in Kitty, so opposed to Levin’s ideal of
exalted happiness, was at first one of the disappointments; and this
sweet care of her household, the aim of which he did not understand, but
could not help loving, was one of the new happy surprises.

Another disappointment and happy surprise came in their quarrels. Levin
could never have conceived that between him and his wife any relations
could arise other than tender, respectful and loving, and all at once in
the very early days they quarreled, so that she said he did not care for
her, that he cared for no one but himself, burst into tears, and wrung
her arms.

This first quarrel arose from Levin’s having gone out to a new farmhouse
and having been away half an hour too long, because he had tried to get
home by a short cut and had lost his way. He drove home thinking of
nothing but her, of her love, of his own happiness, and the nearer he
drew to home, the warmer was his tenderness for her. He ran into the
room with the same feeling, with an even stronger feeling than he had
had when he reached the Shtcherbatskys’ house to make his offer. And
suddenly he was met by a lowering expression he had never seen in her.
He would have kissed her; she pushed him away.

"What is it?"

"You’ve been enjoying yourself," she began, trying to be calm and
spiteful. But as soon as she opened her mouth, a stream of reproach, of
senseless jealousy, of all that had been torturing her during that half
hour which she had spent sitting motionless at the window, burst from
her. It was only then, for the first time, that he clearly understood
what he had not understood when he led her out of the church after the
wedding. He felt now that he was not simply close to her, but that he
did not know where he ended and she began. He felt this from the
agonizing sensation of division that he experienced at that instant. He
was offended for the first instant, but the very same second he felt
that he could not be offended by her, that she was himself. He felt for
the first moment as a man feels when, having suddenly received a violent
blow from behind, he turns round, angry and eager to avenge himself, to
look for his antagonist, and finds that it is he himself who has
accidentally struck himself, that there is no one to be angry with, and
that he must put up with and try to soothe the pain.

Never afterwards did he feel it with such intensity, but this first time
he could not for a long while get over it. His natural feeling urged him
to defend himself, to prove to her she was wrong; but to prove her wrong
would mean irritating her still more and making the rupture greater that
was the cause of all his suffering. One habitual feeling impelled him to
get rid of the blame and to pass it on to her. Another feeling, even
stronger, impelled him as quickly as possible to smooth over the rupture
without letting it grow greater. To remain under such undeserved
reproach was wretched, but to make her suffer by justifying himself was
worse still. Like a man half-awake in an agony of pain, he wanted to
tear out, to fling away the aching place, and coming to his senses, he
felt that the aching place was himself. He could do nothing but try to
help the aching place to bear it, and this he tried to do.

They made peace. She, recognizing that she was wrong, though she did not
say so, became tenderer to him, and they experienced new, redoubled
happiness in their love. But that did not prevent such quarrels from
happening again, and exceedingly often too, on the most unexpected and
trivial grounds. These quarrels frequently arose from the fact that they
did not yet know what was of importance to each other and that all this
early period they were both often in a bad temper. When one was in a
good temper, and the other in a bad temper, the peace was not broken;
but when both happened to be in an ill-humor, quarrels sprang up from
such incomprehensibly trifling causes, that they could never remember
afterwards what they had quarreled about. It is true that when they were
both in a good temper their enjoyment of life was redoubled. But still
this first period of their married life was a difficult time for them.

During all this early time they had a peculiarly vivid sense of tension,
as it were, a tugging in opposite directions of the chain by which they
were bound. Altogether their honeymoon—that is to say, the month after
their wedding—from which from tradition Levin expected so much, was not
merely not a time of sweetness, but remained in the memories of both as
the bitterest and most humiliating period in their lives. They both
alike tried in later life to blot out from their memories all the
monstrous, shameful incidents of that morbid period, when both were
rarely in a normal frame of mind, both were rarely quite themselves.

It was only in the third month of their married life, after their return
from Moscow, where they had been staying for a month, that their life
began to go more smoothly.



Chapter 


They had just come back from Moscow, and were glad to be alone. He was
sitting at the writing table in his study, writing. She, wearing the
dark lilac dress she had worn during the first days of their married
life, and put on again today, a dress particularly remembered and loved
by him, was sitting on the sofa, the same old-fashioned leather sofa
which had always stood in the study in Levin’s father’s and
grandfather’s days. She was sewing at _broderie anglaise_. He thought
and wrote, never losing the happy consciousness of her presence. His
work, both on the land and on the book, in which the principles of the
new land system were to be laid down, had not been abandoned; but just
as formerly these pursuits and ideas had seemed to him petty and trivial
in comparison with the darkness that overspread all life, now they
seemed as unimportant and petty in comparison with the life that lay
before him suffused with the brilliant light of happiness. He went on
with his work, but he felt now that the center of gravity of his
attention had passed to something else, and that consequently he looked
at his work quite differently and more clearly. Formerly this work had
been for him an escape from life. Formerly he had felt that without this
work his life would be too gloomy. Now these pursuits were necessary for
him that life might not be too uniformly bright. Taking up his
manuscript, reading through what he had written, he found with pleasure
that the work was worth his working at. Many of his old ideas seemed to
him superfluous and extreme, but many blanks became distinct to him when
he reviewed the whole thing in his memory. He was writing now a new
chapter on the causes of the present disastrous condition of agriculture
in Russia. He maintained that the poverty of Russia arises not merely
from the anomalous distribution of landed property and misdirected
reforms, but that what had contributed of late years to this result was
the civilization from without abnormally grafted upon Russia, especially
facilities of communication, as railways, leading to centralization in
