"Oh, I’m not excited, mamma. I fancy he will make her an offer today."

"Ah, that’s so strange, how and when a man makes an offer!... There is a
sort of barrier, and all at once it’s broken down," said Dolly, smiling
pensively and recalling her past with Stepan Arkadyevitch.

"Mamma, how did papa make you an offer?" Kitty asked suddenly.

"There was nothing out of the way, it was very simple," answered the
princess, but her face beamed all over at the recollection.

"Oh, but how was it? You loved him, anyway, before you were allowed to
speak?"

Kitty felt a peculiar pleasure in being able now to talk to her mother
on equal terms about those questions of such paramount interest in a
woman’s life.

"Of course I did; he had come to stay with us in the country."

"But how was it settled between you, mamma?"

"You imagine, I dare say, that you invented something quite new? It’s
always just the same: it was settled by the eyes, by smiles..."

"How nicely you said that, mamma! It’s just by the eyes, by smiles that
it’s done," Dolly assented.

"But what words did he say?"

"What did Kostya say to you?"

"He wrote it in chalk. It was wonderful.... How long ago it seems!" she
said.

And the three women all fell to musing on the same thing. Kitty was the
first to break the silence. She remembered all that last winter before
her marriage, and her passion for Vronsky.

"There’s one thing ... that old love affair of Varenka’s," she said, a
natural chain of ideas bringing her to this point. "I should have liked
to say something to Sergey Ivanovitch, to prepare him. They’re all—all
men, I mean," she added, "awfully jealous over our past."

"Not all," said Dolly. "You judge by your own husband. It makes him
miserable even now to remember Vronsky. Eh? that’s true, isn’t it?"

"Yes," Kitty answered, a pensive smile in her eyes.

"But I really don’t know," the mother put in in defense of her motherly
care of her daughter, "what there was in your past that could worry him?
That Vronsky paid you attentions—that happens to every girl."

"Oh, yes, but we didn’t mean that," Kitty said, flushing a little.

"No, let me speak," her mother went on, "why, you yourself would not let
me have a talk to Vronsky. Don’t you remember?"

"Oh, mamma!" said Kitty, with an expression of suffering.

"There’s no keeping you young people in check nowadays.... Your
friendship could not have gone beyond what was suitable. I should myself
have called upon him to explain himself. But, my darling, it’s not right
for you to be agitated. Please remember that, and calm yourself."

"I’m perfectly calm, maman."

"How happy it was for Kitty that Anna came then," said Dolly, "and how
unhappy for her. It turned out quite the opposite," she said, struck by
her own ideas. "Then Anna was so happy, and Kitty thought herself
unhappy. Now it is just the opposite. I often think of her."

"A nice person to think about! Horrid, repulsive woman—no heart," said
her mother, who could not forget that Kitty had married not Vronsky, but
Levin.

"What do you want to talk of it for?" Kitty said with annoyance. "I
never think about it, and I don’t want to think of it.... And I don’t
want to think of it," she said, catching the sound of her husband’s
well-known step on the steps of the terrace.

"What’s that you don’t want to think about?" inquired Levin, coming onto
the terrace.

But no one answered him, and he did not repeat the question.

"I’m sorry I’ve broken in on your feminine parliament," he said, looking
round on every one discontentedly, and perceiving that they had been
talking of something which they would not talk about before him.

For a second he felt that he was sharing the feeling of Agafea
Mihalovna, vexation at their making jam without water, and altogether at
the outside Shtcherbatsky element. He smiled, however, and went up to
Kitty.

"Well, how are you?" he asked her, looking at her with the expression
with which everyone looked at her now.

"Oh, very well," said Kitty, smiling, "and how have things gone with
you?"

"The wagons held three times as much as the old carts did. Well, are we
going for the children? I’ve ordered the horses to be put in."

"What! you want to take Kitty in the wagonette?" her mother said
reproachfully.

"Yes, at a walking pace, princess."

Levin never called the princess "maman" as men often do call their
mothers-in-law, and the princess disliked his not doing so. But though
he liked and respected the princess, Levin could not call her so without
a sense of profaning his feeling for his dead mother.

"Come with us, maman," said Kitty.

"I don’t like to see such imprudence."

"Well, I’ll walk then, I’m so well." Kitty got up and went to her
husband and took his hand.

"You may be well, but everything in moderation," said the princess.

"Well, Agafea Mihalovna, is the jam done?" said Levin, smiling to Agafea
Mihalovna, and trying to cheer her up. "Is it all right in the new way?"

"I suppose it’s all right. For our notions it’s boiled too long."

"It’ll be all the better, Agafea Mihalovna, it won’t mildew, even though
our ice has begun to thaw already, so that we’ve no cool cellar to store
it," said Kitty, at once divining her husband’s motive, and addressing
the old housekeeper with the same feeling; "but your pickle’s so good,
that mamma says she never tasted any like it," she added, smiling, and
putting her kerchief straight.

Agafea Mihalovna looked angrily at Kitty.

"You needn’t try to console me, mistress. I need only to look at you
with him, and I feel happy," she said, and something in the rough
familiarity of that _with him_ touched Kitty.

"Come along with us to look for mushrooms, you will show us the best
places." Agafea Mihalovna smiled and shook her head, as though to say:
"I should like to be angry with you too, but I can’t."

"Do it, please, by my receipt," said the princess; "put some paper over
the jam, and moisten it with a little rum, and without even ice, it will
never go mildewy."


