tears that streamed from his eyes.

"Thank God, thank God!" she said, "now everything is ready. Only to
stretch my legs a little. There, that’s capital. How badly these flowers
are done—not a bit like a violet," she said, pointing to the hangings.
"My God, my God! when will it end? Give me some morphine. Doctor, give
me some morphine! Oh, my God, my God!"

And she tossed about on the bed.

The doctors said that it was puerperal fever, and that it was
ninety-nine chances in a hundred it would end in death. The whole day
long there was fever, delirium, and unconsciousness. At midnight the
patient lay without consciousness, and almost without pulse.

The end was expected every minute.

Vronsky had gone home, but in the morning he came to inquire, and Alexey
Alexandrovitch meeting him in the hall, said: "Better stay, she might
ask for you," and himself led him to his wife’s boudoir. Towards
morning, there was a return again of excitement, rapid thought and talk,
and again it ended in unconsciousness. On the third day it was the same
thing, and the doctors said there was hope. That day Alexey
Alexandrovitch went into the boudoir where Vronsky was sitting, and
closing the door sat down opposite him.

"Alexey Alexandrovitch," said Vronsky, feeling that a statement of the
position was coming, "I can’t speak, I can’t understand. Spare me!
However hard it is for you, believe me, it is more terrible for me."

He would have risen; but Alexey Alexandrovitch took him by the hand and
said:

"I beg you to hear me out; it is necessary. I must explain my feelings,
the feelings that have guided me and will guide me, so that you may not
be in error regarding me. You know I had resolved on a divorce, and had
even begun to take proceedings. I won’t conceal from you that in
beginning this I was in uncertainty, I was in misery; I will confess
that I was pursued by a desire to revenge myself on you and on her. When
I got the telegram, I came here with the same feelings; I will say more,
I longed for her death. But...." He paused, pondering whether to
disclose or not to disclose his feeling to him. "But I saw her and
forgave her. And the happiness of forgiveness has revealed to me my
duty. I forgive completely. I would offer the other cheek, I would give
my cloak if my coat be taken. I pray to God only not to take from me the
bliss of forgiveness!"

Tears stood in his eyes, and the luminous, serene look in them impressed
Vronsky.

"This is my position: you can trample me in the mud, make me the
laughing-stock of the world, I will not abandon her, and I will never
utter a word of reproach to you," Alexey Alexandrovitch went on. "My
duty is clearly marked for me; I ought to be with her, and I will be. If
she wishes to see you, I will let you know, but now I suppose it would
be better for you to go away."

He got up, and sobs cut short his words. Vronsky too was getting up, and
in a stooping, not yet erect posture, looked up at him from under his
brows. He did not understand Alexey Alexandrovitch’s feeling, but he
felt that it was something higher and even unattainable for him with his
view of life.



Chapter 


After the conversation with Alexey Alexandrovitch, Vronsky went out onto
the steps of the Karenins’ house and stood still, with difficulty
remembering where he was, and where he ought to walk or drive. He felt
disgraced, humiliated, guilty, and deprived of all possibility of
washing away his humiliation. He felt thrust out of the beaten track
along which he had so proudly and lightly walked till then. All the
habits and rules of his life that had seemed so firm, had turned out
suddenly false and inapplicable. The betrayed husband, who had figured
till that time as a pitiful creature, an incidental and somewhat
ludicrous obstacle to his happiness, had suddenly been summoned by her
herself, elevated to an awe-inspiring pinnacle, and on the pinnacle that
husband had shown himself, not malignant, not false, not ludicrous, but
kind and straightforward and large. Vronsky could not but feel this, and
the parts were suddenly reversed. Vronsky felt his elevation and his own
abasement, his truth and his own falsehood. He felt that the husband was
magnanimous even in his sorrow, while he had been base and petty in his
deceit. But this sense of his own humiliation before the man he had
unjustly despised made up only a small part of his misery. He felt
unutterably wretched now, for his passion for Anna, which had seemed to
him of late to be growing cooler, now that he knew he had lost her
forever, was stronger than ever it had been. He had seen all of her in
her illness, had come to know her very soul, and it seemed to him that
he had never loved her till then. And now when he had learned to know
her, to love her as she should be loved, he had been humiliated before
her, and had lost her forever, leaving with her nothing of himself but a
shameful memory. Most terrible of all had been his ludicrous, shameful
position when Alexey Alexandrovitch had pulled his hands away from his
humiliated face. He stood on the steps of the Karenins’ house like one
distraught, and did not know what to do.

"A sledge, sir?" asked the porter.

"Yes, a sledge."

On getting home, after three sleepless nights, Vronsky, without
undressing, lay down flat on the sofa, clasping his hands and laying his
head on them. His head was heavy. Images, memories, and ideas of the
strangest description followed one another with extraordinary rapidity
and vividness. First it was the medicine he had poured out for the
patient and spilt over the spoon, then the midwife’s white hands, then
the queer posture of Alexey Alexandrovitch on the floor beside the bed.

"To sleep! To forget!" he said to himself with the serene confidence of
a healthy man that if he is tired and sleepy, he will go to sleep at
once. And the same instant his head did begin to feel drowsy and he
began to drop off into forgetfulness. The waves of the sea of
unconsciousness had begun to meet over his head, when all at once—it was
as though a violent shock of electricity had passed over him. He started
so that he leaped up on the springs of the sofa, and leaning on his arms
got in a panic onto his knees. His eyes were wide open as though he had
never been asleep. The heaviness in his head and the weariness in his
limbs that he had felt a minute before had suddenly gone.

"You may trample me in the mud," he heard Alexey Alexandrovitch’s words
and saw him standing before him, and saw Anna’s face with its burning
flush and glittering eyes, gazing with love and tenderness not at him
but at Alexey Alexandrovitch; he saw his own, as he fancied, foolish and
ludicrous figure when Alexey Alexandrovitch took his hands away from his
face. He stretched out his legs again and flung himself on the sofa in
the same position and shut his eyes.

"To sleep! To forget!" he repeated to himself. But with his eyes shut he
saw more distinctly than ever Anna’s face as it had been on the
memorable evening before the races.

"That is not and will not be, and she wants to wipe it out of her
memory. But I cannot live without it. How can we be reconciled? how can
we be reconciled?" he said aloud, and unconsciously began to repeat
these words. This repetition checked the rising up of fresh images and
memories, which he felt were thronging in his brain. But repeating words
did not check his imagination for long. Again in extraordinarily rapid
succession his best moments rose before his mind, and then his recent
humiliation. "Take away his hands," Anna’s voice says. He takes away his
hands and feels the shamestruck and idiotic expression of his face.

He still lay down, trying to sleep, though he felt there was not the
smallest hope of it, and kept repeating stray words from some chain of
thought, trying by this to check the rising flood of fresh images. He
listened, and heard in a strange, mad whisper words repeated: "I did not
appreciate it, did not make enough of it. I did not appreciate it, did
not make enough of it."

