inevitably control him in the life he led in the eyes of the world, and
hinder him from giving way to his feeling of love and forgiveness. He
stopped short, looking at Princess Tverskaya.

"Well, good-bye, my darling," said Betsy, getting up. She kissed Anna,
and went out. Alexey Alexandrovitch escorted her out.

"Alexey Alexandrovitch! I know you are a truly magnanimous man," said
Betsy, stopping in the little drawing-room, and with special warmth
shaking hands with him once more. "I am an outsider, but I so love her
and respect you that I venture to advise. Receive him. Alexey Vronsky is
the soul of honor, and he is going away to Tashkend."

"Thank you, princess, for your sympathy and advice. But the question of
whether my wife can or cannot see anyone she must decide herself."

He said this from habit, lifting his brows with dignity, and reflected
immediately that whatever his words might be, there could be no dignity
in his position. And he saw this by the suppressed, malicious, and
ironical smile with which Betsy glanced at him after this phrase.



Chapter 


Alexey Alexandrovitch took leave of Betsy in the drawing room, and went
to his wife. She was lying down, but hearing his steps she sat up
hastily in her former attitude, and looked in a scared way at him. He
saw she had been crying.

"I am very grateful for your confidence in me." He repeated gently in
Russian the phrase he had said in Betsy’s presence in French, and sat
down beside her. When he spoke to her in Russian, using the Russian
"thou" of intimacy and affection, it was insufferably irritating to
Anna. "And I am very grateful for your decision. I, too, imagine that
since he is going away, there is no sort of necessity for Count Vronsky
to come here. However, if..."

"But I’ve said so already, so why repeat it?" Anna suddenly interrupted
him with an irritation she could not succeed in repressing. "No sort of
necessity," she thought, "for a man to come and say good-bye to the
woman he loves, for whom he was ready to ruin himself, and has ruined
himself, and who cannot live without him. No sort of necessity!" she
compressed her lips, and dropped her burning eyes to his hands with
their swollen veins. They were rubbing each other.

"Let us never speak of it," she added more calmly.

"I have left this question to you to decide, and I am very glad to
see..." Alexey Alexandrovitch was beginning.

"That my wish coincides with your own," she finished quickly,
exasperated at his talking so slowly while she knew beforehand all he
would say.

"Yes," he assented; "and Princess Tverskaya’s interference in the most
difficult private affairs is utterly uncalled for. She especially..."

"I don’t believe a word of what’s said about her," said Anna quickly. "I
know she really cares for me."

Alexey Alexandrovitch sighed and said nothing. She played nervously with
the tassel of her dressing-gown, glancing at him with that torturing
sensation of physical repulsion for which she blamed herself, though she
could not control it. Her only desire now was to be rid of his
oppressive presence.

"I have just sent for the doctor," said Alexey Alexandrovitch.

"I am very well; what do I want the doctor for?"

"No, the little one cries, and they say the nurse hasn’t enough milk."

"Why didn’t you let me nurse her, when I begged to? Anyway" (Alexey
Alexandrovitch knew what was meant by that "anyway"), "she’s a baby, and
they’re killing her." She rang the bell and ordered the baby to be
brought her. "I begged to nurse her, I wasn’t allowed to, and now I’m
blamed for it."

"I don’t blame..."

"Yes, you do blame me! My God! why didn’t I die!" And she broke into
sobs. "Forgive me, I’m nervous, I’m unjust," she said, controlling
herself, "but do go away..."

"No, it can’t go on like this," Alexey Alexandrovitch said to himself
decidedly as he left his wife’s room.

Never had the impossibility of his position in the world’s eyes, and his
wife’s hatred of him, and altogether the might of that mysterious brutal
force that guided his life against his spiritual inclinations, and
exacted conformity with its decrees and change in his attitude to his
wife, been presented to him with such distinctness as that day. He saw
clearly that all the world and his wife expected of him something, but
what exactly, he could not make out. He felt that this was rousing in
his soul a feeling of anger destructive of his peace of mind and of all
the good of his achievement. He believed that for Anna herself it would
be better to break off all relations with Vronsky; but if they all
thought this out of the question, he was even ready to allow these
relations to be renewed, so long as the children were not disgraced, and
he was not deprived of them nor forced to change his position. Bad as
this might be, it was anyway better than a rupture, which would put her
in a hopeless and shameful position, and deprive him of everything he
cared for. But he felt helpless; he knew beforehand that every one was
against him, and that he would not be allowed to do what seemed to him
now so natural and right, but would be forced to do what was wrong,
though it seemed the proper thing to them.



Chapter 


Before Betsy had time to walk out of the drawing-room, she was met in
the doorway by Stepan Arkadyevitch, who had just come from Yeliseev’s,
where a consignment of fresh oysters had been received.

"Ah! princess! what a delightful meeting!" he began. "I’ve been to see
you."

"A meeting for one minute, for I’m going," said Betsy, smiling and
putting on her glove.

"Don’t put on your glove yet, princess; let me kiss your hand. There’s
nothing I’m so thankful to the revival of the old fashions for as the
kissing the hand." He kissed Betsy’s hand. "When shall we see each
other?"

"You don’t deserve it," answered Betsy, smiling.

"Oh, yes, I deserve a great deal, for I’ve become a most serious person.
I don’t only manage my own affairs, but other people’s too," he said,
with a significant expression.

"Oh, I’m so glad!" answered Betsy, at once understanding that he was
speaking of Anna. And going back into the drawing room, they stood in a
corner. "He’s killing her," said Betsy in a whisper full of meaning.
"It’s impossible, impossible..."

"I’m so glad you think so," said Stepan Arkadyevitch, shaking his head
with a serious and sympathetically distressed expression, "that’s what
I’ve come to Petersburg for."

"The whole town’s talking of it," she said. "It’s an impossible
position. She pines and pines away. He doesn’t understand that she’s one
of those women who can’t trifle with their feelings. One of two things:
either let him take her away, act with energy, or give her a divorce.
This is stifling her."

