
"He came down dressed. No doubt he’s run up to her again."

Stepan Arkadyevitch guessed right. Levin had run up again to his wife to
ask her once more if she forgave him for his idiocy yesterday, and,
moreover, to beg her for Christ’s sake to be more careful. The great
thing was for her to keep away from the children—they might any minute
push against her. Then he had once more to hear her declare that she was
not angry with him for going away for two days, and to beg her to be
sure to send him a note next morning by a servant on horseback, to write
him, if it were but two words only, to let him know that all was well
with her.

Kitty was distressed, as she always was, at parting for a couple of days
from her husband, but when she saw his eager figure, looking big and
strong in his shooting-boots and his white blouse, and a sort of
sportsman elation and excitement incomprehensible to her, she forgot her
own chagrin for the sake of his pleasure, and said good-bye to him
cheerfully.

"Pardon, gentlemen!" he said, running out onto the steps. "Have you put
the lunch in? Why is the chestnut on the right? Well, it doesn’t matter.
Laska, down; go and lie down!"

"Put it with the herd of oxen," he said to the herdsman, who was waiting
for him at the steps with some question. "Excuse me, here comes another
villain."

Levin jumped out of the wagonette, in which he had already taken his
seat, to meet the carpenter, who came towards the steps with a rule in
his hand.

"You didn’t come to the counting house yesterday, and now you’re
detaining me. Well, what is it?"

"Would your honor let me make another turning? It’s only three steps to
add. And we make it just fit at the same time. It will be much more
convenient."

"You should have listened to me," Levin answered with annoyance. "I
said: Put the lines and then fit in the steps. Now there’s no setting it
right. Do as I told you, and make a new staircase."

The point was that in the lodge that was being built the carpenter had
spoiled the staircase, fitting it together without calculating the space
it was to fill, so that the steps were all sloping when it was put in
place. Now the carpenter wanted, keeping the same staircase, to add
three steps.

"It will be much better."

"But where’s your staircase coming out with its three steps?"

"Why, upon my word, sir," the carpenter said with a contemptuous smile.
"It comes out right at the very spot. It starts, so to speak," he said,
with a persuasive gesture; "it comes down, and comes down, and comes
out."

"But three steps will add to the length too ... where is it to come
out?"

"Why, to be sure, it’ll start from the bottom and go up and go up, and
come out so," the carpenter said obstinately and convincingly.

"It’ll reach the ceiling and the wall."

"Upon my word! Why, it’ll go up, and up, and come out like this."

Levin took out a ramrod and began sketching him the staircase in the
dust.

"There, do you see?"

"As your honor likes," said the carpenter, with a sudden gleam in his
eyes, obviously understanding the thing at last. "It seems it’ll be best
to make a new one."

"Well, then, do it as you’re told," Levin shouted, seating himself in
the wagonette. "Down! Hold the dogs, Philip!"

Levin felt now at leaving behind all his family and household cares such
an eager sense of joy in life and expectation that he was not disposed
to talk. Besides that, he had that feeling of concentrated excitement
that every sportsman experiences as he approaches the scene of action.
If he had anything on his mind at that moment, it was only the doubt
whether they would start anything in the Kolpensky marsh, whether Laska
would show to advantage in comparison with Krak, and whether he would
shoot well that day himself. Not to disgrace himself before a new
spectator—not to be outdone by Oblonsky—that too was a thought that
crossed his brain.

Oblonsky was feeling the same, and he too was not talkative. Vassenka
Veslovsky kept up alone a ceaseless flow of cheerful chatter. As he
listened to him now, Levin felt ashamed to think how unfair he had been
to him the day before. Vassenka was really a nice fellow, simple,
good-hearted, and very good-humored. If Levin had met him before he was
married, he would have made friends with him. Levin rather disliked his
holiday attitude to life and a sort of free and easy assumption of
elegance. It was as though he assumed a high degree of importance in
himself that could not be disputed, because he had long nails and a
stylish cap, and everything else to correspond; but this could be
forgiven for the sake of his good nature and good breeding. Levin liked
him for his good education, for speaking French and English with such an
excellent accent, and for being a man of his world.

Vassenka was extremely delighted with the left horse, a horse of the Don
Steppes. He kept praising him enthusiastically. "How fine it must be
galloping over the steppes on a steppe horse! Eh? isn’t it?" he said. He
had imagined riding on a steppe horse as something wild and romantic,
and it turned out nothing of the sort. But his simplicity, particularly
in conjunction with his good looks, his amiable smile, and the grace of
his movements, was very attractive. Either because his nature was
sympathetic to Levin, or because Levin was trying to atone for his sins
of the previous evening by seeing nothing but what was good in him,
anyway he liked his society.

After they had driven over two miles from home, Veslovsky all at once
felt for a cigar and his pocketbook, and did not know whether he had
lost them or left them on the table. In the pocketbook there were
thirty-seven pounds, and so the matter could not be left in uncertainty.

"Do you know what, Levin, I’ll gallop home on that left trace-horse.
That will be splendid. Eh?" he said, preparing to get out.

"No, why should you?" answered Levin, calculating that Vassenka could
hardly weigh less than seventeen stone. "I’ll send the coachman."

The coachman rode back on the trace-horse, and Levin himself drove the
remaining pair.



Chapter 


"Well, now what’s our plan of campaign? Tell us all about it," said
Stepan Arkadyevitch.

"Our plan is this. Now we’re driving to Gvozdyov. In Gvozdyov there’s a
grouse marsh on this side, and beyond Gvozdyov come some magnificent
snipe marshes where there are grouse too. It’s hot now, and we’ll get
there—it’s fifteen miles or so—towards evening and have some evening
shooting; we’ll spend the night there and go on tomorrow to the bigger
moors."

"And is there nothing on the way?"

"Yes; but we’ll reserve ourselves; besides it’s hot. There are two nice
little places, but I doubt there being anything to shoot."

