
He lifted his head. With her hands hanging exhausted on the quilt,
looking extraordinarily lovely and serene, she looked at him in silence
and tried to smile, and could not.

And suddenly, from the mysterious and awful far-away world in which he
had been living for the last twenty-two hours, Levin felt himself all in
an instant borne back to the old every-day world, glorified though now,
by such a radiance of happiness that he could not bear it. The strained
chords snapped, sobs and tears of joy which he had never foreseen rose
up with such violence that his whole body shook, that for long they
prevented him from speaking.

Falling on his knees before the bed, he held his wife’s hand before his
lips and kissed it, and the hand, with a weak movement of the fingers,
responded to his kiss. And meanwhile, there at the foot of the bed, in
the deft hands of Lizaveta Petrovna, like a flickering light in a lamp,
lay the life of a human creature, which had never existed before, and
which would now with the same right, with the same importance to itself,
live and create in its own image.

"Alive! alive! And a boy too! Set your mind at rest!" Levin heard
Lizaveta Petrovna saying, as she slapped the baby’s back with a shaking
hand.

"Mamma, is it true?" said Kitty’s voice.

The princess’s sobs were all the answers she could make. And in the
midst of the silence there came in unmistakable reply to the mother’s
question, a voice quite unlike the subdued voices speaking in the room.
It was the bold, clamorous, self-assertive squall of the new human
being, who had so incomprehensibly appeared.

If Levin had been told before that Kitty was dead, and that he had died
with her, and that their children were angels, and that God was standing
before him, he would have been surprised at nothing. But now, coming
back to the world of reality, he had to make great mental efforts to
take in that she was alive and well, and that the creature squalling so
desperately was his son. Kitty was alive, her agony was over. And he was
unutterably happy. That he understood; he was completely happy in it.
But the baby? Whence, why, who was he?... He could not get used to the
idea. It seemed to him something extraneous, superfluous, to which he
could not accustom himself.



Chapter 


At ten o’clock the old prince, Sergey Ivanovitch, and Stepan
Arkadyevitch were sitting at Levin’s. Having inquired after Kitty, they
had dropped into conversation upon other subjects. Levin heard them, and
unconsciously, as they talked, going over the past, over what had been
up to that morning, he thought of himself as he had been yesterday till
that point. It was as though a hundred years had passed since then. He
felt himself exalted to unattainable heights, from which he studiously
lowered himself so as not to wound the people he was talking to. He
talked, and was all the time thinking of his wife, of her condition now,
of his son, in whose existence he tried to school himself into
believing. The whole world of woman, which had taken for him since his
marriage a new value he had never suspected before, was now so exalted
that he could not take it in in his imagination. He heard them talk of
yesterday’s dinner at the club, and thought: "What is happening with her
now? Is she asleep? How is she? What is she thinking of? Is he crying,
my son Dmitri?" And in the middle of the conversation, in the middle of
a sentence, he jumped up and went out of the room.

"Send me word if I can see her," said the prince.

"Very well, in a minute," answered Levin, and without stopping, he went
to her room.

She was not asleep, she was talking gently with her mother, making plans
about the christening.

Carefully set to rights, with hair well-brushed, in a smart little cap
with some blue in it, her arms out on the quilt, she was lying on her
back. Meeting his eyes, her eyes drew him to her. Her face, bright
before, brightened still more as he drew near her. There was the same
change in it from earthly to unearthly that is seen in the face of the
dead. But then it means farewell, here it meant welcome. Again a rush of
emotion, such as he had felt at the moment of the child’s birth, flooded
his heart. She took his hand and asked him if he had slept. He could not
answer, and turned away, struggling with his weakness.

"I have had a nap, Kostya!" she said to him; "and I am so comfortable
now."

She looked at him, but suddenly her expression changed.

"Give him to me," she said, hearing the baby’s cry. "Give him to me,
Lizaveta Petrovna, and he shall look at him."

"To be sure, his papa shall look at him," said Lizaveta Petrovna,
getting up and bringing something red, and queer, and wriggling. "Wait a
minute, we’ll make him tidy first," and Lizaveta Petrovna laid the red
wobbling thing on the bed, began untrussing and trussing up the baby,
lifting it up and turning it over with one finger and powdering it with
something.

Levin, looking at the tiny, pitiful creature, made strenuous efforts to
discover in his heart some traces of fatherly feeling for it. He felt
nothing towards it but disgust. But when it was undressed and he caught
a glimpse of wee, wee, little hands, little feet, saffron-colored, with
little toes, too, and positively with a little big toe different from
the rest, and when he saw Lizaveta Petrovna closing the wide-open little
hands, as though they were soft springs, and putting them into linen
garments, such pity for the little creature came upon him, and such
terror that she would hurt it, that he held her hand back.

Lizaveta Petrovna laughed.

"Don’t be frightened, don’t be frightened!"

When the baby had been put to rights and transformed into a firm doll,
Lizaveta Petrovna dandled it as though proud of her handiwork, and stood
a little away so that Levin might see his son in all his glory.

Kitty looked sideways in the same direction, never taking her eyes off
the baby. "Give him to me! give him to me!" she said, and even made as
though she would sit up.

"What are you thinking of, Katerina Alexandrovna, you mustn’t move like
that! Wait a minute. I’ll give him to you. Here we’re showing papa what
a fine fellow we are!"

And Lizaveta Petrovna, with one hand supporting the wobbling head,
lifted up on the other arm the strange, limp, red creature, whose head
was lost in its swaddling clothes. But it had a nose, too, and slanting
eyes and smacking lips.

"A splendid baby!" said Lizaveta Petrovna.

Levin sighed with mortification. This splendid baby excited in him no
feeling but disgust and compassion. It was not at all the feeling he had
looked forward to.

He turned away while Lizaveta Petrovna put the baby to the unaccustomed
breast.

Suddenly laughter made him look round. The baby had taken the breast.

"Come, that’s enough, that’s enough!" said Lizaveta Petrovna, but Kitty
would not let the baby go. He fell asleep in her arms.

"Look, now," said Kitty, turning the baby so that he could see it. The
aged-looking little face suddenly puckered up still more and the baby
sneezed.

Smiling, hardly able to restrain his tears, Levin kissed his wife and
