
"How is it that you, living constantly in the country, are not a justice
of the peace? You are not in the uniform of one."

"It’s because I consider that the justice of the peace is a silly
institution," Levin answered gloomily. He had been all the time looking
for an opportunity to enter into conversation with Vronsky, so as to
smooth over his rudeness at their first meeting.

"I don’t think so, quite the contrary," Vronsky said, with quiet
surprise.

"It’s a plaything," Levin cut him short. "We don’t want justices of the
peace. I’ve never had a single thing to do with them during eight years.
And what I have had was decided wrongly by them. The justice of the
peace is over thirty miles from me. For some matter of two roubles I
should have to send a lawyer, who costs me fifteen."

And he related how a peasant had stolen some flour from the miller, and
when the miller told him of it, had lodged a complaint for slander. All
this was utterly uncalled for and stupid, and Levin felt it himself as
he said it.

"Oh, this is such an original fellow!" said Stepan Arkadyevitch with his
most soothing, almond-oil smile. "But come along; I think they’re
voting...."

And they separated.

"I can’t understand," said Sergey Ivanovitch, who had observed his
brother’s clumsiness, "I can’t understand how anyone can be so
absolutely devoid of political tact. That’s where we Russians are so
deficient. The marshal of the province is our opponent, and with him
you’re _ami cochon_, and you beg him to stand. Count Vronsky, now ...
I’m not making a friend of him; he’s asked me to dinner, and I’m not
going; but he’s one of our side—why make an enemy of him? Then you ask
Nevyedovsky if he’s going to stand. That’s not a thing to do."

"Oh, I don’t understand it at all! And it’s all such nonsense," Levin
answered gloomily.

"You say it’s all such nonsense, but as soon as you have anything to do
with it, you make a muddle."

Levin did not answer, and they walked together into the big room.

The marshal of the province, though he was vaguely conscious in the air
of some trap being prepared for him, and though he had not been called
upon by all to stand, had still made up his mind to stand. All was
silence in the room. The secretary announced in a loud voice that the
captain of the guards, Mihail Stepanovitch Snetkov, would now be
balloted for as marshal of the province.

The district marshals walked carrying plates, on which were balls, from
their tables to the high table, and the election began.

"Put it in the right side," whispered Stepan Arkadyevitch, as with his
brother Levin followed the marshal of his district to the table. But
Levin had forgotten by now the calculations that had been explained to
him, and was afraid Stepan Arkadyevitch might be mistaken in saying "the
right side." Surely Snetkov was the enemy. As he went up, he held the
ball in his right hand, but thinking he was wrong, just at the box he
changed to the left hand, and undoubtedly put the ball to the left. An
adept in the business, standing at the box and seeing by the mere action
of the elbow where each put his ball, scowled with annoyance. It was no
good for him to use his insight.

Everything was still, and the counting of the balls was heard. Then a
single voice rose and proclaimed the numbers for and against. The
marshal had been voted for by a considerable majority. All was noise and
eager movement towards the doors. Snetkov came in, and the nobles
thronged round him, congratulating him.

"Well, now is it over?" Levin asked Sergey Ivanovitch.

"It’s only just beginning," Sviazhsky said, replying for Sergey
Ivanovitch with a smile. "Some other candidate may receive more votes
than the marshal."

Levin had quite forgotten about that. Now he could only remember that
there was some sort of trickery in it, but he was too bored to think
what it was exactly. He felt depressed, and longed to get out of the
crowd.

As no one was paying any attention to him, and no one apparently needed
him, he quietly slipped away into the little room where the refreshments
were, and again had a great sense of comfort when he saw the waiters.
The little old waiter pressed him to have something, and Levin agreed.
After eating a cutlet with beans and talking to the waiters of their
former masters, Levin, not wishing to go back to the hall, where it was
all so distasteful to him, proceeded to walk through the galleries. The
galleries were full of fashionably dressed ladies, leaning over the
balustrade and trying not to lose a single word of what was being said
below. With the ladies were sitting and standing smart lawyers, high
school teachers in spectacles, and officers. Everywhere they were
talking of the election, and of how worried the marshal was, and how
splendid the discussions had been. In one group Levin heard his
brother’s praises. One lady was telling a lawyer:

"How glad I am I heard Koznishev! It’s worth losing one’s dinner. He’s
exquisite! So clear and distinct all of it! There’s not one of you in
the law courts that speaks like that. The only one is Meidel, and he’s
not so eloquent by a long way."

Finding a free place, Levin leaned over the balustrade and began looking
and listening.

All the noblemen were sitting railed off behind barriers according to
their districts. In the middle of the room stood a man in a uniform, who
shouted in a loud, high voice:

"As a candidate for the marshalship of the nobility of the province we
call upon staff-captain Yevgeney Ivanovitch Apuhtin!" A dead silence
followed, and then a weak old voice was heard: "Declined!"

"We call upon the privy councilor Pyotr Petrovitch Bol," the voice began
again.

"Declined!" a high boyish voice replied.

Again it began, and again "Declined." And so it went on for about an
hour. Levin, with his elbows on the balustrade, looked and listened. At
first he wondered and wanted to know what it meant; then feeling sure
that he could not make it out he began to be bored. Then recalling all
the excitement and vindictiveness he had seen on all the faces, he felt
sad; he made up his mind to go, and went downstairs. As he passed
through the entry to the galleries he met a dejected high school boy
walking up and down with tired-looking eyes. On the stairs he met a
couple—a lady running quickly on her high heels and the jaunty deputy
prosecutor.

"I told you you weren’t late," the deputy prosecutor was saying at the
moment when Levin moved aside to let the lady pass.

Levin was on the stairs to the way out, and was just feeling in his
waistcoat pocket for the number of his overcoat, when the secretary
overtook him.

"This way, please, Konstantin Dmitrievitch; they are voting."

The candidate who was being voted on was Nevyedovsky, who had so stoutly
denied all idea of standing. Levin went up to the door of the room; it
was locked. The secretary knocked, the door opened, and Levin was met by
two red-faced gentlemen, who darted out.

"I can’t stand any more of it," said one red-faced gentleman.

After them the face of the marshal of the province was poked out. His
face was dreadful-looking from exhaustion and dismay.

