At the moment when she had moved away to the big clock to compare it
with her watch, someone drove up. Glancing out of the window, she saw
his carriage. But no one came upstairs, and voices could be heard below.
It was the messenger who had come back in the carriage. She went down to
him.

"We didn’t catch the count. The count had driven off on the lower city
road."

"What do you say? What!..." she said to the rosy, good-humored Mihail,
as he handed her back her note.

"Why, then, he has never received it!" she thought.

"Go with this note to Countess Vronskaya’s place, you know? and bring an
answer back immediately," she said to the messenger.

"And I, what am I going to do?" she thought. "Yes, I’m going to Dolly’s,
that’s true or else I shall go out of my mind. Yes, and I can telegraph,
too." And she wrote a telegram. "I absolutely must talk to you; come at
once." After sending off the telegram, she went to dress. When she was
dressed and in her hat, she glanced again into the eyes of the plump,
comfortable-looking Annushka. There was unmistakable sympathy in those
good-natured little gray eyes.

"Annushka, dear, what am I to do?" said Anna, sobbing and sinking
helplessly into a chair.

"Why fret yourself so, Anna Arkadyevna? Why, there’s nothing out of the
way. You drive out a little, and it’ll cheer you up," said the maid.

"Yes, I’m going," said Anna, rousing herself and getting up. "And if
there’s a telegram while I’m away, send it on to Darya Alexandrovna’s
... but no, I shall be back myself."

"Yes, I mustn’t think, I must do something, drive somewhere, and most of
all, get out of this house," she said, feeling with terror the strange
turmoil going on in her own heart, and she made haste to go out and get
into the carriage.

"Where to?" asked Pyotr before getting onto the box.

"To Znamenka, the Oblonskys’."



Chapter 


It was bright and sunny. A fine rain had been falling all the morning,
and now it had not long cleared up. The iron roofs, the flags of the
roads, the flints of the pavements, the wheels and leather, the brass
and the tinplate of the carriages—all glistened brightly in the May
sunshine. It was three o’clock, and the very liveliest time in the
streets.

As she sat in a corner of the comfortable carriage, that hardly swayed
on its supple springs, while the grays trotted swiftly, in the midst of
the unceasing rattle of wheels and the changing impressions in the pure
air, Anna ran over the events of the last days, and she saw her position
quite differently from how it had seemed at home. Now the thought of
death seemed no longer so terrible and so clear to her, and death itself
no longer seemed so inevitable. Now she blamed herself for the
humiliation to which she had lowered herself. "I entreat him to forgive
me. I have given in to him. I have owned myself in fault. What for?
Can’t I live without him?" And leaving unanswered the question how she
was going to live without him, she fell to reading the signs on the
shops. "Office and warehouse. Dental surgeon. Yes, I’ll tell Dolly all
about it. She doesn’t like Vronsky. I shall be sick and ashamed, but
I’ll tell her. She loves me, and I’ll follow her advice. I won’t give in
to him; I won’t let him train me as he pleases. Filippov, bun shop. They
say they send their dough to Petersburg. The Moscow water is so good for
it. Ah, the springs at Mitishtchen, and the pancakes!"

And she remembered how, long, long ago, when she was a girl of
seventeen, she had gone with her aunt to Troitsa. "Riding, too. Was that
really me, with red hands? How much that seemed to me then splendid and
out of reach has become worthless, while what I had then has gone out of
my reach forever! Could I ever have believed then that I could come to
such humiliation? How conceited and self-satisfied he will be when he
gets my note! But I will show him.... How horrid that paint smells! Why
is it they’re always painting and building? _Modes et robes,_" she read.
A man bowed to her. It was Annushka’s husband. "Our parasites"; she
remembered how Vronsky had said that. "Our? Why our? What’s so awful is
that one can’t tear up the past by its roots. One can’t tear it out, but
one can hide one’s memory of it. And I’ll hide it." And then she thought
of her past with Alexey Alexandrovitch, of how she had blotted the
memory of it out of her life. "Dolly will think I’m leaving my second
husband, and so I certainly must be in the wrong. As if I cared to be
right! I can’t help it!" she said, and she wanted to cry. But at once
she fell to wondering what those two girls could be smiling about.
"Love, most likely. They don’t know how dreary it is, how low.... The
boulevard and the children. Three boys running, playing at horses.
Seryozha! And I’m losing everything and not getting him back. Yes, I’m
losing everything, if he doesn’t return. Perhaps he was late for the
train and has come back by now. Longing for humiliation again!" she said
to herself. "No, I’ll go to Dolly, and say straight out to her, I’m
unhappy, I deserve this, I’m to blame, but still I’m unhappy, help me.
These horses, this carriage—how loathsome I am to myself in this
carriage—all his; but I won’t see them again."

Thinking over the words in which she would tell Dolly, and mentally
working her heart up to great bitterness, Anna went upstairs.

"Is there anyone with her?" she asked in the hall.

"Katerina Alexandrovna Levin," answered the footman.

"Kitty! Kitty, whom Vronsky was in love with!" thought Anna, "the girl
he thinks of with love. He’s sorry he didn’t marry her. But me he thinks
of with hatred, and is sorry he had anything to do with me."

The sisters were having a consultation about nursing when Anna called.
Dolly went down alone to see the visitor who had interrupted their
conversation.

"Well, so you’ve not gone away yet? I meant to have come to you," she
said; "I had a letter from Stiva today."

"We had a telegram too," answered Anna, looking round for Kitty.

"He writes that he can’t make out quite what Alexey Alexandrovitch
wants, but he won’t go away without a decisive answer."

"I thought you had someone with you. Can I see the letter?"

"Yes; Kitty," said Dolly, embarrassed. "She stayed in the nursery. She
has been very ill."

"So I heard. May I see the letter?"

"I’ll get it directly. But he doesn’t refuse; on the contrary, Stiva has
hopes," said Dolly, stopping in the doorway.

"I haven’t, and indeed I don’t wish it," said Anna.

"What’s this? Does Kitty consider it degrading to meet me?" thought Anna
when she was alone. "Perhaps she’s right, too. But it’s not for her, the
girl who was in love with Vronsky, it’s not for her to show me that,
even if it is true. I know that in my position I can’t be received by
any decent woman. I knew that from the first moment I sacrificed
everything to him. And this is my reward! Oh, how I hate him! And what
did I come here for? I’m worse here, more miserable." She heard from the
next room the sisters’ voices in consultation. "And what am I going to
say to Dolly now? Amuse Kitty by the sight of my wretchedness, submit to
her patronizing? No; and besides, Dolly wouldn’t understand. And it
would be no good my telling her. It would only be interesting to see
Kitty, to show her how I despise everyone and everything, how nothing
matters to me now."

