master. He was coming along with the face she knew so well, though the
eyes were always terrible to her. He stumbled over the stump as he came,
and moved, as she thought, extraordinarily slowly. She thought he came
slowly, but he was running.

Noticing Laska’s special attitude as she crouched on the ground, as it
were, scratching big prints with her hind paws, and with her mouth
slightly open, Levin knew she was pointing at grouse, and with an inward
prayer for luck, especially with the first bird, he ran up to her.
Coming quite close up to her, he could from his height look beyond her,
and he saw with his eyes what she was seeing with her nose. In a space
between two little thickets, at a couple of yards’ distance, he could
see a grouse. Turning its head, it was listening. Then lightly preening
and folding its wings, it disappeared round a corner with a clumsy wag
of its tail.

"Fetch it, fetch it!" shouted Levin, giving Laska a shove from behind.

"But I can’t go," thought Laska. "Where am I to go? From here I feel
them, but if I move forward I shall know nothing of where they are or
who they are." But then he shoved her with his knee, and in an excited
whisper said, "Fetch it, Laska."

"Well, if that’s what he wishes, I’ll do it, but I can’t answer for
myself now," she thought, and darted forward as fast as her legs would
carry her between the thick bushes. She scented nothing now; she could
only see and hear, without understanding anything.

Ten paces from her former place a grouse rose with a guttural cry and
the peculiar round sound of its wings. And immediately after the shot it
splashed heavily with its white breast on the wet mire. Another bird did
not linger, but rose behind Levin without the dog. When Levin turned
towards it, it was already some way off. But his shot caught it. Flying
twenty paces further, the second grouse rose upwards, and whirling round
like a ball, dropped heavily on a dry place.

"Come, this is going to be some good!" thought Levin, packing the warm
and fat grouse into his game bag. "Eh, Laska, will it be good?"

When Levin, after loading his gun, moved on, the sun had fully risen,
though unseen behind the storm-clouds. The moon had lost all of its
luster, and was like a white cloud in the sky. Not a single star could
be seen. The sedge, silvery with dew before, now shone like gold. The
stagnant pools were all like amber. The blue of the grass had changed to
yellow-green. The marsh birds twittered and swarmed about the brook and
upon the bushes that glittered with dew and cast long shadows. A hawk
woke up and settled on a haycock, turning its head from side to side and
looking discontentedly at the marsh. Crows were flying about the field,
and a bare-legged boy was driving the horses to an old man, who had got
up from under his long coat and was combing his hair. The smoke from the
gun was white as milk over the green of the grass.

One of the boys ran up to Levin.

"Uncle, there were ducks here yesterday!" he shouted to him, and he
walked a little way off behind him.

And Levin was doubly pleased, in sight of the boy, who expressed his
approval, at killing three snipe, one after another, straight off.



Chapter 


The sportsman’s saying, that if the first beast or the first bird is not
missed, the day will be lucky, turned out correct.

At ten o’clock Levin, weary, hungry, and happy after a tramp of twenty
miles, returned to his night’s lodging with nineteen head of fine game
and one duck, which he tied to his belt, as it would not go into the
game bag. His companions had long been awake, and had had time to get
hungry and have breakfast.

"Wait a bit, wait a bit, I know there are nineteen," said Levin,
counting a second time over the grouse and snipe, that looked so much
less important now, bent and dry and bloodstained, with heads crooked
aside, than they did when they were flying.

The number was verified, and Stepan Arkadyevitch’s envy pleased Levin.
He was pleased too on returning to find the man sent by Kitty with a
note was already there.

"I am perfectly well and happy. If you were uneasy about me, you can
feel easier than ever. I’ve a new bodyguard, Marya Vlasyevna,"—this was
the midwife, a new and important personage in Levin’s domestic life.
"She has come to have a look at me. She found me perfectly well, and we
have kept her till you are back. All are happy and well, and please,
don’t be in a hurry to come back, but, if the sport is good, stay
another day."

These two pleasures, his lucky shooting and the letter from his wife,
were so great that two slightly disagreeable incidents passed lightly
over Levin. One was that the chestnut trace horse, who had been
unmistakably overworked on the previous day, was off his feed and out of
sorts. The coachman said he was "Overdriven yesterday, Konstantin
Dmitrievitch. Yes, indeed! driven ten miles with no sense!"

The other unpleasant incident, which for the first minute destroyed his
good humor, though later he laughed at it a great deal, was to find that
of all the provisions Kitty had provided in such abundance that one
would have thought there was enough for a week, nothing was left. On his
way back, tired and hungry from shooting, Levin had so distinct a vision
of meat-pies that as he approached the hut he seemed to smell and taste
them, as Laska had smelt the game, and he immediately told Philip to
give him some. It appeared that there were no pies left, nor even any
chicken.

"Well, this fellow’s appetite!" said Stepan Arkadyevitch, laughing and
pointing at Vassenka Veslovsky. "I never suffer from loss of appetite,
but he’s really marvelous!..."

"Well, it can’t be helped," said Levin, looking gloomily at Veslovsky.
"Well, Philip, give me some beef, then."

"The beef’s been eaten, and the bones given to the dogs," answered
Philip.

Levin was so hurt that he said, in a tone of vexation, "You might have
left me something!" and he felt ready to cry.

"Then put away the game," he said in a shaking voice to Philip, trying
not to look at Vassenka, "and cover them with some nettles. And you
might at least ask for some milk for me."

But when he had drunk some milk, he felt ashamed immediately at having
shown his annoyance to a stranger, and he began to laugh at his hungry
mortification.

In the evening they went shooting again, and Veslovsky had several
successful shots, and in the night they drove home.

Their homeward journey was as lively as their drive out had been.
Veslovsky sang songs and related with enjoyment his adventures with the
peasants, who had regaled him with vodka, and said to him, "Excuse our
homely ways," and his night’s adventures with kiss-in-the-ring and the
servant-girl and the peasant, who had asked him was he married, and on
learning that he was not, said to him, "Well, mind you don’t run after
other men’s wives—you’d better get one of your own." These words had
particularly amused Veslovsky.

"Altogether, I’ve enjoyed our outing awfully. And you, Levin?"

"I have, very much," Levin said quite sincerely. It was particularly
delightful to him to have got rid of the hostility he had been feeling
towards Vassenka Veslovsky at home, and to feel instead the most
friendly disposition to him.



