sitting in a little elbow chair at the table, having her dinner of
broth, which she was spilling all over her little chest. The baby was
being fed, and the Russian nursery maid was evidently sharing her meal.
Neither the wet-nurse nor the head nurse were there; they were in the
next room, from which came the sound of their conversation in the queer
French which was their only means of communication.

Hearing Anna’s voice, a smart, tall, English nurse with a disagreeable
face and a dissolute expression walked in at the door, hurriedly shaking
her fair curls, and immediately began to defend herself though Anna had
not found fault with her. At every word Anna said, the English nurse
said hurriedly several times, "Yes, my lady."

The rosy baby with her black eyebrows and hair, her sturdy red little
body with tight goose-flesh skin, delighted Darya Alexandrovna in spite
of the cross expression with which she stared at the stranger. She
positively envied the baby’s healthy appearance. She was delighted, too,
at the baby’s crawling. Not one of her own children had crawled like
that. When the baby was put on the carpet and its little dress tucked up
behind, it was wonderfully charming. Looking round like some little wild
animal at the grown-up big people with her bright black eyes, she
smiled, unmistakably pleased at their admiring her, and holding her legs
sideways, she pressed vigorously on her arms, and rapidly drew her whole
back up after, and then made another step forward with her little arms.

But the whole atmosphere of the nursery, and especially the English
nurse, Darya Alexandrovna did not like at all. It was only on the
supposition that no good nurse would have entered so irregular a
household as Anna’s that Darya Alexandrovna could explain to herself how
Anna with her insight into people could take such an unprepossessing,
disreputable-looking woman as nurse to her child.

Besides, from a few words that were dropped, Darya Alexandrovna saw at
once that Anna, the two nurses, and the child had no common existence,
and that the mother’s visit was something exceptional. Anna wanted to
get the baby her plaything, and could not find it.

Most amazing of all was the fact that on being asked how many teeth the
baby had, Anna answered wrong, and knew nothing about the two last
teeth.

"I sometimes feel sorry I’m so superfluous here," said Anna, going out
of the nursery and holding up her skirt so as to escape the plaything
standing in the doorway. "It was very different with my first child."

"I expected it to be the other way," said Darya Alexandrovna shyly.

"Oh, no! By the way, do you know I saw Seryozha?" said Anna, screwing up
her eyes, as though looking at something far away. "But we’ll talk about
that later. You wouldn’t believe it, I’m like a hungry beggar woman when
a full dinner is set before her, and she does not know what to begin on
first. The dinner is you, and the talks I have before me with you, which
I could never have with anyone else; and I don’t know which subject to
begin upon first. _Mais je ne vous ferai grace de rien_. I must have
everything out with you."

"Oh, I ought to give you a sketch of the company you will meet with us,"
she went on. "I’ll begin with the ladies. Princess Varvara—you know her,
and I know your opinion and Stiva’s about her. Stiva says the whole aim
of her existence is to prove her superiority over Auntie Katerina
Pavlovna: that’s all true; but she’s a good-natured woman, and I am so
grateful to her. In Petersburg there was a moment when a chaperon was
absolutely essential for me. Then she turned up. But really she is
good-natured. She did a great deal to alleviate my position. I see you
don’t understand all the difficulty of my position ... there in
Petersburg," she added. "Here I’m perfectly at ease and happy. Well, of
that later on, though. Then Sviazhsky—he’s the marshal of the district,
and he’s a very good sort of a man, but he wants to get something out of
Alexey. You understand, with his property, now that we are settled in
the country, Alexey can exercise great influence. Then there’s
Tushkevitch—you have seen him, you know—Betsy’s admirer. Now he’s been
thrown over and he’s come to see us. As Alexey says, he’s one of those
people who are very pleasant if one accepts them for what they try to
appear to be, _et puis il est comme il faut_, as Princess Varvara says.
Then Veslovsky ... you know him. A very nice boy," she said, and a sly
smile curved her lips. "What’s this wild story about him and the Levins?
Veslovsky told Alexey about it, and we don’t believe it. _Il est très
gentil et naïf_," she said again with the same smile. "Men need
occupation, and Alexey needs a circle, so I value all these people. We
have to have the house lively and gay, so that Alexey may not long for
any novelty. Then you’ll see the steward—a German, a very good fellow,
and he understands his work. Alexey has a very high opinion of him. Then
the doctor, a young man, not quite a Nihilist perhaps, but you know,
eats with his knife ... but a very good doctor. Then the architect....
_Une petite cour!_"



Chapter 


"Here’s Dolly for you, princess, you were so anxious to see her," said
Anna, coming out with Darya Alexandrovna onto the stone terrace where
Princess Varvara was sitting in the shade at an embroidery frame,
working at a cover for Count Alexey Kirillovitch’s easy chair. "She says
she doesn’t want anything before dinner, but please order some lunch for
her, and I’ll go and look for Alexey and bring them all in."

Princess Varvara gave Dolly a cordial and rather patronizing reception,
and began at once explaining to her that she was living with Anna
because she had always cared more for her than her sister Katerina
Pavlovna, the aunt that had brought Anna up, and that now, when every
one had abandoned Anna, she thought it her duty to help her in this most
difficult period of transition.

"Her husband will give her a divorce, and then I shall go back to my
solitude; but now I can be of use, and I am doing my duty, however
difficult it may be for me—not like some other people. And how sweet it
is of you, how right of you to have come! They live like the best of
married couples; it’s for God to judge them, not for us. And didn’t
Biryuzovsky and Madame Avenieva ... and Sam Nikandrov, and Vassiliev and
Madame Mamonova, and Liza Neptunova... Did no one say anything about
them? And it has ended by their being received by everyone. And then,
_c’est un intérieur si joli, si comme il faut. Tout-à-fait à l’anglaise.
On se réunit le matin au breakfast, et puis on se sépare._ Everyone does
as he pleases till dinnertime. Dinner at seven o’clock. Stiva did very
rightly to send you. He needs their support. You know that through his
mother and brother he can do anything. And then they do so much good. He
didn’t tell you about his hospital? _Ce sera admirable_—everything from
Paris."

Their conversation was interrupted by Anna, who had found the men of the
party in the billiard room, and returned with them to the terrace. There
was still a long time before the dinner-hour, it was exquisite weather,
and so several different methods of spending the next two hours were
proposed. There were very many methods of passing the time at
Vozdvizhenskoe, and these were all unlike those in use at Pokrovskoe.

"_Une partie de lawn-tennis,_" Veslovsky proposed, with his handsome
smile. "We’ll be partners again, Anna Arkadyevna."

"No, it’s too hot; better stroll about the garden and have a row in the
boat, show Darya Alexandrovna the river banks." Vronsky proposed.

"I agree to anything," said Sviazhsky.

"I imagine that what Dolly would like best would be a stroll—wouldn’t
you? And then the boat, perhaps," said Anna.

So it was decided. Veslovsky and Tushkevitch went off to the bathing
place, promising to get the boat ready and to wait there for them.

They walked along the path in two couples, Anna with Sviazhsky, and
Dolly with Vronsky. Dolly was a little embarrassed and anxious in the
new surroundings in which she found herself. Abstractly, theoretically,
she did not merely justify, she positively approved of Anna’s conduct.
As is indeed not unfrequent with women of unimpeachable virtue, weary of
the monotony of respectable existence, at a distance she not only
excused illicit love, she positively envied it. Besides, she loved Anna
with all her heart. But seeing Anna in actual life among these
