who had given her his arm, gathering up the bouquets that were flying
awkwardly over the footlights. Then she went up to a gentleman with
glossy pomaded hair parted down the center, who was stretching across
the footlights holding out something to her, and all the public in the
stalls as well as in the boxes was in excitement, craning forward,
shouting and clapping. The conductor in his high chair assisted in
passing the offering, and straightened his white tie. Vronsky walked
into the middle of the stalls, and, standing still, began looking about
him. That day less than ever was his attention turned upon the familiar,
habitual surroundings, the stage, the noise, all the familiar,
uninteresting, particolored herd of spectators in the packed theater.

There were, as always, the same ladies of some sort with officers of
some sort in the back of the boxes; the same gaily dressed women—God
knows who—and uniforms and black coats; the same dirty crowd in the
upper gallery; and among the crowd, in the boxes and in the front rows,
were some forty of the _real_ people. And to those oases Vronsky at once
directed his attention, and with them he entered at once into relation.

The act was over when he went in, and so he did not go straight to his
brother’s box, but going up to the first row of stalls stopped at the
footlights with Serpuhovskoy, who, standing with one knee raised and his
heel on the footlights, caught sight of him in the distance and beckoned
to him, smiling.

Vronsky had not yet seen Anna. He purposely avoided looking in her
direction. But he knew by the direction of people’s eyes where she was.
He looked round discreetly, but he was not seeking her; expecting the
worst, his eyes sought for Alexey Alexandrovitch. To his relief Alexey
Alexandrovitch was not in the theater that evening.

"How little of the military man there is left in you!" Serpuhovskoy was
saying to him. "A diplomat, an artist, something of that sort, one would
say."

"Yes, it was like going back home when I put on a black coat," answered
Vronsky, smiling and slowly taking out his opera glass.

"Well, I’ll own I envy you there. When I come back from abroad and put
on this," he touched his epaulets, "I regret my freedom."

Serpuhovskoy had long given up all hope of Vronsky’s career, but he
liked him as before, and was now particularly cordial to him.

"What a pity you were not in time for the first act!"

Vronsky, listening with one ear, moved his opera glass from the stalls
and scanned the boxes. Near a lady in a turban and a bald old man, who
seemed to wave angrily in the moving opera glass, Vronsky suddenly
caught sight of Anna’s head, proud, strikingly beautiful, and smiling in
the frame of lace. She was in the fifth box, twenty paces from him. She
was sitting in front, and slightly turning, was saying something to
Yashvin. The setting of her head on her handsome, broad shoulders, and
the restrained excitement and brilliance of her eyes and her whole face
reminded him of her just as he had seen her at the ball in Moscow. But
he felt utterly different towards her beauty now. In his feeling for her
now there was no element of mystery, and so her beauty, though it
attracted him even more intensely than before, gave him now a sense of
injury. She was not looking in his direction, but Vronsky felt that she
had seen him already.

When Vronsky turned the opera glass again in that direction, he noticed
that Princess Varvara was particularly red, and kept laughing
unnaturally and looking round at the next box. Anna, folding her fan and
tapping it on the red velvet, was gazing away and did not see, and
obviously did not wish to see, what was taking place in the next box.
Yashvin’s face wore the expression which was common when he was losing
at cards. Scowling, he sucked the left end of his mustache further and
further into his mouth, and cast sidelong glances at the next box.

In that box on the left were the Kartasovs. Vronsky knew them, and knew
that Anna was acquainted with them. Madame Kartasova, a thin little
woman, was standing up in her box, and, her back turned upon Anna, she
was putting on a mantle that her husband was holding for her. Her face
was pale and angry, and she was talking excitedly. Kartasov, a fat, bald
man, was continually looking round at Anna, while he attempted to soothe
his wife. When the wife had gone out, the husband lingered a long while,
and tried to catch Anna’s eye, obviously anxious to bow to her. But
Anna, with unmistakable intention, avoided noticing him, and talked to
Yashvin, whose cropped head was bent down to her. Kartasov went out
without making his salutation, and the box was left empty.

Vronsky could not understand exactly what had passed between the
Kartasovs and Anna, but he saw that something humiliating for Anna had
happened. He knew this both from what he had seen, and most of all from
the face of Anna, who, he could see, was taxing every nerve to carry
through the part she had taken up. And in maintaining this attitude of
external composure she was completely successful. Anyone who did not
know her and her circle, who had not heard all the utterances of the
women expressive of commiseration, indignation, and amazement, that she
should show herself in society, and show herself so conspicuously with
her lace and her beauty, would have admired the serenity and loveliness
of this woman without a suspicion that she was undergoing the sensations
of a man in the stocks.

Knowing that something had happened, but not knowing precisely what,
Vronsky felt a thrill of agonizing anxiety, and hoping to find out
something, he went towards his brother’s box. Purposely choosing the way
round furthest from Anna’s box, he jostled as he came out against the
colonel of his old regiment talking to two acquaintances. Vronsky heard
the name of Madame Karenina, and noticed how the colonel hastened to
address Vronsky loudly by name, with a meaning glance at his companions.

"Ah, Vronsky! When are you coming to the regiment? We can’t let you off
without a supper. You’re one of the old set," said the colonel of his
regiment.

"I can’t stop, awfully sorry, another time," said Vronsky, and he ran
upstairs towards his brother’s box.

The old countess, Vronsky’s mother, with her steel-gray curls, was in
his brother’s box. Varya with the young Princess Sorokina met him in the
corridor.

Leaving the Princess Sorokina with her mother, Varya held out her hand
to her brother-in-law, and began immediately to speak of what interested
him. She was more excited than he had ever seen her.

"I think it’s mean and hateful, and Madame Kartasova had no right to do
it. Madame Karenina..." she began.

"But what is it? I don’t know."

"What? you’ve not heard?"

"You know I should be the last person to hear of it."

"There isn’t a more spiteful creature than that Madame Kartasova!"

"But what did she do?"

"My husband told me.... She has insulted Madame Karenina. Her husband
began talking to her across the box, and Madame Kartasova made a scene.
She said something aloud, he says, something insulting, and went away."

"Count, your maman is asking for you," said the young Princess Sorokina,
peeping out of the door of the box.

"I’ve been expecting you all the while," said his mother, smiling
sarcastically. "You were nowhere to be seen."

Her son saw that she could not suppress a smile of delight.

"Good evening, maman. I have come to you," he said coldly.

"Why aren’t you going to _faire la cour à Madame Karenina?_" she went
on, when Princess Sorokina had moved away. "_Elle fait sensation. On
oublie la Patti pour elle_."

"Maman, I have asked you not to say anything to me of that," he
