She appeared not to understand the motive of his words.

"Oh, of course, there’s no reason whatever," he said, frowning.

"That’s just what I say," she said, willfully refusing to see the irony
of his tone, and quietly turning back her long, perfumed glove.

"Anna, for God’s sake! what is the matter with you?" he said, appealing
to her exactly as once her husband had done.

"I don’t understand what you are asking."

"You know that it’s out of the question to go."

"Why so? I’m not going alone. Princess Varvara has gone to dress, she is
going with me."

He shrugged his shoulders with an air of perplexity and despair.

"But do you mean to say you don’t know?..." he began.

"But I don’t care to know!" she almost shrieked. "I don’t care to. Do I
regret what I have done? No, no, no! If it were all to do again from the
beginning, it would be the same. For us, for you and for me, there is
only one thing that matters, whether we love each other. Other people we
need not consider. Why are we living here apart and not seeing each
other? Why can’t I go? I love you, and I don’t care for anything," she
said in Russian, glancing at him with a peculiar gleam in her eyes that
he could not understand. "If you have not changed to me, why don’t you
look at me?"

He looked at her. He saw all the beauty of her face and full dress,
always so becoming to her. But now her beauty and elegance were just
what irritated him.

"My feeling cannot change, you know, but I beg you, I entreat you," he
said again in French, with a note of tender supplication in his voice,
but with coldness in his eyes.

She did not hear his words, but she saw the coldness of his eyes, and
answered with irritation:

"And I beg you to explain why I should not go."

"Because it might cause you..." he hesitated.

"I don’t understand. Yashvin _n’est pas compromettant_, and Princess
Varvara is no worse than others. Oh, here she is!"



Chapter 


Vronsky for the first time experienced a feeling of anger against Anna,
almost a hatred for her willfully refusing to understand her own
position. This feeling was aggravated by his being unable to tell her
plainly the cause of his anger. If he had told her directly what he was
thinking, he would have said:

"In that dress, with a princess only too well known to everyone, to show
yourself at the theater is equivalent not merely to acknowledging your
position as a fallen woman, but is flinging down a challenge to society,
that is to say, cutting yourself off from it forever."

He could not say that to her. "But how can she fail to see it, and what
is going on in her?" he said to himself. He felt at the same time that
his respect for her was diminished while his sense of her beauty was
intensified.

He went back scowling to his rooms, and sitting down beside Yashvin,
who, with his long legs stretched out on a chair, was drinking brandy
and seltzer water, he ordered a glass of the same for himself.

"You were talking of Lankovsky’s Powerful. That’s a fine horse, and I
would advise you to buy him," said Yashvin, glancing at his comrade’s
gloomy face. "His hind-quarters aren’t quite first-rate, but the legs
and head—one couldn’t wish for anything better."

"I think I will take him," answered Vronsky.

Their conversation about horses interested him, but he did not for an
instant forget Anna, and could not help listening to the sound of steps
in the corridor and looking at the clock on the chimney piece.

"Anna Arkadyevna gave orders to announce that she has gone to the
theater."

Yashvin, tipping another glass of brandy into the bubbling water, drank
it and got up, buttoning his coat.

"Well, let’s go," he said, faintly smiling under his mustache, and
showing by this smile that he knew the cause of Vronsky’s gloominess,
and did not attach any significance to it.

"I’m not going," Vronsky answered gloomily.

"Well, I must, I promised to. Good-bye, then. If you do, come to the
stalls; you can take Kruzin’s stall," added Yashvin as he went out.

"No, I’m busy."

"A wife is a care, but it’s worse when she’s not a wife," thought
Yashvin, as he walked out of the hotel.

Vronsky, left alone, got up from his chair and began pacing up and down
the room.

"And what’s today? The fourth night.... Yegor and his wife are there,
and my mother, most likely. Of course all Petersburg’s there. Now she’s
gone in, taken off her cloak and come into the light. Tushkevitch,
Yashvin, Princess Varvara," he pictured them to himself.... "What about
me? Either that I’m frightened or have given up to Tushkevitch the right
to protect her? From every point of view—stupid, stupid!... And why is
she putting me in such a position?" he said with a gesture of despair.

With that gesture he knocked against the table, on which there was
standing the seltzer water and the decanter of brandy, and almost upset
it. He tried to catch it, let it slip, and angrily kicked the table over
and rang.

"If you care to be in my service," he said to the valet who came in,
"you had better remember your duties. This shouldn’t be here. You ought
to have cleared away."

The valet, conscious of his own innocence, would have defended himself,
but glancing at his master, he saw from his face that the only thing to
do was to be silent, and hurriedly threading his way in and out, dropped
down on the carpet and began gathering up the whole and broken glasses
and bottles.

"That’s not your duty; send the waiter to clear away, and get my dress
coat out."

Vronsky went into the theater at half-past eight. The performance was in
full swing. The little old box-keeper, recognizing Vronsky as he helped
him off with his fur coat, called him "Your Excellency," and suggested
he should not take a number but should simply call Fyodor. In the
brightly lighted corridor there was no one but the box-opener and two
attendants with fur cloaks on their arms listening at the doors. Through
the closed doors came the sounds of the discreet _staccato_
accompaniment of the orchestra, and a single female voice rendering
distinctly a musical phrase. The door opened to let the box-opener slip
through, and the phrase drawing to the end reached Vronsky’s hearing
clearly. But the doors were closed again at once, and Vronsky did not
hear the end of the phrase and the cadence of the accompaniment, though
he knew from the thunder of applause that it was over. When he entered
the hall, brilliantly lighted with chandeliers and gas jets, the noise
was still going on. On the stage the singer, bowing and smiling, with
bare shoulders flashing with diamonds, was, with the help of the tenor
