"Yes, that may all be very true and clever.... Lie down, Krak!" Stepan
Arkadyevitch called to his dog, who was scratching and turning over all
the hay. He was obviously convinced of the correctness of his position,
and so talked serenely and without haste. "But you have not drawn the
line between honest and dishonest work. That I receive a bigger salary
than my chief clerk, though he knows more about the work than I
do—that’s dishonest, I suppose?"

"I can’t say."

"Well, but I can tell you: your receiving some five thousand, let’s say,
for your work on the land, while our host, the peasant here, however
hard he works, can never get more than fifty roubles, is just as
dishonest as my earning more than my chief clerk, and Malthus getting
more than a station-master. No, quite the contrary; I see that society
takes up a sort of antagonistic attitude to these people, which is
utterly baseless, and I fancy there’s envy at the bottom of it...."

"No, that’s unfair," said Veslovsky; "how could envy come in? There is
something not nice about that sort of business."

"You say," Levin went on, "that it’s unjust for me to receive five
thousand, while the peasant has fifty; that’s true. It is unfair, and I
feel it, but..."

"It really is. Why is it we spend our time riding, drinking, shooting,
doing nothing, while they are forever at work?" said Vassenka Veslovsky,
obviously for the first time in his life reflecting on the question, and
consequently considering it with perfect sincerity.

"Yes, you feel it, but you don’t give him your property," said Stepan
Arkadyevitch, intentionally, as it seemed, provoking Levin.

There had arisen of late something like a secret antagonism between the
two brothers-in-law; as though, since they had married sisters, a kind
of rivalry had sprung up between them as to which was ordering his life
best, and now this hostility showed itself in the conversation, as it
began to take a personal note.

"I don’t give it away, because no one demands that from me, and if I
wanted to, I could not give it away," answered Levin, "and have no one
to give it to."

"Give it to this peasant, he would not refuse it."

"Yes, but how am I to give it up? Am I to go to him and make a deed of
conveyance?"

"I don’t know; but if you are convinced that you have no right..."

"I’m not at all convinced. On the contrary, I feel I have no right to
give it up, that I have duties both to the land and to my family."

"No, excuse me, but if you consider this inequality is unjust, why is it
you don’t act accordingly?..."

"Well, I do act negatively on that idea, so far as not trying to
increase the difference of position existing between him and me."

"No, excuse me, that’s a paradox."

"Yes, there’s something of a sophistry about that," Veslovsky agreed.
"Ah! our host; so you’re not asleep yet?" he said to the peasant who
came into the barn, opening the creaking door. "How is it you’re not
asleep?"

"No, how’s one to sleep! I thought our gentlemen would be asleep, but I
heard them chattering. I want to get a hook from here. She won’t bite?"
he added, stepping cautiously with his bare feet.

"And where are you going to sleep?"

"We are going out for the night with the beasts."

"Ah, what a night!" said Veslovsky, looking out at the edge of the hut
and the unharnessed wagonette that could be seen in the faint light of
the evening glow in the great frame of the open doors. "But listen,
there are women’s voices singing, and, on my word, not badly too. Who’s
that singing, my friend?"

"That’s the maids from hard by here."

"Let’s go, let’s have a walk! We shan’t go to sleep, you know. Oblonsky,
come along!"

"If one could only do both, lie here and go," answered Oblonsky,
stretching. "It’s capital lying here."

"Well, I shall go by myself," said Veslovsky, getting up eagerly, and
putting on his shoes and stockings. "Good-bye, gentlemen. If it’s fun,
I’ll fetch you. You’ve treated me to some good sport, and I won’t forget
you."

"He really is a capital fellow, isn’t he?" said Stepan Arkadyevitch,
when Veslovsky had gone out and the peasant had closed the door after
him.

"Yes, capital," answered Levin, still thinking of the subject of their
conversation just before. It seemed to him that he had clearly expressed
his thoughts and feelings to the best of his capacity, and yet both of
them, straightforward men and not fools, had said with one voice that he
was comforting himself with sophistries. This disconcerted him.

"It’s just this, my dear boy. One must do one of two things: either
admit that the existing order of society is just, and then stick up for
one’s rights in it; or acknowledge that you are enjoying unjust
privileges, as I do, and then enjoy them and be satisfied."

"No, if it were unjust, you could not enjoy these advantages and be
satisfied—at least I could not. The great thing for me is to feel that
I’m not to blame."

"What do you say, why not go after all?" said Stepan Arkadyevitch,
evidently weary of the strain of thought. "We shan’t go to sleep, you
know. Come, let’s go!"

Levin did not answer. What they had said in the conversation, that he
acted justly only in a negative sense, absorbed his thoughts. "Can it be
that it’s only possible to be just negatively?" he was asking himself.

"How strong the smell of the fresh hay is, though," said Stepan
Arkadyevitch, getting up. "There’s not a chance of sleeping. Vassenka
has been getting up some fun there. Do you hear the laughing and his
voice? Hadn’t we better go? Come along!"

"No, I’m not coming," answered Levin.

"Surely that’s not a matter of principle too," said Stepan Arkadyevitch,
smiling, as he felt about in the dark for his cap.

"It’s not a matter of principle, but why should I go?"

"But do you know you are preparing trouble for yourself," said Stepan
Arkadyevitch, finding his cap and getting up.

"How so?"

"Do you suppose I don’t see the line you’ve taken up with your wife? I
heard how it’s a question of the greatest consequence, whether or not
you’re to be away for a couple of days’ shooting. That’s all very well
as an idyllic episode, but for your whole life that won’t answer. A man
must be independent; he has his masculine interests. A man has to be
manly," said Oblonsky, opening the door.

"In what way? To go running after servant girls?" said Levin.

"Why not, if it amuses him? _Ça ne tire pas a consequence_. It won’t do
my wife any harm, and it’ll amuse me. The great thing is to respect the
sanctity of the home. There should be nothing in the home. But don’t tie
your own hands."
