country, Dolly surmised that this question of public activity was
connected with some deep private disagreement between Anna and Vronsky.

The dinner, the wine, the decoration of the table were all very good;
but it was all like what Darya Alexandrovna had seen at formal dinners
and balls which of late years had become quite unfamiliar to her; it all
had the same impersonal and constrained character, and so on an ordinary
day and in a little circle of friends it made a disagreeable impression
on her.

After dinner they sat on the terrace, then they proceeded to play lawn
tennis. The players, divided into two parties, stood on opposite sides
of a tightly drawn net with gilt poles on the carefully leveled and
rolled croquet-ground. Darya Alexandrovna made an attempt to play, but
it was a long time before she could understand the game, and by the time
she did understand it, she was so tired that she sat down with Princess
Varvara and simply looked on at the players. Her partner, Tushkevitch,
gave up playing too, but the others kept the game up for a long time.
Sviazhsky and Vronsky both played very well and seriously. They kept a
sharp lookout on the balls served to them, and without haste or getting
in each other’s way, they ran adroitly up to them, waited for the
rebound, and neatly and accurately returned them over the net. Veslovsky
played worse than the others. He was too eager, but he kept the players
lively with his high spirits. His laughter and outcries never paused.
Like the other men of the party, with the ladies’ permission, he took
off his coat, and his solid, comely figure in his white shirt-sleeves,
with his red perspiring face and his impulsive movements, made a picture
that imprinted itself vividly on the memory.

When Darya Alexandrovna lay in bed that night, as soon as she closed her
eyes, she saw Vassenka Veslovsky flying about the croquet ground.

During the game Darya Alexandrovna was not enjoying herself. She did not
like the light tone of raillery that was kept up all the time between
Vassenka Veslovsky and Anna, and the unnaturalness altogether of
grown-up people, all alone without children, playing at a child’s game.
But to avoid breaking up the party and to get through the time somehow,
after a rest she joined the game again, and pretended to be enjoying it.
All that day it seemed to her as though she were acting in a theater
with actors cleverer than she, and that her bad acting was spoiling the
whole performance. She had come with the intention of staying two days,
if all went well. But in the evening, during the game, she made up her
mind that she would go home next day. The maternal cares and worries,
which she had so hated on the way, now, after a day spent without them,
struck her in quite another light, and tempted her back to them.

When, after evening tea and a row by night in the boat, Darya
Alexandrovna went alone to her room, took off her dress, and began
arranging her thin hair for the night, she had a great sense of relief.

It was positively disagreeable to her to think that Anna was coming to
see her immediately. She longed to be alone with her own thoughts.



Chapter 


Dolly was wanting to go to bed when Anna came in to see her, attired for
the night. In the course of the day Anna had several times begun to
speak of matters near her heart, and every time after a few words she
had stopped: "Afterwards, by ourselves, we’ll talk about everything.
I’ve got so much I want to tell you," she said.

Now they were by themselves, and Anna did not know what to talk about.
She sat in the window looking at Dolly, and going over in her own mind
all the stores of intimate talk which had seemed so inexhaustible
beforehand, and she found nothing. At that moment it seemed to her that
everything had been said already.

"Well, what of Kitty?" she said with a heavy sigh, looking penitently at
Dolly. "Tell me the truth, Dolly: isn’t she angry with me?"

"Angry? Oh, no!" said Darya Alexandrovna, smiling.

"But she hates me, despises me?"

"Oh, no! But you know that sort of thing isn’t forgiven."

"Yes, yes," said Anna, turning away and looking out of the open window.
"But I was not to blame. And who is to blame? What’s the meaning of
being to blame? Could it have been otherwise? What do you think? Could
it possibly have happened that you didn’t become the wife of Stiva?"

"Really, I don’t know. But this is what I want you to tell me..."

"Yes, yes, but we’ve not finished about Kitty. Is she happy? He’s a very
nice man, they say."

"He’s much more than very nice. I don’t know a better man."

"Ah, how glad I am! I’m so glad! Much more than very nice," she
repeated.

Dolly smiled.

"But tell me about yourself. We’ve a great deal to talk about. And I’ve
had a talk with..." Dolly did not know what to call him. She felt it
awkward to call him either the count or Alexey Kirillovitch.

"With Alexey," said Anna, "I know what you talked about. But I wanted to
ask you directly what you think of me, of my life?"

"How am I to say like that straight off? I really don’t know."

"No, tell me all the same.... You see my life. But you mustn’t forget
that you’re seeing us in the summer, when you have come to us and we are
not alone.... But we came here early in the spring, lived quite alone,
and shall be alone again, and I desire nothing better. But imagine me
living alone without him, alone, and that will be ... I see by
everything that it will often be repeated, that he will be half the time
away from home," she said, getting up and sitting down close by Dolly.

"Of course," she interrupted Dolly, who would have answered, "of course
I won’t try to keep him by force. I don’t keep him indeed. The races are
just coming, his horses are running, he will go. I’m very glad. But
think of me, fancy my position.... But what’s the use of talking about
it?" She smiled. "Well, what did he talk about with you?"

"He spoke of what I want to speak about of myself, and it’s easy for me
to be his advocate; of whether there is not a possibility ... whether
you could not..." (Darya Alexandrovna hesitated) "correct, improve your
position.... You know how I look at it.... But all the same, if
possible, you should get married...."

"Divorce, you mean?" said Anna. "Do you know, the only woman who came to
see me in Petersburg was Betsy Tverskaya? You know her, of course? _Au
fond, c’est la femme la plus depraveé qui existe._ She had an intrigue
with Tushkevitch, deceiving her husband in the basest way. And she told
me that she did not care to know me so long as my position was
irregular. Don’t imagine I would compare ... I know you, darling. But I
could not help remembering.... Well, so what did he say to you?" she
repeated.

"He said that he was unhappy on your account and his own. Perhaps you
will say that it’s egoism, but what a legitimate and noble egoism. He
wants first of all to legitimize his daughter, and to be your husband,
to have a legal right to you."

"What wife, what slave can be so utterly a slave as I, in my position?"
she put in gloomily.

"The chief thing he desires ... he desires that you should not suffer."

"That’s impossible. Well?"

"Well, and the most legitimate desire—he wishes that your children
should have a name."

"What children?" Anna said, not looking at Dolly, and half closing her
