
"Oh, I agree to everything Arseny thinks beforehand. I’ll go and see
him. By the way, if I do go to the concert, I’ll go with Natalia. Well,
good-bye."

On the steps Levin was stopped by his old servant Kouzma, who had been
with him before his marriage, and now looked after their household in
town.

"Beauty" (that was the left shaft-horse brought up from the country)
"has been badly shod and is quite lame," he said. "What does your honor
wish to be done?"

During the first part of their stay in Moscow, Levin had used his own
horses brought up from the country. He had tried to arrange this part of
their expenses in the best and cheapest way possible; but it appeared
that their own horses came dearer than hired horses, and they still
hired too.

"Send for the veterinary, there may be a bruise."

"And for Katerina Alexandrovna?" asked Kouzma.

Levin was not by now struck as he had been at first by the fact that to
get from one end of Moscow to the other he had to have two powerful
horses put into a heavy carriage, to take the carriage three miles
through the snowy slush and to keep it standing there four hours, paying
five roubles every time.

Now it seemed quite natural.

"Hire a pair for our carriage from the jobmaster," said he.

"Yes, sir."

And so, simply and easily, thanks to the facilities of town life, Levin
settled a question which, in the country, would have called for so much
personal trouble and exertion, and going out onto the steps, he called a
sledge, sat down, and drove to Nikitsky. On the way he thought no more
of money, but mused on the introduction that awaited him to the
Petersburg savant, a writer on sociology, and what he would say to him
about his book.

Only during the first days of his stay in Moscow Levin had been struck
by the expenditure, strange to one living in the country, unproductive
but inevitable, that was expected of him on every side. But by now he
had grown used to it. That had happened to him in this matter which is
said to happen to drunkards—the first glass sticks in the throat, the
second flies down like a hawk, but after the third they’re like tiny
little birds. When Levin had changed his first hundred-rouble note to
pay for liveries for his footmen and hall-porter he could not help
reflecting that these liveries were of no use to anyone—but they were
indubitably necessary, to judge by the amazement of the princess and
Kitty when he suggested that they might do without liveries,—that these
liveries would cost the wages of two laborers for the summer, that is,
would pay for about three hundred working days from Easter to Ash
Wednesday, and each a day of hard work from early morning to late
evening—and that hundred-rouble note did stick in his throat. But the
next note, changed to pay for providing a dinner for their relations,
that cost twenty-eight roubles, though it did excite in Levin the
reflection that twenty-eight roubles meant nine measures of oats, which
men would with groans and sweat have reaped and bound and thrashed and
winnowed and sifted and sown,—this next one he parted with more easily.
And now the notes he changed no longer aroused such reflections, and
they flew off like little birds. Whether the labor devoted to obtaining
the money corresponded to the pleasure given by what was bought with it,
was a consideration he had long ago dismissed. His business calculation
that there was a certain price below which he could not sell certain
grain was forgotten too. The rye, for the price of which he had so long
held out, had been sold for fifty kopecks a measure cheaper than it had
been fetching a month ago. Even the consideration that with such an
expenditure he could not go on living for a year without debt, that even
had no force. Only one thing was essential: to have money in the bank,
without inquiring where it came from, so as to know that one had the
wherewithal to buy meat for tomorrow. And this condition had hitherto
been fulfilled; he had always had the money in the bank. But now the
money in the bank had gone, and he could not quite tell where to get the
next installment. And this it was which, at the moment when Kitty had
mentioned money, had disturbed him; but he had no time to think about
it. He drove off, thinking of Katavasov and the meeting with Metrov that
was before him.



Chapter 


Levin had on this visit to town seen a great deal of his old friend at
the university, Professor Katavasov, whom he had not seen since his
marriage. He liked in Katavasov the clearness and simplicity of his
conception of life. Levin thought that the clearness of Katavasov’s
conception of life was due to the poverty of his nature; Katavasov
thought that the disconnectedness of Levin’s ideas was due to his lack
of intellectual discipline; but Levin enjoyed Katavasov’s clearness, and
Katavasov enjoyed the abundance of Levin’s untrained ideas, and they
liked to meet and to discuss.

Levin had read Katavasov some parts of his book, and he had liked them.
On the previous day Katavasov had met Levin at a public lecture and told
him that the celebrated Metrov, whose article Levin had so much liked,
was in Moscow, that he had been much interested by what Katavasov had
told him about Levin’s work, and that he was coming to see him tomorrow
at eleven, and would be very glad to make Levin’s acquaintance.

"You’re positively a reformed character, I’m glad to see," said
Katavasov, meeting Levin in the little drawing room. "I heard the bell
and thought: Impossible that it can be he at the exact time!... Well,
what do you say to the Montenegrins now? They’re a race of warriors."

"Why, what’s happened?" asked Levin.

Katavasov in a few words told him the last piece of news from the war,
and going into his study, introduced Levin to a short, thick-set man of
pleasant appearance. This was Metrov. The conversation touched for a
brief space on politics and on how recent events were looked at in the
higher spheres in Petersburg. Metrov repeated a saying that had reached
him through a most trustworthy source, reported as having been uttered
on this subject by the Tsar and one of the ministers. Katavasov had
heard also on excellent authority that the Tsar had said something quite
different. Levin tried to imagine circumstances in which both sayings
might have been uttered, and the conversation on that topic dropped.

"Yes, here he’s written almost a book on the natural conditions of the
laborer in relation to the land," said Katavasov; "I’m not a specialist,
but I, as a natural science man, was pleased at his not taking mankind
as something outside biological laws; but, on the contrary, seeing his
dependence on his surroundings, and in that dependence seeking the laws
of his development."

"That’s very interesting," said Metrov.

"What I began precisely was to write a book on agriculture; but studying
the chief instrument of agriculture, the laborer," said Levin,
reddening, "I could not help coming to quite unexpected results."

And Levin began carefully, as it were, feeling his ground, to expound
his views. He knew Metrov had written an article against the generally
accepted theory of political economy, but to what extent he could reckon
on his sympathy with his own new views he did not know and could not
guess from the clever and serene face of the learned man.

"But in what do you see the special characteristics of the Russian
laborer?" said Metrov; "in his biological characteristics, so to speak,
or in the condition in which he is placed?"

Levin saw that there was an idea underlying this question with which he
did not agree. But he went on explaining his own idea that the Russian
laborer has a quite special view of the land, different from that of
other people; and to support this proposition he made haste to add that
in his opinion this attitude of the Russian peasant was due to the
