"But we’ll talk later on," he added. "If we’re going to the bee house,
it’s this way, along this little path," he said, addressing them all.

Going along the narrow path to a little uncut meadow covered on one side
with thick clumps of brilliant heart’s-ease among which stood up here
and there tall, dark green tufts of hellebore, Levin settled his guests
in the dense, cool shade of the young aspens on a bench and some stumps
purposely put there for visitors to the bee house who might be afraid of
the bees, and he went off himself to the hut to get bread, cucumbers,
and fresh honey, to regale them with.

Trying to make his movements as deliberate as possible, and listening to
the bees that buzzed more and more frequently past him, he walked along
the little path to the hut. In the very entry one bee hummed angrily,
caught in his beard, but he carefully extricated it. Going into the
shady outer room, he took down from the wall his veil, that hung on a
peg, and putting it on, and thrusting his hands into his pockets, he
went into the fenced-in bee-garden, where there stood in the midst of a
closely mown space in regular rows, fastened with bast on posts, all the
hives he knew so well, the old stocks, each with its own history, and
along the fences the younger swarms hived that year. In front of the
openings of the hives, it made his eyes giddy to watch the bees and
drones whirling round and round about the same spot, while among them
the working bees flew in and out with spoils or in search of them,
always in the same direction into the wood to the flowering lime trees
and back to the hives.

His ears were filled with the incessant hum in various notes, now the
busy hum of the working bee flying quickly off, then the blaring of the
lazy drone, and the excited buzz of the bees on guard protecting their
property from the enemy and preparing to sting. On the farther side of
the fence the old bee-keeper was shaving a hoop for a tub, and he did
not see Levin. Levin stood still in the midst of the beehives and did
not call him.

He was glad of a chance to be alone to recover from the influence of
ordinary actual life, which had already depressed his happy mood. He
thought that he had already had time to lose his temper with Ivan, to
show coolness to his brother, and to talk flippantly with Katavasov.

"Can it have been only a momentary mood, and will it pass and leave no
trace?" he thought. But the same instant, going back to his mood, he
felt with delight that something new and important had happened to him.
Real life had only for a time overcast the spiritual peace he had found,
but it was still untouched within him.

Just as the bees, whirling round him, now menacing him and distracting
his attention, prevented him from enjoying complete physical peace,
forced him to restrain his movements to avoid them, so had the petty
cares that had swarmed about him from the moment he got into the trap
restricted his spiritual freedom; but that lasted only so long as he was
among them. Just as his bodily strength was still unaffected, in spite
of the bees, so too was the spiritual strength that he had just become
aware of.



Chapter 


"Do you know, Kostya, with whom Sergey Ivanovitch traveled on his way
here?" said Dolly, doling out cucumbers and honey to the children; "with
Vronsky! He’s going to Servia."

"And not alone; he’s taking a squadron out with him at his own expense,"
said Katavasov.

"That’s the right thing for him," said Levin. "Are volunteers still
going out then?" he added, glancing at Sergey Ivanovitch.

Sergey Ivanovitch did not answer. He was carefully with a blunt knife
getting a live bee covered with sticky honey out of a cup full of white
honeycomb.

"I should think so! You should have seen what was going on at the
station yesterday!" said Katavasov, biting with a juicy sound into a
cucumber.

"Well, what is one to make of it? For mercy’s sake, do explain to me,
Sergey Ivanovitch, where are all those volunteers going, whom are they
fighting with?" asked the old prince, unmistakably taking up a
conversation that had sprung up in Levin’s absence.

"With the Turks," Sergey Ivanovitch answered, smiling serenely, as he
extricated the bee, dark with honey and helplessly kicking, and put it
with the knife on a stout aspen leaf.

"But who has declared war on the Turks?—Ivan Ivanovitch Ragozov and
Countess Lidia Ivanovna, assisted by Madame Stahl?"

"No one has declared war, but people sympathize with their neighbors’
sufferings and are eager to help them," said Sergey Ivanovitch.

"But the prince is not speaking of help," said Levin, coming to the
assistance of his father-in-law, "but of war. The prince says that
private persons cannot take part in war without the permission of the
government."

"Kostya, mind, that’s a bee! Really, they’ll sting us!" said Dolly,
waving away a wasp.

"But that’s not a bee, it’s a wasp," said Levin.

"Well now, well, what’s your own theory?" Katavasov said to Levin with a
smile, distinctly challenging him to a discussion. "Why have not private
persons the right to do so?"

"Oh, my theory’s this: war is on one side such a beastly, cruel, and
awful thing, that no one man, not to speak of a Christian, can
individually take upon himself the responsibility of beginning wars;
that can only be done by a government, which is called upon to do this,
and is driven inevitably into war. On the other hand, both political
science and common sense teach us that in matters of state, and
especially in the matter of war, private citizens must forego their
personal individual will."

Sergey Ivanovitch and Katavasov had their replies ready, and both began
speaking at the same time.

"But the point is, my dear fellow, that there may be cases when the
government does not carry out the will of the citizens and then the
public asserts its will," said Katavasov.

But evidently Sergey Ivanovitch did not approve of this answer. His
brows contracted at Katavasov’s words and he said something else.

"You don’t put the matter in its true light. There is no question here
of a declaration of war, but simply the expression of a human Christian
feeling. Our brothers, one with us in religion and in race, are being
massacred. Even supposing they were not our brothers nor
fellow-Christians, but simply children, women, old people, feeling is
aroused and Russians go eagerly to help in stopping these atrocities.
Fancy, if you were going along the street and saw drunken men beating a
woman or a child—I imagine you would not stop to inquire whether war had
been declared on the men, but would throw yourself on them, and protect
the victim."

"But I should not kill them," said Levin.

"Yes, you would kill them."

"I don’t know. If I saw that, I might give way to my impulse of the
moment, but I can’t say beforehand. And such a momentary impulse there
is not, and there cannot be, in the case of the oppression of the
Slavonic peoples."

"Possibly for you there is not; but for others there is," said Sergey
Ivanovitch, frowning with displeasure. "There are traditions still
extant among the people of Slavs of the true faith suffering under the
yoke of the ‘unclean sons of Hagar.’ The people have heard of the
