to put all this into words.

Vronsky at once divined that Golenishtchev was of this class, and
therefore was doubly pleased to see him. And in fact, Golenishtchev’s
manner to Madame Karenina, when he was taken to call on her, was all
that Vronsky could have desired. Obviously without the slightest effort
he steered clear of all subjects which might lead to embarrassment.

He had never met Anna before, and was struck by her beauty, and still
more by the frankness with which she accepted her position. She blushed
when Vronsky brought in Golenishtchev, and he was extremely charmed by
this childish blush overspreading her candid and handsome face. But what
he liked particularly was the way in which at once, as though on purpose
that there might be no misunderstanding with an outsider, she called
Vronsky simply Alexey, and said they were moving into a house they had
just taken, what was here called a palazzo. Golenishtchev liked this
direct and simple attitude to her own position. Looking at Anna’s manner
of simple-hearted, spirited gaiety, and knowing Alexey Alexandrovitch
and Vronsky, Golenishtchev fancied that he understood her perfectly. He
fancied that he understood what she was utterly unable to understand:
how it was that, having made her husband wretched, having abandoned him
and her son and lost her good name, she yet felt full of spirits,
gaiety, and happiness.

"It’s in the guide-book," said Golenishtchev, referring to the palazzo
Vronsky had taken. "There’s a first-rate Tintoretto there. One of his
latest period."

"I tell you what: it’s a lovely day, let’s go and have another look at
it," said Vronsky, addressing Anna.

"I shall be very glad to; I’ll go and put on my hat. Would you say it’s
hot?" she said, stopping short in the doorway and looking inquiringly at
Vronsky. And again a vivid flush overspread her face.

Vronsky saw from her eyes that she did not know on what terms he cared
to be with Golenishtchev, and so was afraid of not behaving as he would
wish.

He looked a long, tender look at her.

"No, not very," he said.

And it seemed to her that she understood everything, most of all, that
he was pleased with her; and smiling to him, she walked with her rapid
step out at the door.

The friends glanced at one another, and a look of hesitation came into
both faces, as though Golenishtchev, unmistakably admiring her, would
have liked to say something about her, and could not find the right
thing to say, while Vronsky desired and dreaded his doing so.

"Well then," Vronsky began to start a conversation of some sort; "so
you’re settled here? You’re still at the same work, then?" he went on,
recalling that he had been told Golenishtchev was writing something.

"Yes, I’m writing the second part of the _Two Elements_," said
Golenishtchev, coloring with pleasure at the question—"that is, to be
exact, I am not writing it yet; I am preparing, collecting materials. It
will be of far wider scope, and will touch on almost all questions. We
in Russia refuse to see that we are the heirs of Byzantium," and he
launched into a long and heated explanation of his views.

Vronsky at the first moment felt embarrassed at not even knowing of the
first part of the _Two Elements_, of which the author spoke as something
well known. But as Golenishtchev began to lay down his opinions and
Vronsky was able to follow them even without knowing the _Two Elements_,
he listened to him with some interest, for Golenishtchev spoke well. But
Vronsky was startled and annoyed by the nervous irascibility with which
Golenishtchev talked of the subject that engrossed him. As he went on
talking, his eyes glittered more and more angrily; he was more and more
hurried in his replies to imaginary opponents, and his face grew more
and more excited and worried. Remembering Golenishtchev, a thin, lively,
good-natured and well-bred boy, always at the head of the class, Vronsky
could not make out the reason of his irritability, and he did not like
it. What he particularly disliked was that Golenishtchev, a man
belonging to a good set, should put himself on a level with some
scribbling fellows, with whom he was irritated and angry. Was it worth
it? Vronsky disliked it, yet he felt that Golenishtchev was unhappy, and
was sorry for him. Unhappiness, almost mental derangement, was visible
on his mobile, rather handsome face, while without even noticing Anna’s
coming in, he went on hurriedly and hotly expressing his views.

When Anna came in in her hat and cape, and her lovely hand rapidly
swinging her parasol, and stood beside him, it was with a feeling of
relief that Vronsky broke away from the plaintive eyes of Golenishtchev
which fastened persistently upon him, and with a fresh rush of love
looked at his charming companion, full of life and happiness.
Golenishtchev recovered himself with an effort, and at first was
dejected and gloomy, but Anna, disposed to feel friendly with everyone
as she was at that time, soon revived his spirits by her direct and
lively manner. After trying various subjects of conversation, she got
him upon painting, of which he talked very well, and she listened to him
attentively. They walked to the house they had taken, and looked over
it.

"I am very glad of one thing," said Anna to Golenishtchev when they were
on their way back, "Alexey will have a capital _atelier_. You must
certainly take that room," she said to Vronsky in Russian, using the
affectionately familiar form as though she saw that Golenishtchev would
become intimate with them in their isolation, and that there was no need
of reserve before him.

"Do you paint?" said Golenishtchev, turning round quickly to Vronsky.

"Yes, I used to study long ago, and now I have begun to do a little,"
said Vronsky, reddening.

"He has great talent," said Anna with a delighted smile. "I’m no judge,
of course. But good judges have said the same."



Chapter 


Anna, in that first period of her emancipation and rapid return to
health, felt herself unpardonably happy and full of the joy of life. The
thought of her husband’s unhappiness did not poison her happiness. On
one side that memory was too awful to be thought of. On the other side
her husband’s unhappiness had given her too much happiness to be
regretted. The memory of all that had happened after her illness: her
reconciliation with her husband, its breakdown, the news of Vronsky’s
wound, his visit, the preparations for divorce, the departure from her
husband’s house, the parting from her son—all that seemed to her like a
delirious dream, from which she had waked up alone with Vronsky abroad.
The thought of the harm caused to her husband aroused in her a feeling
like repulsion, and akin to what a drowning man might feel who has
shaken off another man clinging to him. That man did drown. It was an
evil action, of course, but it was the sole means of escape, and better
not to brood over these fearful facts.

One consolatory reflection upon her conduct had occurred to her at the
first moment of the final rupture, and when now she recalled all the
past, she remembered that one reflection. "I have inevitably made that
man wretched," she thought; "but I don’t want to profit by his misery. I
too am suffering, and shall suffer; I am losing what I prized above
everything—I am losing my good name and my son. I have done wrong, and
so I don’t want happiness, I don’t want a divorce, and shall suffer from
my shame and the separation from my child." But, however sincerely Anna
had meant to suffer, she was not suffering. Shame there was not. With
the tact of which both had such a large share, they had succeeded in
avoiding Russian ladies abroad, and so had never placed themselves in a
false position, and everywhere they had met people who pretended that
they perfectly understood their position, far better indeed than they
did themselves. Separation from the son she loved—even that did not
cause her anguish in these early days. The baby girl—_his_ child—was so
sweet, and had so won Anna’s heart, since she was all that was left her,
that Anna rarely thought of her son.

