he had hardly finished writing when she read them over her arm, and
herself finished and wrote the answer, "Yes."

"You’re playing _secrétaire_?" said the old prince. "But we must really
be getting along if you want to be in time at the theater."

Levin got up and escorted Kitty to the door.

In their conversation everything had been said; it had been said that
she loved him, and that she would tell her father and mother that he
would come tomorrow morning.



Chapter 


When Kitty had gone and Levin was left alone, he felt such uneasiness
without her, and such an impatient longing to get as quickly, as quickly
as possible, to tomorrow morning, when he would see her again and be
plighted to her forever, that he felt afraid, as though of death, of
those fourteen hours that he had to get through without her. It was
essential for him to be with someone to talk to, so as not to be left
alone, to kill time. Stepan Arkadyevitch would have been the companion
most congenial to him, but he was going out, he said, to a _soirée_, in
reality to the ballet. Levin only had time to tell him he was happy, and
that he loved him, and would never, never forget what he had done for
him. The eyes and the smile of Stepan Arkadyevitch showed Levin that he
comprehended that feeling fittingly.

"Oh, so it’s not time to die yet?" said Stepan Arkadyevitch, pressing
Levin’s hand with emotion.

"N-n-no!" said Levin.

Darya Alexandrovna too, as she said good-bye to him, gave him a sort of
congratulation, saying, "How glad I am you have met Kitty again! One
must value old friends." Levin did not like these words of Darya
Alexandrovna’s. She could not understand how lofty and beyond her it all
was, and she ought not to have dared to allude to it. Levin said
good-bye to them, but, not to be left alone, he attached himself to his
brother.

"Where are you going?"

"I’m going to a meeting."

"Well, I’ll come with you. May I?"

"What for? Yes, come along," said Sergey Ivanovitch, smiling. "What is
the matter with you today?"

"With me? Happiness is the matter with me!" said Levin, letting down the
window of the carriage they were driving in. "You don’t mind?—it’s so
stifling. It’s happiness is the matter with me! Why is it you have never
married?"

Sergey Ivanovitch smiled.

"I am very glad, she seems a nice gi..." Sergey Ivanovitch was
beginning.

"Don’t say it! don’t say it!" shouted Levin, clutching at the collar of
his fur coat with both hands, and muffling him up in it. "She’s a nice
girl" were such simple, humble words, so out of harmony with his
feeling.

Sergey Ivanovitch laughed outright a merry laugh, which was rare with
him. "Well, anyway, I may say that I’m very glad of it."

"That you may do tomorrow, tomorrow and nothing more! Nothing, nothing,
silence," said Levin, and muffling him once more in his fur coat, he
added: "I do like you so! Well, is it possible for me to be present at
the meeting?"

"Of course it is."

"What is your discussion about today?" asked Levin, never ceasing
smiling.

They arrived at the meeting. Levin heard the secretary hesitatingly read
the minutes which he obviously did not himself understand; but Levin saw
from this secretary’s face what a good, nice, kind-hearted person he
was. This was evident from his confusion and embarrassment in reading
the minutes. Then the discussion began. They were disputing about the
misappropriation of certain sums and the laying of certain pipes, and
Sergey Ivanovitch was very cutting to two members, and said something at
great length with an air of triumph; and another member, scribbling
something on a bit of paper, began timidly at first, but afterwards
answered him very viciously and delightfully. And then Sviazhsky (he was
there too) said something too, very handsomely and nobly. Levin listened
to them, and saw clearly that these missing sums and these pipes were
not anything real, and that they were not at all angry, but were all the
nicest, kindest people, and everything was as happy and charming as
possible among them. They did no harm to anyone, and were all enjoying
it. What struck Levin was that he could see through them all today, and
from little, almost imperceptible signs knew the soul of each, and saw
distinctly that they were all good at heart. And Levin himself in
particular they were all extremely fond of that day. That was evident
from the way they spoke to him, from the friendly, affectionate way even
those he did not know looked at him.

"Well, did you like it?" Sergey Ivanovitch asked him.

"Very much. I never supposed it was so interesting! Capital! Splendid!"

Sviazhsky went up to Levin and invited him to come round to tea with
him. Levin was utterly at a loss to comprehend or recall what it was he
had disliked in Sviazhsky, what he had failed to find in him. He was a
clever and wonderfully good-hearted man.

"Most delighted," he said, and asked after his wife and sister-in-law.
And from a queer association of ideas, because in his imagination the
idea of Sviazhsky’s sister-in-law was connected with marriage, it
occurred to him that there was no one to whom he could more suitably
speak of his happiness, and he was very glad to go and see them.

Sviazhsky questioned him about his improvements on his estate,
presupposing, as he always did, that there was no possibility of doing
anything not done already in Europe, and now this did not in the least
annoy Levin. On the contrary, he felt that Sviazhsky was right, that the
whole business was of little value, and he saw the wonderful softness
and consideration with which Sviazhsky avoided fully expressing his
correct view. The ladies of the Sviazhsky household were particularly
delightful. It seemed to Levin that they knew all about it already and
sympathized with him, saying nothing merely from delicacy. He stayed
with them one hour, two, three, talking of all sorts of subjects but the
one thing that filled his heart, and did not observe that he was boring
them dreadfully, and that it was long past their bedtime.

Sviazhsky went with him into the hall, yawning and wondering at the
strange humor his friend was in. It was past one o’clock. Levin went
back to his hotel, and was dismayed at the thought that all alone now
with his impatience he had ten hours still left to get through. The
servant, whose turn it was to be up all night, lighted his candles, and
would have gone away, but Levin stopped him. This servant, Yegor, whom
Levin had noticed before, struck him as a very intelligent, excellent,
and, above all, good-hearted man.

"Well, Yegor, it’s hard work not sleeping, isn’t it?"

"One’s got to put up with it! It’s part of our work, you see. In a
gentleman’s house it’s easier; but then here one makes more."

It appeared that Yegor had a family, three boys and a daughter, a
sempstress, whom he wanted to marry to a cashier in a saddler’s shop.

Levin, on hearing this, informed Yegor that, in his opinion, in marriage
the great thing was love, and that with love one would always be happy,
for happiness rests only on oneself. Yegor listened attentively, and
