respectful footmen, unmistakably old house serfs who had stuck to their
master; the stout, good-natured wife in a cap with lace and a Turkish
shawl, petting her pretty grandchild, her daughter’s daughter; the young
son, a sixth form high school boy, coming home from school, and greeting
his father, kissing his big hand; the genuine, cordial words and
gestures of the old man—all this had the day before roused an
instinctive feeling of respect and sympathy in Levin. This old man was a
touching and pathetic figure to Levin now, and he longed to say
something pleasant to him.

"So you’re sure to be our marshal again," he said.

"It’s not likely," said the marshal, looking round with a scared
expression. "I’m worn out, I’m old. If there are men younger and more
deserving than I, let them serve."

And the marshal disappeared through a side door.

The most solemn moment was at hand. They were to proceed immediately to
the election. The leaders of both parties were reckoning white and black
on their fingers.

The discussion upon Flerov had given the new party not only Flerov’s
vote, but had also gained time for them, so that they could send to
fetch three noblemen who had been rendered unable to take part in the
elections by the wiles of the other party. Two noble gentlemen, who had
a weakness for strong drink, had been made drunk by the partisans of
Snetkov, and a third had been robbed of his uniform.

On learning this, the new party had made haste, during the dispute about
Flerov, to send some of their men in a sledge to clothe the stripped
gentleman, and to bring along one of the intoxicated to the meeting.

"I’ve brought one, drenched him with water," said the landowner, who had
gone on this errand, to Sviazhsky. "He’s all right? he’ll do."

"Not too drunk, he won’t fall down?" said Sviazhsky, shaking his head.

"No, he’s first-rate. If only they don’t give him any more here.... I’ve
told the waiter not to give him anything on any account."



Chapter 


The narrow room, in which they were smoking and taking refreshments, was
full of noblemen. The excitement grew more intense, and every face
betrayed some uneasiness. The excitement was specially keen for the
leaders of each party, who knew every detail, and had reckoned up every
vote. They were the generals organizing the approaching battle. The
rest, like the rank and file before an engagement, though they were
getting ready for the fight, sought for other distractions in the
interval. Some were lunching, standing at the bar, or sitting at the
table; others were walking up and down the long room, smoking
cigarettes, and talking with friends whom they had not seen for a long
while.

Levin did not care to eat, and he was not smoking; he did not want to
join his own friends, that is Sergey Ivanovitch, Stepan Arkadyevitch,
Sviazhsky and the rest, because Vronsky in his equerry’s uniform was
standing with them in eager conversation. Levin had seen him already at
the meeting on the previous day, and he had studiously avoided him, not
caring to greet him. He went to the window and sat down, scanning the
groups, and listening to what was being said around him. He felt
depressed, especially because everyone else was, as he saw, eager,
anxious, and interested, and he alone, with an old, toothless little man
with mumbling lips wearing a naval uniform, sitting beside him, had no
interest in it and nothing to do.

"He’s such a blackguard! I have told him so, but it makes no difference.
Only think of it! He couldn’t collect it in three years!" he heard
vigorously uttered by a round-shouldered, short, country gentleman, who
had pomaded hair hanging on his embroidered collar, and new boots
obviously put on for the occasion, with heels that tapped energetically
as he spoke. Casting a displeased glance at Levin, this gentleman
sharply turned his back.

"Yes, it’s a dirty business, there’s no denying," a small gentleman
assented in a high voice.

Next, a whole crowd of country gentlemen, surrounding a stout general,
hurriedly came near Levin. These persons were unmistakably seeking a
place where they could talk without being overheard.

"How dare he say I had his breeches stolen! Pawned them for drink, I
expect. Damn the fellow, prince indeed! He’d better not say it, the
beast!"

"But excuse me! They take their stand on the act," was being said in
another group; "the wife must be registered as noble."

"Oh, damn your acts! I speak from my heart. We’re all gentlemen, aren’t
we? Above suspicion."

"Shall we go on, your excellency, _fine champagne?_"

Another group was following a nobleman, who was shouting something in a
loud voice; it was one of the three intoxicated gentlemen.

"I always advised Marya Semyonovna to let for a fair rent, for she can
never save a profit," he heard a pleasant voice say. The speaker was a
country gentleman with gray whiskers, wearing the regimental uniform of
an old general staff-officer. It was the very landowner Levin had met at
Sviazhsky’s. He knew him at once. The landowner too stared at Levin, and
they exchanged greetings.

"Very glad to see you! To be sure! I remember you very well. Last year
at our district marshal, Nikolay Ivanovitch’s."

"Well, and how is your land doing?" asked Levin.

"Oh, still just the same, always at a loss," the landowner answered with
a resigned smile, but with an expression of serenity and conviction that
so it must be. "And how do you come to be in our province?" he asked.
"Come to take part in our _coup d’état?_" he said, confidently
pronouncing the French words with a bad accent. "All Russia’s
here—gentlemen of the bedchamber, and everything short of the ministry."
He pointed to the imposing figure of Stepan Arkadyevitch in white
trousers and his court uniform, walking by with a general.

"I ought to own that I don’t very well understand the drift of the
provincial elections," said Levin.

The landowner looked at him.

"Why, what is there to understand? There’s no meaning in it at all. It’s
a decaying institution that goes on running only by the force of
inertia. Just look, the very uniforms tell you that it’s an assembly of
justices of the peace, permanent members of the court, and so on, but
not of noblemen."

"Then why do you come?" asked Levin.

"From habit, nothing else. Then, too, one must keep up connections. It’s
a moral obligation of a sort. And then, to tell the truth, there’s one’s
own interests. My son-in-law wants to stand as a permanent member;
they’re not rich people, and he must be brought forward. These
gentlemen, now, what do they come for?" he said, pointing to the
malignant gentleman, who was talking at the high table.

"That’s the new generation of nobility."

"New it may be, but nobility it isn’t. They’re proprietors of a sort,
but we’re the landowners. As noblemen, they’re cutting their own
throats."

"But you say it’s an institution that’s served its time."

"That it may be, but still it ought to be treated a little more
