early, while it was still hot.

As they drew near this more important marsh, the chief aim of their
expedition, Levin could not help considering how he could get rid of
Vassenka and be free in his movements. Stepan Arkadyevitch evidently had
the same desire, and on his face Levin saw the look of anxiety always
present in a true sportsman when beginning shooting, together with a
certain good-humored slyness peculiar to him.

"How shall we go? It’s a splendid marsh, I see, and there are hawks,"
said Stepan Arkadyevitch, pointing to two great birds hovering over the
reeds. "Where there are hawks, there is sure to be game."

"Now, gentlemen," said Levin, pulling up his boots and examining the
lock of his gun with rather a gloomy expression, "do you see those
reeds?" He pointed to an oasis of blackish green in the huge half-mown
wet meadow that stretched along the right bank of the river. "The marsh
begins here, straight in front of us, do you see—where it is greener?
From here it runs to the right where the horses are; there are breeding
places there, and grouse, and all round those reeds as far as that
alder, and right up to the mill. Over there, do you see, where the pools
are? That’s the best place. There I once shot seventeen snipe. We’ll
separate with the dogs and go in different directions, and then meet
over there at the mill."

"Well, which shall go to left and which to right?" asked Stepan
Arkadyevitch. "It’s wider to the right; you two go that way and I’ll
take the left," he said with apparent carelessness.

"Capital! we’ll make the bigger bag! Yes, come along, come along!"
Vassenka exclaimed.

Levin could do nothing but agree, and they divided.

As soon as they entered the marsh, the two dogs began hunting about
together and made towards the green, slime-covered pool. Levin knew
Laska’s method, wary and indefinite; he knew the place too and expected
a whole covey of snipe.

"Veslovsky, beside me, walk beside me!" he said in a faint voice to his
companion splashing in the water behind him. Levin could not help
feeling an interest in the direction his gun was pointed, after that
casual shot near the Kolpensky marsh.

"Oh, I won’t get in your way, don’t trouble about me."

But Levin could not help troubling, and recalled Kitty’s words at
parting: "Mind you don’t shoot one another." The dogs came nearer and
nearer, passed each other, each pursuing its own scent. The expectation
of snipe was so intense that to Levin the squelching sound of his own
heel, as he drew it up out of the mire, seemed to be the call of a
snipe, and he clutched and pressed the lock of his gun.

"Bang! bang!" sounded almost in his ear. Vassenka had fired at a flock
of ducks which was hovering over the marsh and flying at that moment
towards the sportsmen, far out of range. Before Levin had time to look
round, there was the whir of one snipe, another, a third, and some eight
more rose one after another.

Stepan Arkadyevitch hit one at the very moment when it was beginning its
zigzag movements, and the snipe fell in a heap into the mud. Oblonsky
aimed deliberately at another, still flying low in the reeds, and
together with the report of the shot, that snipe too fell, and it could
be seen fluttering out where the sedge had been cut, its unhurt wing
showing white beneath.

Levin was not so lucky: he aimed at his first bird too low, and missed;
he aimed at it again, just as it was rising, but at that instant another
snipe flew up at his very feet, distracting him so that he missed again.

While they were loading their guns, another snipe rose, and Veslovsky,
who had had time to load again, sent two charges of small-shot into the
water. Stepan Arkadyevitch picked up his snipe, and with sparkling eyes
looked at Levin.

"Well, now let us separate," said Stepan Arkadyevitch, and limping on
his left foot, holding his gun in readiness and whistling to his dog, he
walked off in one direction. Levin and Veslovsky walked in the other.

It always happened with Levin that when his first shots were a failure
he got hot and out of temper, and shot badly the whole day. So it was
that day. The snipe showed themselves in numbers. They kept flying up
from just under the dogs, from under the sportsmen’s legs, and Levin
might have retrieved his ill luck. But the more he shot, the more he
felt disgraced in the eyes of Veslovsky, who kept popping away merrily
and indiscriminately, killing nothing, and not in the slightest abashed
by his ill success. Levin, in feverish haste, could not restrain
himself, got more and more out of temper, and ended by shooting almost
without a hope of hitting. Laska, indeed, seemed to understand this. She
began looking more languidly, and gazed back at the sportsmen, as it
were, with perplexity or reproach in her eyes. Shots followed shots in
rapid succession. The smoke of the powder hung about the sportsmen,
while in the great roomy net of the game bag there were only three light
little snipe. And of these one had been killed by Veslovsky alone, and
one by both of them together. Meanwhile from the other side of the marsh
came the sound of Stepan Arkadyevitch’s shots, not frequent, but, as
Levin fancied, well-directed, for almost after each they heard "Krak,
Krak, _apporte_!"

This excited Levin still more. The snipe were floating continually in
the air over the reeds. Their whirring wings close to the earth, and
their harsh cries high in the air, could be heard on all sides; the
snipe that had risen first and flown up into the air, settled again
before the sportsmen. Instead of two hawks there were now dozens of them
hovering with shrill cries over the marsh.

After walking through the larger half of the marsh, Levin and Veslovsky
reached the place where the peasants’ mowing-grass was divided into long
strips reaching to the reeds, marked off in one place by the trampled
grass, in another by a path mown through it. Half of these strips had
already been mown.

Though there was not so much hope of finding birds in the uncut part as
the cut part, Levin had promised Stepan Arkadyevitch to meet him, and so
he walked on with his companion through the cut and uncut patches.

"Hi, sportsmen!" shouted one of a group of peasants, sitting on an
unharnessed cart; "come and have some lunch with us! Have a drop of
wine!"

Levin looked round.

"Come along, it’s all right!" shouted a good-humored-looking bearded
peasant with a red face, showing his white teeth in a grin, and holding
up a greenish bottle that flashed in the sunlight.

"_Qu’est-ce qu’ils disent_?" asked Veslovsky.

"They invite you to have some vodka. Most likely they’ve been dividing
the meadow into lots. I should have some," said Levin, not without some
guile, hoping Veslovsky would be tempted by the vodka, and would go away
to them.

"Why do they offer it?"

"Oh, they’re merry-making. Really, you should join them. You would be
interested."

"_Allons, c’est curieux_."

"You go, you go, you’ll find the way to the mill!" cried Levin, and
looking round he perceived with satisfaction that Veslovsky, bent and
stumbling with weariness, holding his gun out at arm’s length, was
making his way out of the marsh towards the peasants.

"You come too!" the peasants shouted to Levin. "Never fear! You taste
our cake!"

Levin felt a strong inclination to drink a little vodka and to eat some
bread. He was exhausted, and felt it a great effort to drag his
