"What’s this? Am I going out of my mind?" he said to himself. "Perhaps.
What makes men go out of their minds; what makes men shoot themselves?"
he answered himself, and opening his eyes, he saw with wonder an
embroidered cushion beside him, worked by Varya, his brother’s wife. He
touched the tassel of the cushion, and tried to think of Varya, of when
he had seen her last. But to think of anything extraneous was an
agonizing effort. "No, I must sleep!" He moved the cushion up, and
pressed his head into it, but he had to make an effort to keep his eyes
shut. He jumped up and sat down. "That’s all over for me," he said to
himself. "I must think what to do. What is left?" His mind rapidly ran
through his life apart from his love of Anna.

"Ambition? Serpuhovskoy? Society? The court?" He could not come to a
pause anywhere. All of it had had meaning before, but now there was no
reality in it. He got up from the sofa, took off his coat, undid his
belt, and uncovering his hairy chest to breathe more freely, walked up
and down the room. "This is how people go mad," he repeated, "and how
they shoot themselves ... to escape humiliation," he added slowly.

He went to the door and closed it, then with fixed eyes and clenched
teeth he went up to the table, took a revolver, looked round him, turned
it to a loaded barrel, and sank into thought. For two minutes, his head
bent forward with an expression of an intense effort of thought, he
stood with the revolver in his hand, motionless, thinking.

"Of course," he said to himself, as though a logical, continuous, and
clear chain of reasoning had brought him to an indubitable conclusion.
In reality this "of course," that seemed convincing to him, was simply
the result of exactly the same circle of memories and images through
which he had passed ten times already during the last hour—memories of
happiness lost forever. There was the same conception of the
senselessness of everything to come in life, the same consciousness of
humiliation. Even the sequence of these images and emotions was the
same.

"Of course," he repeated, when for the third time his thought passed
again round the same spellbound circle of memories and images, and
pulling the revolver to the left side of his chest, and clutching it
vigorously with his whole hand, as it were, squeezing it in his fist, he
pulled the trigger. He did not hear the sound of the shot, but a violent
blow on his chest sent him reeling. He tried to clutch at the edge of
the table, dropped the revolver, staggered, and sat down on the ground,
looking about him in astonishment. He did not recognize his room,
looking up from the ground, at the bent legs of the table, at the
wastepaper basket, and the tiger-skin rug. The hurried, creaking steps
of his servant coming through the drawing room brought him to his
senses. He made an effort at thought, and was aware that he was on the
floor; and seeing blood on the tiger-skin rug and on his arm, he knew he
had shot himself.

"Idiotic! Missed!" he said, fumbling after the revolver. The revolver
was close beside him—he sought further off. Still feeling for it, he
stretched out to the other side, and not being strong enough to keep his
balance, fell over, streaming with blood.

The elegant, whiskered manservant, who used to be continually
complaining to his acquaintances of the delicacy of his nerves, was so
panic-stricken on seeing his master lying on the floor, that he left him
losing blood while he ran for assistance. An hour later Varya, his
brother’s wife, had arrived, and with the assistance of three doctors,
whom she had sent for in all directions, and who all appeared at the
same moment, she got the wounded man to bed, and remained to nurse him.



Chapter 


The mistake made by Alexey Alexandrovitch in that, when preparing for
seeing his wife, he had overlooked the possibility that her repentance
might be sincere, and he might forgive her, and she might not die—this
mistake was two months after his return from Moscow brought home to him
in all its significance. But the mistake made by him had arisen not
simply from his having overlooked that contingency, but also from the
fact that until that day of his interview with his dying wife, he had
not known his own heart. At his sick wife’s bedside he had for the first
time in his life given way to that feeling of sympathetic suffering
always roused in him by the sufferings of others, and hitherto looked on
by him with shame as a harmful weakness. And pity for her, and remorse
for having desired her death, and most of all, the joy of forgiveness,
made him at once conscious, not simply of the relief of his own
sufferings, but of a spiritual peace he had never experienced before. He
suddenly felt that the very thing that was the source of his sufferings
had become the source of his spiritual joy; that what had seemed
insoluble while he was judging, blaming, and hating, had become clear
and simple when he forgave and loved.

He forgave his wife and pitied her for her sufferings and her remorse.
He forgave Vronsky, and pitied him, especially after reports reached him
of his despairing action. He felt more for his son than before. And he
blamed himself now for having taken too little interest in him. But for
the little newborn baby he felt a quite peculiar sentiment, not of pity,
only, but of tenderness. At first, from a feeling of compassion alone,
he had been interested in the delicate little creature, who was not his
child, and who was cast on one side during her mother’s illness, and
would certainly have died if he had not troubled about her, and he did
not himself observe how fond he became of her. He would go into the
nursery several times a day, and sit there for a long while, so that the
nurses, who were at first afraid of him, got quite used to his presence.
Sometimes for half an hour at a stretch he would sit silently gazing at
the saffron-red, downy, wrinkled face of the sleeping baby, watching the
movements of the frowning brows, and the fat little hands, with clenched
fingers, that rubbed the little eyes and nose. At such moments
particularly, Alexey Alexandrovitch had a sense of perfect peace and
inward harmony, and saw nothing extraordinary in his position, nothing
that ought to be changed.

But as time went on, he saw more and more distinctly that however
natural the position now seemed to him, he would not long be allowed to
remain in it. He felt that besides the blessed spiritual force
controlling his soul, there was another, a brutal force, as powerful, or
more powerful, which controlled his life, and that this force would not
allow him that humble peace he longed for. He felt that everyone was
looking at him with inquiring wonder, that he was not understood, and
that something was expected of him. Above all, he felt the instability
and unnaturalness of his relations with his wife.

When the softening effect of the near approach of death had passed away,
Alexey Alexandrovitch began to notice that Anna was afraid of him, ill
at ease with him, and could not look him straight in the face. She
seemed to be wanting, and not daring, to tell him something; and as
though foreseeing their present relations could not continue, she seemed
to be expecting something from him.

Towards the end of February it happened that Anna’s baby daughter, who
had been named Anna too, fell ill. Alexey Alexandrovitch was in the
nursery in the morning, and leaving orders for the doctor to be sent
for, he went to his office. On finishing his work, he returned home at
four. Going into the hall he saw a handsome groom, in a braided livery
and a bear fur cape, holding a white fur cloak.

"Who is here?" asked Alexey Alexandrovitch.

"Princess Elizaveta Federovna Tverskaya," the groom answered, and it
seemed to Alexey Alexandrovitch that he grinned.

During all this difficult time Alexey Alexandrovitch had noticed that
his worldly acquaintances, especially women, took a peculiar interest in
him and his wife. All these acquaintances he observed with difficulty
concealing their mirth at something; the same mirth that he had
perceived in the lawyer’s eyes, and just now in the eyes of this groom.
Everyone seemed, somehow, hugely delighted, as though they had just been
at a wedding. When they met him, with ill-disguised enjoyment they
inquired after his wife’s health. The presence of Princess Tverskaya was
unpleasant to Alexey Alexandrovitch from the memories associated with
her, and also because he disliked her, and he went straight to the
nursery. In the day nursery Seryozha, leaning on the table with his legs
on a chair, was drawing and chatting away merrily. The English
governess, who had during Anna’s illness replaced the French one, was
sitting near the boy knitting a shawl. She hurriedly got up, curtseyed,
