mist.

"There was a quarrel. Just what has happened several times. I said I had
a headache, and he did not come in to see me. Tomorrow we’re going away;
I must see him and get ready for the journey," she said to herself. And
learning that he was in his study, she went down to him. As she passed
through the drawing room she heard a carriage stop at the entrance, and
looking out of the window she saw the carriage, from which a young girl
in a lilac hat was leaning out giving some direction to the footman
ringing the bell. After a parley in the hall, someone came upstairs, and
Vronsky’s steps could be heard passing the drawing room. He went rapidly
downstairs. Anna went again to the window. She saw him come out onto the
steps without his hat and go up to the carriage. The young girl in the
lilac hat handed him a parcel. Vronsky, smiling, said something to her.
The carriage drove away, he ran rapidly upstairs again.

The mists that had shrouded everything in her soul parted suddenly. The
feelings of yesterday pierced the sick heart with a fresh pang. She
could not understand now how she could have lowered herself by spending
a whole day with him in his house. She went into his room to announce
her determination.

"That was Madame Sorokina and her daughter. They came and brought me the
money and the deeds from maman. I couldn’t get them yesterday. How is
your head, better?" he said quietly, not wishing to see and to
understand the gloomy and solemn expression of her face.

She looked silently, intently at him, standing in the middle of the
room. He glanced at her, frowned for a moment, and went on reading a
letter. She turned, and went deliberately out of the room. He still
might have turned her back, but she had reached the door, he was still
silent, and the only sound audible was the rustling of the note paper as
he turned it.

"Oh, by the way," he said at the very moment she was in the doorway,
"we’re going tomorrow for certain, aren’t we?"

"You, but not I," she said, turning round to him.

"Anna, we can’t go on like this..."

"You, but not I," she repeated.

"This is getting unbearable!"

"You ... you will be sorry for this," she said, and went out.

Frightened by the desperate expression with which these words were
uttered, he jumped up and would have run after her, but on second
thoughts he sat down and scowled, setting his teeth. This vulgar—as he
thought it—threat of something vague exasperated him. "I’ve tried
everything," he thought; "the only thing left is not to pay attention,"
and he began to get ready to drive into town, and again to his mother’s
to get her signature to the deeds.

She heard the sound of his steps about the study and the dining room. At
the drawing room he stood still. But he did not turn in to see her, he
merely gave an order that the horse should be given to Voytov if he came
while he was away. Then she heard the carriage brought round, the door
opened, and he came out again. But he went back into the porch again,
and someone was running upstairs. It was the valet running up for his
gloves that had been forgotten. She went to the window and saw him take
the gloves without looking, and touching the coachman on the back he
said something to him. Then without looking up at the window he settled
himself in his usual attitude in the carriage, with his legs crossed,
and drawing on his gloves he vanished round the corner.



Chapter 


"He has gone! It is over!" Anna said to herself, standing at the window;
and in answer to this statement the impression of the darkness when the
candle had flickered out, and of her fearful dream mingling into one,
filled her heart with cold terror.

"No, that cannot be!" she cried, and crossing the room she rang the
bell. She was so afraid now of being alone, that without waiting for the
servant to come in, she went out to meet him.

"Inquire where the count has gone," she said. The servant answered that
the count had gone to the stable.

"His honor left word that if you cared to drive out, the carriage would
be back immediately."

"Very good. Wait a minute. I’ll write a note at once. Send Mihail with
the note to the stables. Make haste."

She sat down and wrote:

"I was wrong. Come back home; I must explain. For God’s sake come! I’m
afraid."

She sealed it up and gave it to the servant.

She was afraid of being left alone now; she followed the servant out of
the room, and went to the nursery.

"Why, this isn’t it, this isn’t he! Where are his blue eyes, his sweet,
shy smile?" was her first thought when she saw her chubby, rosy little
girl with her black, curly hair instead of Seryozha, whom in the tangle
of her ideas she had expected to see in the nursery. The little girl
sitting at the table was obstinately and violently battering on it with
a cork, and staring aimlessly at her mother with her pitch-black eyes.
Answering the English nurse that she was quite well, and that she was
going to the country tomorrow, Anna sat down by the little girl and
began spinning the cork to show her. But the child’s loud, ringing
laugh, and the motion of her eyebrows, recalled Vronsky so vividly that
she got up hurriedly, restraining her sobs, and went away. "Can it be
all over? No, it cannot be!" she thought. "He will come back. But how
can he explain that smile, that excitement after he had been talking to
her? But even if he doesn’t explain, I will believe. If I don’t believe,
there’s only one thing left for me, and I can’t."

She looked at her watch. Twenty minutes had passed. "By now he has
received the note and is coming back. Not long, ten minutes more.... But
what if he doesn’t come? No, that cannot be. He mustn’t see me with
tear-stained eyes. I’ll go and wash. Yes, yes; did I do my hair or not?"
she asked herself. And she could not remember. She felt her head with
her hand. "Yes, my hair has been done, but when I did it I can’t in the
least remember." She could not believe the evidence of her hand, and
went up to the pier glass to see whether she really had done her hair.
She certainly had, but she could not think when she had done it. "Who’s
that?" she thought, looking in the looking glass at the swollen face
with strangely glittering eyes, that looked in a scared way at her.
"Why, it’s I!" she suddenly understood, and looking round, she seemed
all at once to feel his kisses on her, and twitched her shoulders,
shuddering. Then she lifted her hand to her lips and kissed it.

"What is it? Why, I’m going out of my mind!" and she went into her
bedroom, where Annushka was tidying the room.

"Annushka," she said, coming to a standstill before her, and she stared
at the maid, not knowing what to say to her.

"You meant to go and see Darya Alexandrovna," said the girl, as though
she understood.

"Darya Alexandrovna? Yes, I’ll go."

"Fifteen minutes there, fifteen minutes back. He’s coming, he’ll be here
soon." She took out her watch and looked at it. "But how could he go
away, leaving me in such a state? How can he live, without making it up
with me?" She went to the window and began looking into the street.
Judging by the time, he might be back now. But her calculations might be
wrong, and she began once more to recall when he had started and to
count the minutes.

