
"_Et vous oubliez votre devoir_," she said to Veslovsky, who came out
too on the steps.

"_Pardon, j’en ai tout plein les poches_," he answered, smiling, putting
his fingers in his waistcoat pocket.

"_Mais vous venez trop tard_," she said, rubbing her handkerchief on her
hand, which the horse had made wet in taking the sugar.

Anna turned to Dolly. "You can stay some time? For one day only? That’s
impossible!"

"I promised to be back, and the children..." said Dolly, feeling
embarrassed both because she had to get her bag out of the carriage, and
because she knew her face must be covered with dust.

"No, Dolly, darling!... Well, we’ll see. Come along, come along!" and
Anna led Dolly to her room.

That room was not the smart guest chamber Vronsky had suggested, but the
one of which Anna had said that Dolly would excuse it. And this room,
for which excuse was needed, was more full of luxury than any in which
Dolly had ever stayed, a luxury that reminded her of the best hotels
abroad.

"Well, darling, how happy I am!" Anna said, sitting down in her riding
habit for a moment beside Dolly. "Tell me about all of you. Stiva I had
only a glimpse of, and he cannot tell one about the children. How is my
favorite, Tanya? Quite a big girl, I expect?"

"Yes, she’s very tall," Darya Alexandrovna answered shortly, surprised
herself that she should respond so coolly about her children. "We are
having a delightful stay at the Levins’," she added.

"Oh, if I had known," said Anna, "that you do not despise me!... You
might have all come to us. Stiva’s an old friend and a great friend of
Alexey’s, you know," she added, and suddenly she blushed.

"Yes, but we are all..." Dolly answered in confusion.

"But in my delight I’m talking nonsense. The one thing, darling, is that
I am so glad to have you!" said Anna, kissing her again. "You haven’t
told me yet how and what you think about me, and I keep wanting to know.
But I’m glad you will see me as I am. The chief thing I shouldn’t like
would be for people to imagine I want to prove anything. I don’t want to
prove anything; I merely want to live, to do no one harm but myself. I
have the right to do that, haven’t I? But it is a big subject, and we’ll
talk over everything properly later. Now I’ll go and dress and send a
maid to you."



Chapter 


Left alone, Darya Alexandrovna, with a good housewife’s eye, scanned her
room. All she had seen in entering the house and walking through it, and
all she saw now in her room, gave her an impression of wealth and
sumptuousness and of that modern European luxury of which she had only
read in English novels, but had never seen in Russia and in the country.
Everything was new from the new French hangings on the walls to the
carpet which covered the whole floor. The bed had a spring mattress, and
a special sort of bolster and silk pillowcases on the little pillows.
The marble washstand, the dressing table, the little sofa, the tables,
the bronze clock on the chimney piece, the window curtains, and the
_portières_ were all new and expensive.

The smart maid, who came in to offer her services, with her hair done up
high, and a gown more fashionable than Dolly’s, was as new and expensive
as the whole room. Darya Alexandrovna liked her neatness, her
deferential and obliging manners, but she felt ill at ease with her. She
felt ashamed of her seeing the patched dressing jacket that had
unluckily been packed by mistake for her. She was ashamed of the very
patches and darned places of which she had been so proud at home. At
home it had been so clear that for six dressing jackets there would be
needed twenty-four yards of nainsook at sixteen pence the yard, which
was a matter of thirty shillings besides the cutting-out and making, and
these thirty shillings had been saved. But before the maid she felt, if
not exactly ashamed, at least uncomfortable.

Darya Alexandrovna had a great sense of relief when Annushka, whom she
had known for years, walked in. The smart maid was sent for to go to her
mistress, and Annushka remained with Darya Alexandrovna.

Annushka was obviously much pleased at that lady’s arrival, and began to
chatter away without a pause. Dolly observed that she was longing to
express her opinion in regard to her mistress’s position, especially as
to the love and devotion of the count to Anna Arkadyevna, but Dolly
carefully interrupted her whenever she began to speak about this.

"I grew up with Anna Arkadyevna; my lady’s dearer to me than anything.
Well, it’s not for us to judge. And, to be sure, there seems so much
love..."

"Kindly pour out the water for me to wash now, please," Darya
Alexandrovna cut her short.

"Certainly. We’ve two women kept specially for washing small things, but
most of the linen’s done by machinery. The count goes into everything
himself. Ah, what a husband!..."

Dolly was glad when Anna came in, and by her entrance put a stop to
Annushka’s gossip.

Anna had put on a very simple batiste gown. Dolly scrutinized that
simple gown attentively. She knew what it meant, and the price at which
such simplicity was obtained.

"An old friend," said Anna of Annushka.

Anna was not embarrassed now. She was perfectly composed and at ease.
Dolly saw that she had now completely recovered from the impression her
arrival had made on her, and had assumed that superficial, careless tone
which, as it were, closed the door on that compartment in which her
deeper feelings and ideas were kept.

"Well, Anna, and how is your little girl?" asked Dolly.

"Annie?" (This was what she called her little daughter Anna.) "Very
well. She has got on wonderfully. Would you like to see her? Come, I’ll
show her to you. We had a terrible bother," she began telling her, "over
nurses. We had an Italian wet-nurse. A good creature, but so stupid! We
wanted to get rid of her, but the baby is so used to her that we’ve gone
on keeping her still."

"But how have you managed?..." Dolly was beginning a question as to what
name the little girl would have; but noticing a sudden frown on Anna’s
face, she changed the drift of her question.

"How did you manage? have you weaned her yet?"

But Anna had understood.

"You didn’t mean to ask that? You meant to ask about her surname. Yes?
That worries Alexey. She has no name—that is, she’s a Karenina," said
Anna, dropping her eyelids till nothing could be seen but the eyelashes
meeting. "But we’ll talk about all that later," her face suddenly
brightening. "Come, I’ll show you her. _Elle est très gentille_. She
crawls now."

In the nursery the luxury which had impressed Dolly in the whole house
struck her still more. There were little go-carts ordered from England,
and appliances for learning to walk, and a sofa after the fashion of a
billiard table, purposely constructed for crawling, and swings and
baths, all of special pattern, and modern. They were all English, solid,
and of good make, and obviously very expensive. The room was large, and
very light and lofty.

When they went in, the baby, with nothing on but her little smock, was
