the wedding crowns and Shtcherbatsky, his hand shaking in its
three-button glove, held the crown high above her head.

"Put it on!" she whispered, smiling.

Levin looked round at her, and was struck by the joyful radiance on her
face, and unconsciously her feeling infected him. He too, like her felt
glad and happy.

They enjoyed hearing the epistle read, and the roll of the head deacon’s
voice at the last verse, awaited with such impatience by the outside
public. They enjoyed drinking out of the shallow cup of warm red wine
and water, and they were still more pleased when the priest, flinging
back his stole and taking both their hands in his, led them round the
lectern to the accompaniment of bass voices chanting "Glory to God."

Shtcherbatsky and Tchirikov, supporting the crowns and stumbling over
the bride’s train, smiling too and seeming delighted at something, were
at one moment left behind, at the next treading on the bridal pair as
the priest came to a halt. The spark of joy kindled in Kitty seemed to
have infected everyone in the church. It seemed to Levin that the priest
and the deacon too wanted to smile just as he did.

Taking the crowns off their heads the priest read the last prayer and
congratulated the young people. Levin looked at Kitty, and he had never
before seen her look as she did. She was charming with the new radiance
of happiness in her face. Levin longed to say something to her, but he
did not know whether it was all over. The priest got him out of his
difficulty. He smiled his kindly smile and said gently, "Kiss your wife,
and you kiss your husband," and took the candles out of their hands.

Levin kissed her smiling lips with timid care, gave her his arm, and
with a new strange sense of closeness, walked out of the church. He did
not believe, he could not believe, that it was true. It was only when
their wondering and timid eyes met that he believed in it, because he
felt that they were one.

After supper, the same night, the young people left for the country.



Chapter 


Vronsky and Anna had been traveling for three months together in Europe.
They had visited Venice, Rome, and Naples, and had just arrived at a
small Italian town where they meant to stay some time. A handsome head
waiter, with thick pomaded hair parted from the neck upwards, an evening
coat, a broad white cambric shirt front, and a bunch of trinkets hanging
above his rounded stomach, stood with his hands in the full curve of his
pockets, looking contemptuously from under his eyelids while he gave
some frigid reply to a gentleman who had stopped him. Catching the sound
of footsteps coming from the other side of the entry towards the
staircase, the head waiter turned round, and seeing the Russian count,
who had taken their best rooms, he took his hands out of his pockets
deferentially, and with a bow informed him that a courier had been, and
that the business about the palazzo had been arranged. The steward was
prepared to sign the agreement.

"Ah! I’m glad to hear it," said Vronsky. "Is madame at home or not?"

"Madame has been out for a walk but has returned now," answered the
waiter.

Vronsky took off his soft, wide-brimmed hat and passed his handkerchief
over his heated brow and hair, which had grown half over his ears, and
was brushed back covering the bald patch on his head. And glancing
casually at the gentleman, who still stood there gazing intently at him,
he would have gone on.

"This gentleman is a Russian, and was inquiring after you," said the
head waiter.

With mingled feelings of annoyance at never being able to get away from
acquaintances anywhere, and longing to find some sort of diversion from
the monotony of his life, Vronsky looked once more at the gentleman, who
had retreated and stood still again, and at the same moment a light came
into the eyes of both.

"Golenishtchev!"

"Vronsky!"

It really was Golenishtchev, a comrade of Vronsky’s in the Corps of
Pages. In the corps Golenishtchev had belonged to the liberal party; he
left the corps without entering the army, and had never taken office
under the government. Vronsky and he had gone completely different ways
on leaving the corps, and had only met once since.

At that meeting Vronsky perceived that Golenishtchev had taken up a sort
of lofty, intellectually liberal line, and was consequently disposed to
look down upon Vronsky’s interests and calling in life. Hence Vronsky
had met him with the chilling and haughty manner he so well knew how to
assume, the meaning of which was: "You may like or dislike my way of
life, that’s a matter of the most perfect indifference to me; you will
have to treat me with respect if you want to know me." Golenishtchev had
been contemptuously indifferent to the tone taken by Vronsky. This
second meeting might have been expected, one would have supposed, to
estrange them still more. But now they beamed and exclaimed with delight
on recognizing one another. Vronsky would never have expected to be so
pleased to see Golenishtchev, but probably he was not himself aware how
bored he was. He forgot the disagreeable impression of their last
meeting, and with a face of frank delight held out his hand to his old
comrade. The same expression of delight replaced the look of uneasiness
on Golenishtchev’s face.

"How glad I am to meet you!" said Vronsky, showing his strong white
teeth in a friendly smile.

"I heard the name Vronsky, but I didn’t know which one. I’m very, very
glad!"

"Let’s go in. Come, tell me what you’re doing."

"I’ve been living here for two years. I’m working."

"Ah!" said Vronsky, with sympathy; "let’s go in." And with the habit
common with Russians, instead of saying in Russian what he wanted to
keep from the servants, he began to speak in French.

"Do you know Madame Karenina? We are traveling together. I am going to
see her now," he said in French, carefully scrutinizing Golenishtchev’s
face.

"Ah! I did not know" (though he did know), Golenishtchev answered
carelessly. "Have you been here long?" he added.

"Four days," Vronsky answered, once more scrutinizing his friend’s face
intently.

"Yes, he’s a decent fellow, and will look at the thing properly,"
Vronsky said to himself, catching the significance of Golenishtchev’s
face and the change of subject. "I can introduce him to Anna, he looks
at it properly."

During those three months that Vronsky had spent abroad with Anna, he
had always on meeting new people asked himself how the new person would
look at his relations with Anna, and for the most part, in men, he had
met with the "proper" way of looking at it. But if he had been asked,
and those who looked at it "properly" had been asked, exactly how they
did look at it, both he and they would have been greatly puzzled to
answer.

In reality, those who in Vronsky’s opinion had the "proper" view had no
sort of view at all, but behaved in general as well-bred persons do
behave in regard to all the complex and insoluble problems with which
life is encompassed on all sides; they behaved with propriety, avoiding
allusions and unpleasant questions. They assumed an air of fully
comprehending the import and force of the situation, of accepting and
even approving of it, but of considering it superfluous and uncalled for
