condition was trembling all over, and had a piteous, crushed look.

"I ... I want to say that we can’t go on like this; that this is
misery..." she said.

"The servants are here at the sideboard," he said angrily; "don’t make a
scene."

"Well, let’s go in here!"

They were standing in the passage. Kitty would have gone into the next
room, but there the English governess was giving Tanya a lesson.

"Well, come into the garden."

In the garden they came upon a peasant weeding the path. And no longer
considering that the peasant could see her tear-stained and his agitated
face, that they looked like people fleeing from some disaster, they went
on with rapid steps, feeling that they must speak out and clear up
misunderstandings, must be alone together, and so get rid of the misery
they were both feeling.

"We can’t go on like this! It’s misery! I am wretched; you are wretched.
What for?" she said, when they had at last reached a solitary garden
seat at a turn in the lime tree avenue.

"But tell me one thing: was there in his tone anything unseemly, not
nice, humiliatingly horrible?" he said, standing before her again in the
same position with his clenched fists on his chest, as he had stood
before her that night.

"Yes," she said in a shaking voice; "but, Kostya, surely you see I’m not
to blame? All the morning I’ve been trying to take a tone ... but such
people.... Why did he come? How happy we were!" she said, breathless
with the sobs that shook her.

Although nothing had been pursuing them, and there was nothing to run
away from, and they could not possibly have found anything very
delightful on that garden seat, the gardener saw with astonishment that
they passed him on their way home with comforted and radiant faces.



Chapter 


After escorting his wife upstairs, Levin went to Dolly’s part of the
house. Darya Alexandrovna, for her part, was in great distress too that
day. She was walking about the room, talking angrily to a little girl,
who stood in the corner roaring.

"And you shall stand all day in the corner, and have your dinner all
alone, and not see one of your dolls, and I won’t make you a new frock,"
she said, not knowing how to punish her.

"Oh, she is a disgusting child!" she turned to Levin. "Where does she
get such wicked propensities?"

"Why, what has she done?" Levin said without much interest, for he had
wanted to ask her advice, and so was annoyed that he had come at an
unlucky moment.

"Grisha and she went into the raspberries, and there ... I can’t tell
you really what she did. It’s a thousand pities Miss Elliot’s not with
us. This one sees to nothing—she’s a machine.... _Figurez-vous que la
petite_?..."

And Darya Alexandrovna described Masha’s crime.

"That proves nothing; it’s not a question of evil propensities at all,
it’s simply mischief," Levin assured her.

"But you are upset about something? What have you come for?" asked
Dolly. "What’s going on there?"

And in the tone of her question Levin heard that it would be easy for
him to say what he had meant to say.

"I’ve not been in there, I’ve been alone in the garden with Kitty. We’ve
had a quarrel for the second time since ... Stiva came."

Dolly looked at him with her shrewd, comprehending eyes.

"Come, tell me, honor bright, has there been ... not in Kitty, but in
that gentleman’s behavior, a tone which might be unpleasant—not
unpleasant, but horrible, offensive to a husband?"

"You mean, how shall I say.... Stay, stay in the corner!" she said to
Masha, who, detecting a faint smile in her mother’s face, had been
turning round. "The opinion of the world would be that he is behaving as
young men do behave. _Il fait la cour à une jeune et jolie femme_, and a
husband who’s a man of the world should only be flattered by it."

"Yes, yes," said Levin gloomily; "but you noticed it?"

"Not only I, but Stiva noticed it. Just after breakfast he said to me in
so many words, _Je crois que Veslovsky fait un petit brin de cour à
Kitty_."

"Well, that’s all right then; now I’m satisfied. I’ll send him away,"
said Levin.

"What do you mean! Are you crazy?" Dolly cried in horror; "nonsense,
Kostya, only think!" she said, laughing. "You can go now to Fanny," she
said to Masha. "No, if you wish it, I’ll speak to Stiva. He’ll take him
away. He can say you’re expecting visitors. Altogether he doesn’t fit
into the house."

"No, no, I’ll do it myself."

"But you’ll quarrel with him?"

"Not a bit. I shall so enjoy it," Levin said, his eyes flashing with
real enjoyment. "Come, forgive her, Dolly, she won’t do it again," he
said of the little sinner, who had not gone to Fanny, but was standing
irresolutely before her mother, waiting and looking up from under her
brows to catch her mother’s eye.

The mother glanced at her. The child broke into sobs, hid her face on
her mother’s lap, and Dolly laid her thin, tender hand on her head.

"And what is there in common between us and him?" thought Levin, and he
went off to look for Veslovsky.

As he passed through the passage he gave orders for the carriage to be
got ready to drive to the station.

"The spring was broken yesterday," said the footman.

"Well, the covered trap, then, and make haste. Where’s the visitor?"

"The gentleman’s gone to his room."

Levin came upon Veslovsky at the moment when the latter, having unpacked
his things from his trunk, and laid out some new songs, was putting on
his gaiters to go out riding.

Whether there was something exceptional in Levin’s face, or that
Vassenka was himself conscious that _ce petit brin de cour_ he was
making was out of place in this family, but he was somewhat (as much as
a young man in society can be) disconcerted at Levin’s entrance.

"You ride in gaiters?"

"Yes, it’s much cleaner," said Vassenka, putting his fat leg on a chair,
fastening the bottom hook, and smiling with simple-hearted good humor.

He was undoubtedly a good-natured fellow, and Levin felt sorry for him
and ashamed of himself, as his host, when he saw the shy look on
Vassenka’s face.
