Levin knew too that Kitty had strengthened his hope by accounts of the
marvelous recoveries she had heard of. Levin knew all this; and it was
agonizingly painful to him to behold the supplicating, hopeful eyes and
the emaciated wrist, lifted with difficulty, making the sign of the
cross on the tense brow, and the prominent shoulders and hollow, gasping
chest, which one could not feel consistent with the life the sick man
was praying for. During the sacrament Levin did what he, an unbeliever,
had done a thousand times. He said, addressing God, "If Thou dost exist,
make this man to recover" (of course this same thing has been repeated
many times), "and Thou wilt save him and me."

After extreme unction the sick man became suddenly much better. He did
not cough once in the course of an hour, smiled, kissed Kitty’s hand,
thanking her with tears, and said he was comfortable, free from pain,
and that he felt strong and had an appetite. He even raised himself when
his soup was brought, and asked for a cutlet as well. Hopelessly ill as
he was, obvious as it was at the first glance that he could not recover,
Levin and Kitty were for that hour both in the same state of excitement,
happy, though fearful of being mistaken.

"Is he better?"

"Yes, much."

"It’s wonderful."

"There’s nothing wonderful in it."

"Anyway, he’s better," they said in a whisper, smiling to one another.

This self-deception was not of long duration. The sick man fell into a
quiet sleep, but he was waked up half an hour later by his cough. And
all at once every hope vanished in those about him and in himself. The
reality of his suffering crushed all hopes in Levin and Kitty and in the
sick man himself, leaving no doubt, no memory even of past hopes.

Without referring to what he had believed in half an hour before, as
though ashamed even to recall it, he asked for iodine to inhale in a
bottle covered with perforated paper. Levin gave him the bottle, and the
same look of passionate hope with which he had taken the sacrament was
now fastened on his brother, demanding from him the confirmation of the
doctor’s words that inhaling iodine worked wonders.

"Is Katya not here?" he gasped, looking round while Levin reluctantly
assented to the doctor’s words. "No; so I can say it.... It was for her
sake I went through that farce. She’s so sweet; but you and I can’t
deceive ourselves. This is what I believe in," he said, and, squeezing
the bottle in his bony hand, he began breathing over it.

At eight o’clock in the evening Levin and his wife were drinking tea in
their room when Marya Nikolaevna ran in to them breathlessly. She was
pale, and her lips were quivering. "He is dying!" she whispered. "I’m
afraid will die this minute."

Both of them ran to him. He was sitting raised up with one elbow on the
bed, his long back bent, and his head hanging low.

"How do you feel?" Levin asked in a whisper, after a silence.

"I feel I’m setting off," Nikolay said with difficulty, but with extreme
distinctness, screwing the words out of himself. He did not raise his
head, but simply turned his eyes upwards, without their reaching his
brother’s face. "Katya, go away!" he added.

Levin jumped up, and with a peremptory whisper made her go out.

"I’m setting off," he said again.

"Why do you think so?" said Levin, so as to say something.

"Because I’m setting off," he repeated, as though he had a liking for
the phrase. "It’s the end."

Marya Nikolaevna went up to him.

"You had better lie down; you’d be easier," she said.

"I shall lie down soon enough," he pronounced slowly, "when I’m dead,"
he said sarcastically, wrathfully. "Well, you can lay me down if you
like."

Levin laid his brother on his back, sat down beside him, and gazed at
his face, holding his breath. The dying man lay with closed eyes, but
the muscles twitched from time to time on his forehead, as with one
thinking deeply and intensely. Levin involuntarily thought with him of
what it was that was happening to him now, but in spite of all his
mental efforts to go along with him he saw by the expression of that
calm, stern face that for the dying man all was growing clearer and
clearer that was still as dark as ever for Levin.

"Yes, yes, so," the dying man articulated slowly at intervals. "Wait a
little." He was silent. "Right!" he pronounced all at once reassuringly,
as though all were solved for him. "O Lord!" he murmured, and sighed
deeply.

Marya Nikolaevna felt his feet. "They’re getting cold," she whispered.

For a long while, a very long while it seemed to Levin, the sick man lay
motionless. But he was still alive, and from time to time he sighed.
Levin by now was exhausted from mental strain. He felt that, with no
mental effort, could he understand what it was that was _right_. He
could not even think of the problem of death itself, but with no will of
his own thoughts kept coming to him of what he had to do next; closing
the dead man’s eyes, dressing him, ordering the coffin. And, strange to
say, he felt utterly cold, and was not conscious of sorrow nor of loss,
less still of pity for his brother. If he had any feeling for his
brother at that moment, it was envy for the knowledge the dying man had
now that he could not have.

A long time more he sat over him so, continually expecting the end. But
the end did not come. The door opened and Kitty appeared. Levin got up
to stop her. But at the moment he was getting up, he caught the sound of
the dying man stirring.

"Don’t go away," said Nikolay and held out his hand. Levin gave him his,
and angrily waved to his wife to go away.

With the dying man’s hand in his hand, he sat for half an hour, an hour,
another hour. He did not think of death at all now. He wondered what
Kitty was doing; who lived in the next room; whether the doctor lived in
a house of his own. He longed for food and for sleep. He cautiously drew
away his hand and felt the feet. The feet were cold, but the sick man
was still breathing. Levin tried again to move away on tiptoe, but the
sick man stirred again and said: "Don’t go."

                                  ――――

The dawn came; the sick man’s condition was unchanged. Levin stealthily
withdrew his hand, and without looking at the dying man, went off to his
own room and went to sleep. When he woke up, instead of news of his
brother’s death which he expected, he learned that the sick man had
returned to his earlier condition. He had begun sitting up again,
coughing, had begun eating again, talking again, and again had ceased to
talk of death, again had begun to express hope of his recovery, and had
become more irritable and more gloomy than ever. No one, neither his
brother nor Kitty, could soothe him. He was angry with everyone, and
said nasty things to everyone, reproached everyone for his sufferings,
and insisted that they should get him a celebrated doctor from Moscow.
To all inquiries made him as to how he felt, he made the same answer
with an expression of vindictive reproachfulness, "I’m suffering
horribly, intolerably!"

The sick man was suffering more and more, especially from bedsores,
which it was impossible now to remedy, and grew more and more angry with
everyone about him, blaming them for everything, and especially for not
having brought him a doctor from Moscow. Kitty tried in every possible
way to relieve him, to soothe him; but it was all in vain, and Levin saw
that she herself was exhausted both physically and morally, though she
would not admit it. The sense of death, which had been evoked in all by
his taking leave of life on the night when he had sent for his brother,
