depends on Anna. Her husband agreed to a divorce—at that time your
husband had arranged it completely. And now, I know, he would not refuse
it. It is only a matter of writing to him. He said plainly at that time
that if she expressed the desire, he would not refuse. Of course," he
said gloomily, "it is one of those Pharisaical cruelties of which only
such heartless men are capable. He knows what agony any recollection of
him must give her, and knowing her, he must have a letter from her. I
can understand that it is agony to her. But the matter is of such
importance, that one must _passer pardessus toutes ces finesses de
sentiment. Il y va du bonheur et de l’existence d’Anne et de ses
enfants._ I won’t speak of myself, though it’s hard for me, very hard,"
he said, with an expression as though he were threatening someone for
its being hard for him. "And so it is, princess, that I am shamelessly
clutching at you as an anchor of salvation. Help me to persuade her to
write to him and ask for a divorce."

"Yes, of course," Darya Alexandrovna said dreamily, as she vividly
recalled her last interview with Alexey Alexandrovitch. "Yes, of
course," she repeated with decision, thinking of Anna.

"Use your influence with her, make her write. I don’t like—I’m almost
unable to speak about this to her."

"Very well, I will talk to her. But how is it she does not think of it
herself?" said Darya Alexandrovna, and for some reason she suddenly at
that point recalled Anna’s strange new habit of half-closing her eyes.
And she remembered that Anna drooped her eyelids just when the deeper
questions of life were touched upon. "Just as though she half-shut her
eyes to her own life, so as not to see everything," thought Dolly. "Yes,
indeed, for my own sake and for hers I will talk to her," Dolly said in
reply to his look of gratitude.

They got up and walked to the house.



Chapter 


When Anna found Dolly at home before her, she looked intently in her
eyes, as though questioning her about the talk she had had with Vronsky,
but she made no inquiry in words.

"I believe it’s dinner time," she said. "We’ve not seen each other at
all yet. I am reckoning on the evening. Now I want to go and dress. I
expect you do too; we all got splashed at the buildings."

Dolly went to her room and she felt amused. To change her dress was
impossible, for she had already put on her best dress. But in order to
signify in some way her preparation for dinner, she asked the maid to
brush her dress, changed her cuffs and tie, and put some lace on her
head.

"This is all I can do," she said with a smile to Anna, who came in to
her in a third dress, again of extreme simplicity.

"Yes, we are too formal here," she said, as it were apologizing for her
magnificence. "Alexey is delighted at your visit, as he rarely is at
anything. He has completely lost his heart to you," she added. "You’re
not tired?"

There was no time for talking about anything before dinner. Going into
the drawing room they found Princess Varvara already there, and the
gentlemen of the party in black frock-coats. The architect wore a
swallow-tail coat. Vronsky presented the doctor and the steward to his
guest. The architect he had already introduced to her at the hospital.

A stout butler, resplendent with a smoothly shaven round chin and a
starched white cravat, announced that dinner was ready, and the ladies
got up. Vronsky asked Sviazhsky to take in Anna Arkadyevna, and himself
offered his arm to Dolly. Veslovsky was before Tushkevitch in offering
his arm to Princess Varvara, so that Tushkevitch with the steward and
the doctor walked in alone.

The dinner, the dining room, the service, the waiting at table, the
wine, and the food, were not simply in keeping with the general tone of
modern luxury throughout all the house, but seemed even more sumptuous
and modern. Darya Alexandrovna watched this luxury which was novel to
her, and as a good housekeeper used to managing a household—although she
never dreamed of adapting anything she saw to her own household, as it
was all in a style of luxury far above her own manner of living—she
could not help scrutinizing every detail, and wondering how and by whom
it was all done. Vassenka Veslovsky, her husband, and even Sviazhsky,
and many other people she knew, would never have considered this
question, and would have readily believed what every well-bred host
tries to make his guests feel, that is, that all that is well-ordered in
his house has cost him, the host, no trouble whatever, but comes of
itself. Darya Alexandrovna was well aware that even porridge for the
children’s breakfast does not come of itself, and that therefore, where
so complicated and magnificent a style of luxury was maintained, someone
must give earnest attention to its organization. And from the glance
with which Alexey Kirillovitch scanned the table, from the way he nodded
to the butler, and offered Darya Alexandrovna her choice between cold
soup and hot soup, she saw that it was all organized and maintained by
the care of the master of the house himself. It was evident that it all
rested no more upon Anna than upon Veslovsky. She, Sviazhsky, the
princess, and Veslovsky, were equally guests, with light hearts enjoying
what had been arranged for them.

Anna was the hostess only in conducting the conversation. The
conversation was a difficult one for the lady of the house at a small
table with persons present, like the steward and the architect,
belonging to a completely different world, struggling not to be overawed
by an elegance to which they were unaccustomed, and unable to sustain a
large share in the general conversation. But this difficult conversation
Anna directed with her usual tact and naturalness, and indeed she did so
with actual enjoyment, as Darya Alexandrovna observed. The conversation
began about the row Tushkevitch and Veslovsky had taken alone together
in the boat, and Tushkevitch began describing the last boat races in
Petersburg at the Yacht Club. But Anna, seizing the first pause, at once
turned to the architect to draw him out of his silence.

"Nikolay Ivanitch was struck," she said, meaning Sviazhsky, "at the
progress the new building had made since he was here last; but I am
there every day, and every day I wonder at the rate at which it grows."

"It’s first-rate working with his excellency," said the architect with a
smile (he was respectful and composed, though with a sense of his own
dignity). "It’s a very different matter to have to do with the district
authorities. Where one would have to write out sheaves of papers, here I
call upon the count, and in three words we settle the business."

"The American way of doing business," said Sviazhsky, with a smile.

"Yes, there they build in a rational fashion..."

The conversation passed to the misuse of political power in the United
States, but Anna quickly brought it round to another topic, so as to
draw the steward into talk.

"Have you ever seen a reaping machine?" she said, addressing Darya
Alexandrovna. "We had just ridden over to look at one when we met. It’s
the first time I ever saw one."

"How do they work?" asked Dolly.

"Exactly like little scissors. A plank and a lot of little scissors.
Like this."

Anna took a knife and fork in her beautiful white hands covered with
rings, and began showing how the machine worked. It was clear that she
saw nothing would be understood from her explanation; but aware that her
talk was pleasant and her hands beautiful she went on explaining.

"More like little penknives," Veslovsky said playfully, never taking his
eyes off her.

Anna gave a just perceptible smile, but made no answer. "Isn’t it true,
Karl Fedoritch, that it’s just like little scissors?" she said to the
steward.
