eyes.

"Annie and those to come..."

"He need not trouble on that score; I shall have no more children."

"How can you tell that you won’t?"

"I shall not, because I don’t wish it." And, in spite of all her
emotion, Anna smiled, as she caught the naïve expression of curiosity,
wonder, and horror on Dolly’s face.

"The doctor told me after my illness..."

"Impossible!" said Dolly, opening her eyes wide.

For her this was one of those discoveries the consequences and
deductions from which are so immense that all that one feels for the
first instant is that it is impossible to take it all in, and that one
will have to reflect a great, great deal upon it.

This discovery, suddenly throwing light on all those families of one or
two children, which had hitherto been so incomprehensible to her,
aroused so many ideas, reflections, and contradictory emotions, that she
had nothing to say, and simply gazed with wide-open eyes of wonder at
Anna. This was the very thing she had been dreaming of, but now learning
that it was possible, she was horrified. She felt that it was too simple
a solution of too complicated a problem.

_"N’est-ce pas immoral?"_ was all she said, after a brief pause.

"Why so? Think, I have a choice between two alternatives: either to be
with child, that is an invalid, or to be the friend and companion of my
husband—practically my husband," Anna said in a tone intentionally
superficial and frivolous.

"Yes, yes," said Darya Alexandrovna, hearing the very arguments she had
used to herself, and not finding the same force in them as before.

"For you, for other people," said Anna, as though divining her thoughts,
"there may be reason to hesitate; but for me.... You must consider, I am
not his wife; he loves me as long as he loves me. And how am I to keep
his love? Not like this!"

She moved her white hands in a curve before her waist with extraordinary
rapidity, as happens during moments of excitement; ideas and memories
rushed into Darya Alexandrovna’s head. "I," she thought, "did not keep
my attraction for Stiva; he left me for others, and the first woman for
whom he betrayed me did not keep him by being always pretty and lively.
He deserted her and took another. And can Anna attract and keep Count
Vronsky in that way? If that is what he looks for, he will find dresses
and manners still more attractive and charming. And however white and
beautiful her bare arms are, however beautiful her full figure and her
eager face under her black curls, he will find something better still,
just as my disgusting, pitiful, and charming husband does."

Dolly made no answer, she merely sighed. Anna noticed this sigh,
indicating dissent, and she went on. In her armory she had other
arguments so strong that no answer could be made to them.

"Do you say that it’s not right? But you must consider," she went on;
"you forget my position. How can I desire children? I’m not speaking of
the suffering, I’m not afraid of that. Think only, what are my children
to be? Ill-fated children, who will have to bear a stranger’s name. For
the very fact of their birth they will be forced to be ashamed of their
mother, their father, their birth."

"But that is just why a divorce is necessary." But Anna did not hear
her. She longed to give utterance to all the arguments with which she
had so many times convinced herself.

"What is reason given me for, if I am not to use it to avoid bringing
unhappy beings into the world!" She looked at Dolly, but without waiting
for a reply she went on:

"I should always feel I had wronged these unhappy children," she said.
"If they are not, at any rate they are not unhappy; while if they are
unhappy, I alone should be to blame for it."

These were the very arguments Darya Alexandrovna had used in her own
reflections; but she heard them without understanding them. "How can one
wrong creatures that don’t exist?" she thought. And all at once the idea
struck her: could it possibly, under any circumstances, have been better
for her favorite Grisha if he had never existed? And this seemed to her
so wild, so strange, that she shook her head to drive away this tangle
of whirling, mad ideas.

"No, I don’t know; it’s not right," was all she said, with an expression
of disgust on her face.

"Yes, but you mustn’t forget that you and I.... And besides that," added
Anna, in spite of the wealth of her arguments and the poverty of Dolly’s
objections, seeming still to admit that it was not right, "don’t forget
the chief point, that I am not now in the same position as you. For you
the question is: do you desire not to have any more children; while for
me it is: do I desire to have them? And that’s a great difference. You
must see that I can’t desire it in my position."

Darya Alexandrovna made no reply. She suddenly felt that she had got far
away from Anna; that there lay between them a barrier of questions on
which they could never agree, and about which it was better not to
speak.



Chapter 


"Then there is all the more reason for you to legalize your position, if
possible," said Dolly.

"Yes, if possible," said Anna, speaking all at once in an utterly
different tone, subdued and mournful.

"Surely you don’t mean a divorce is impossible? I was told your husband
had consented to it."

"Dolly, I don’t want to talk about that."

"Oh, we won’t then," Darya Alexandrovna hastened to say, noticing the
expression of suffering on Anna’s face. "All I see is that you take too
gloomy a view of things."

"I? Not at all! I’m always bright and happy. You see, _je fais des
passions._ Veslovsky..."

"Yes, to tell the truth, I don’t like Veslovsky’s tone," said Darya
Alexandrovna, anxious to change the subject.

"Oh, that’s nonsense! It amuses Alexey, and that’s all; but he’s a boy,
and quite under my control. You know, I turn him as I please. It’s just
as it might be with your Grisha.... Dolly!"—she suddenly changed the
subject—"you say I take too gloomy a view of things. You can’t
understand. It’s too awful! I try not to take any view of it at all."

"But I think you ought to. You ought to do all you can."

"But what can I do? Nothing. You tell me to marry Alexey, and say I
don’t think about it. I don’t think about it!" she repeated, and a flush
rose into her face. She got up, straightening her chest, and sighed
heavily. With her light step she began pacing up and down the room,
stopping now and then. "I don’t think of it? Not a day, not an hour
passes that I don’t think of it, and blame myself for thinking of it ...
because thinking of that may drive me mad. Drive me mad!" she repeated.
"When I think of it, I can’t sleep without morphine. But never mind. Let
us talk quietly. They tell me, divorce. In the first place, he won’t
give me a divorce. He’s under the influence of Countess Lidia Ivanovna
now."

Darya Alexandrovna, sitting erect on a chair, turned her head, following
