Dolly came in with the letter. Anna read it and handed it back in
silence.

"I knew all that," she said, "and it doesn’t interest me in the least."

"Oh, why so? On the contrary, I have hopes," said Dolly, looking
inquisitively at Anna. She had never seen her in such a strangely
irritable condition. "When are you going away?" she asked.

Anna, half-closing her eyes, looked straight before her and did not
answer.

"Why does Kitty shrink from me?" she said, looking at the door and
flushing red.

"Oh, what nonsense! She’s nursing, and things aren’t going right with
her, and I’ve been advising her.... She’s delighted. She’ll be here in a
minute," said Dolly awkwardly, not clever at lying. "Yes, here she is."

Hearing that Anna had called, Kitty had wanted not to appear, but Dolly
persuaded her. Rallying her forces, Kitty went in, walked up to her,
blushing, and shook hands.

"I am so glad to see you," she said with a trembling voice.

Kitty had been thrown into confusion by the inward conflict between her
antagonism to this bad woman and her desire to be nice to her. But as
soon as she saw Anna’s lovely and attractive face, all feeling of
antagonism disappeared.

"I should not have been surprised if you had not cared to meet me. I’m
used to everything. You have been ill? Yes, you are changed," said Anna.

Kitty felt that Anna was looking at her with hostile eyes. She ascribed
this hostility to the awkward position in which Anna, who had once
patronized her, must feel with her now, and she felt sorry for her.

They talked of Kitty’s illness, of the baby, of Stiva, but it was
obvious that nothing interested Anna.

"I came to say good-bye to you," she said, getting up.

"Oh, when are you going?"

But again not answering, Anna turned to Kitty.

"Yes, I am very glad to have seen you," she said with a smile. "I have
heard so much of you from everyone, even from your husband. He came to
see me, and I liked him exceedingly," she said, unmistakably with
malicious intent. "Where is he?"

"He has gone back to the country," said Kitty, blushing.

"Remember me to him, be sure you do."

"I’ll be sure to!" Kitty said naïvely, looking compassionately into her
eyes.

"So good-bye, Dolly." And kissing Dolly and shaking hands with Kitty,
Anna went out hurriedly.

"She’s just the same and just as charming! She’s very lovely!" said
Kitty, when she was alone with her sister. "But there’s something
piteous about her. Awfully piteous!"

"Yes, there’s something unusual about her today," said Dolly. "When I
went with her into the hall, I fancied she was almost crying."



Chapter 


Anna got into the carriage again in an even worse frame of mind than
when she set out from home. To her previous tortures was added now that
sense of mortification and of being an outcast which she had felt so
distinctly on meeting Kitty.

"Where to? Home?" asked Pyotr.

"Yes, home," she said, not even thinking now where she was going.

"How they looked at me as something dreadful, incomprehensible, and
curious! What can he be telling the other with such warmth?" she
thought, staring at two men who walked by. "Can one ever tell anyone
what one is feeling? I meant to tell Dolly, and it’s a good thing I
didn’t tell her. How pleased she would have been at my misery! She would
have concealed it, but her chief feeling would have been delight at my
being punished for the happiness she envied me for. Kitty, she would
have been even more pleased. How I can see through her! She knows I was
more than usually sweet to her husband. And she’s jealous and hates me.
And she despises me. In her eyes I’m an immoral woman. If I were an
immoral woman I could have made her husband fall in love with me ... if
I’d cared to. And, indeed, I did care to. There’s someone who’s pleased
with himself," she thought, as she saw a fat, rubicund gentleman coming
towards her. He took her for an acquaintance, and lifted his glossy hat
above his bald, glossy head, and then perceived his mistake. "He thought
he knew me. Well, he knows me as well as anyone in the world knows me. I
don’t know myself. I know my appetites, as the French say. They want
that dirty ice cream, that they do know for certain," she thought,
looking at two boys stopping an ice cream seller, who took a barrel off
his head and began wiping his perspiring face with a towel. "We all want
what is sweet and nice. If not sweetmeats, then a dirty ice. And Kitty’s
the same—if not Vronsky, then Levin. And she envies me, and hates me.
And we all hate each other. I Kitty, Kitty me. Yes, that’s the truth.
‘_Tiutkin, coiffeur._’ _Je me fais coiffer par Tiutkin...._ I’ll tell
him that when he comes," she thought and smiled. But the same instant
she remembered that she had no one now to tell anything amusing to. "And
there’s nothing amusing, nothing mirthful, really. It’s all hateful.
They’re singing for vespers, and how carefully that merchant crosses
himself! as if he were afraid of missing something. Why these churches
and this singing and this humbug? Simply to conceal that we all hate
each other like these cab drivers who are abusing each other so angrily.
Yashvin says, ‘He wants to strip me of my shirt, and I him of his.’ Yes,
that’s the truth!"

She was plunged in these thoughts, which so engrossed her that she left
off thinking of her own position, when the carriage drew up at the steps
of her house. It was only when she saw the porter running out to meet
her that she remembered she had sent the note and the telegram.

"Is there an answer?" she inquired.

"I’ll see this minute," answered the porter, and glancing into his room,
he took out and gave her the thin square envelope of a telegram. "I
can’t come before ten o’clock.—Vronsky," she read.

"And hasn’t the messenger come back?"

"No," answered the porter.

"Then, since it’s so, I know what I must do," she said, and feeling a
vague fury and craving for revenge rising up within her, she ran
upstairs. "I’ll go to him myself. Before going away forever, I’ll tell
him all. Never have I hated anyone as I hate that man!" she thought.
Seeing his hat on the rack, she shuddered with aversion. She did not
consider that his telegram was an answer to her telegram and that he had
not yet received her note. She pictured him to herself as talking calmly
to his mother and Princess Sorokina and rejoicing at her sufferings.
"Yes, I must go quickly," she said, not knowing yet where she was going.
She longed to get away as quickly as possible from the feelings she had
gone through in that awful house. The servants, the walls, the things in
that house—all aroused repulsion and hatred in her and lay like a weight
upon her.

"Yes, I must go to the railway station, and if he’s not there, then go
there and catch him." Anna looked at the railway timetable in the
newspapers. An evening train went at two minutes past eight. "Yes, I
shall be in time." She gave orders for the other horses to be put in the
carriage, and packed in a traveling-bag the things needed for a few
