"But don’t worry, it’ll be brought directly."

"No, what is to be done!" said Levin, with smothered fury. "And these
fools of open waistcoats! Out of the question!" he said, looking at the
crumpled front of his shirt. "And what if the things have been taken on
to the railway station!" he roared in desperation.

"Then you must put on mine."

"I ought to have done so long ago, if at all."

"It’s not nice to look ridiculous.... Wait a bit! it will _come round_."

The point was that when Levin asked for his evening suit, Kouzma, his
old servant, had brought him the coat, waistcoat, and everything that
was wanted.

"But the shirt!" cried Levin.

"You’ve got a shirt on," Kouzma answered, with a placid smile.

Kouzma had not thought of leaving out a clean shirt, and on receiving
instructions to pack up everything and send it round to the
Shtcherbatskys’ house, from which the young people were to set out the
same evening, he had done so, packing everything but the dress suit. The
shirt worn since the morning was crumpled and out of the question with
the fashionable open waistcoat. It was a long way to send to the
Shtcherbatskys’. They sent out to buy a shirt. The servant came back;
everything was shut up—it was Sunday. They sent to Stepan Arkadyevitch’s
and brought a shirt—it was impossibly wide and short. They sent finally
to the Shtcherbatskys’ to unpack the things. The bridegroom was expected
at the church while he was pacing up and down his room like a wild beast
in a cage, peeping out into the corridor, and with horror and despair
recalling what absurd things he had said to Kitty and what she might be
thinking now.

At last the guilty Kouzma flew panting into the room with the shirt.

"Only just in time. They were just lifting it into the van," said
Kouzma.

Three minutes later Levin ran full speed into the corridor, not looking
at his watch for fear of aggravating his sufferings.

"You won’t help matters like this," said Stepan Arkadyevitch with a
smile, hurrying with more deliberation after him. "It will come round,
it will come round ... I tell you."



Chapter 


"They’ve come!" "Here he is!" "Which one?" "Rather young, eh?" "Why, my
dear soul, she looks more dead than alive!" were the comments in the
crowd, when Levin, meeting his bride in the entrance, walked with her
into the church.

Stepan Arkadyevitch told his wife the cause of the delay, and the guests
were whispering it with smiles to one another. Levin saw nothing and no
one; he did not take his eyes off his bride.

Everyone said she had lost her looks dreadfully of late, and was not
nearly so pretty on her wedding day as usual; but Levin did not think
so. He looked at her hair done up high, with the long white veil and
white flowers and the high, stand-up, scalloped collar, that in such a
maidenly fashion hid her long neck at the sides and only showed it in
front, her strikingly slender figure, and it seemed to him that she
looked better than ever—not because these flowers, this veil, this gown
from Paris added anything to her beauty; but because, in spite of the
elaborate sumptuousness of her attire, the expression of her sweet face,
of her eyes, of her lips was still her own characteristic expression of
guileless truthfulness.

"I was beginning to think you meant to run away," she said, and smiled
to him.

"It’s so stupid, what happened to me, I’m ashamed to speak of it!" he
said, reddening, and he was obliged to turn to Sergey Ivanovitch, who
came up to him.

"This is a pretty story of yours about the shirt!" said Sergey
Ivanovitch, shaking his head and smiling.

"Yes, yes!" answered Levin, without an idea of what they were talking
about.

"Now, Kostya, you have to decide," said Stepan Arkadyevitch with an air
of mock dismay, "a weighty question. You are at this moment just in the
humor to appreciate all its gravity. They ask me, are they to light the
candles that have been lighted before or candles that have never been
lighted? It’s a matter of ten roubles," he added, relaxing his lips into
a smile. "I have decided, but I was afraid you might not agree."

Levin saw it was a joke, but he could not smile.

"Well, how’s it to be then?—unlighted or lighted candles? that’s the
question."

"Yes, yes, unlighted."

"Oh, I’m very glad. The question’s decided!" said Stepan Arkadyevitch,
smiling. "How silly men are, though, in this position," he said to
Tchirikov, when Levin, after looking absently at him, had moved back to
his bride.

"Kitty, mind you’re the first to step on the carpet," said Countess
Nordston, coming up. "You’re a nice person!" she said to Levin.

"Aren’t you frightened, eh?" said Marya Dmitrievna, an old aunt.

"Are you cold? You’re pale. Stop a minute, stoop down," said Kitty’s
sister, Madame Lvova, and with her plump, handsome arms she smilingly
set straight the flowers on her head.

Dolly came up, tried to say something, but could not speak, cried, and
then laughed unnaturally.

Kitty looked at all of them with the same absent eyes as Levin.

Meanwhile the officiating clergy had got into their vestments, and the
priest and deacon came out to the lectern, which stood in the forepart
of the church. The priest turned to Levin saying something. Levin did
not hear what the priest said.

"Take the bride’s hand and lead her up," the best man said to Levin.

It was a long while before Levin could make out what was expected of
him. For a long time they tried to set him right and made him begin
again—because he kept taking Kitty by the wrong arm or with the wrong
arm—till he understood at last that what he had to do was, without
changing his position, to take her right hand in his right hand. When at
last he had taken the bride’s hand in the correct way, the priest walked
a few paces in front of them and stopped at the lectern. The crowd of
friends and relations moved after them, with a buzz of talk and a rustle
of skirts. Someone stooped down and pulled out the bride’s train. The
church became so still that the drops of wax could be heard falling from
the candles.

The little old priest in his ecclesiastical cap, with his long
silvery-gray locks of hair parted behind his ears, was fumbling with
something at the lectern, putting out his little old hands from under
the heavy silver vestment with the gold cross on the back of it.

Stepan Arkadyevitch approached him cautiously, whispered something, and
making a sign to Levin, walked back again.

The priest lighted two candles, wreathed with flowers, and holding them
sideways so that the wax dropped slowly from them he turned, facing the
bridal pair. The priest was the same old man that had confessed Levin.
