staggering legs out of the mire, and for a minute he hesitated. But
Laska was setting. And immediately all his weariness vanished, and he
walked lightly through the swamp towards the dog. A snipe flew up at his
feet; he fired and killed it. Laska still pointed.—"Fetch it!" Another
bird flew up close to the dog. Levin fired. But it was an unlucky day
for him; he missed it, and when he went to look for the one he had shot,
he could not find that either. He wandered all about the reeds, but
Laska did not believe he had shot it, and when he sent her to find it,
she pretended to hunt for it, but did not really. And in the absence of
Vassenka, on whom Levin threw the blame of his failure, things went no
better. There were plenty of snipe still, but Levin made one miss after
another.

The slanting rays of the sun were still hot; his clothes, soaked through
with perspiration, stuck to his body; his left boot full of water
weighed heavily on his leg and squeaked at every step; the sweat ran in
drops down his powder-grimed face, his mouth was full of the bitter
taste, his nose of the smell of powder and stagnant water, his ears were
ringing with the incessant whir of the snipe; he could not touch the
stock of his gun, it was so hot; his heart beat with short, rapid
throbs; his hands shook with excitement, and his weary legs stumbled and
staggered over the hillocks and in the swamp, but still he walked on and
still he shot. At last, after a disgraceful miss, he flung his gun and
his hat on the ground.

"No, I must control myself," he said to himself. Picking up his gun and
his hat, he called Laska, and went out of the swamp. When he got on to
dry ground he sat down, pulled off his boot and emptied it, then walked
to the marsh, drank some stagnant-tasting water, moistened his burning
hot gun, and washed his face and hands. Feeling refreshed, he went back
to the spot where a snipe had settled, firmly resolved to keep cool.

He tried to be calm, but it was the same again. His finger pressed the
cock before he had taken a good aim at the bird. It got worse and worse.

He had only five birds in his game-bag when he walked out of the marsh
towards the alders where he was to rejoin Stepan Arkadyevitch.

Before he caught sight of Stepan Arkadyevitch he saw his dog. Krak
darted out from behind the twisted root of an alder, black all over with
the stinking mire of the marsh, and with the air of a conqueror sniffed
at Laska. Behind Krak there came into view in the shade of the alder
tree the shapely figure of Stepan Arkadyevitch. He came to meet him, red
and perspiring, with unbuttoned neckband, still limping in the same way.

"Well? You have been popping away!" he said, smiling good-humoredly.

"How have you got on?" queried Levin. But there was no need to ask, for
he had already seen the full game bag.

"Oh, pretty fair."

He had fourteen birds.

"A splendid marsh! I’ve no doubt Veslovsky got in your way. It’s awkward
too, shooting with one dog," said Stepan Arkadyevitch, to soften his
triumph.



Chapter 


When Levin and Stepan Arkadyevitch reached the peasant’s hut where Levin
always used to stay, Veslovsky was already there. He was sitting in the
middle of the hut, clinging with both hands to the bench from which he
was being pulled by a soldier, the brother of the peasant’s wife, who
was helping him off with his miry boots. Veslovsky was laughing his
infectious, good-humored laugh.

"I’ve only just come. _Ils ont été charmants_. Just fancy, they gave me
drink, fed me! Such bread, it was exquisite! _Delicieux!_ And the vodka,
I never tasted any better. And they would not take a penny for anything.
And they kept saying: ‘Excuse our homely ways.’"

"What should they take anything for? They were entertaining you, to be
sure. Do you suppose they keep vodka for sale?" said the soldier,
succeeding at last in pulling the soaked boot off the blackened
stocking.

In spite of the dirtiness of the hut, which was all muddied by their
boots and the filthy dogs licking themselves clean, and the smell of
marsh mud and powder that filled the room, and the absence of knives and
forks, the party drank their tea and ate their supper with a relish only
known to sportsmen. Washed and clean, they went into a hay-barn swept
ready for them, where the coachman had been making up beds for the
gentlemen.

Though it was dusk, not one of them wanted to go to sleep.

After wavering among reminiscences and anecdotes of guns, of dogs, and
of former shooting parties, the conversation rested on a topic that
interested all of them. After Vassenka had several times over expressed
his appreciation of this delightful sleeping place among the fragrant
hay, this delightful broken cart (he supposed it to be broken because
the shafts had been taken out), of the good nature of the peasants that
had treated him to vodka, of the dogs who lay at the feet of their
respective masters, Oblonsky began telling them of a delightful shooting
party at Malthus’s, where he had stayed the previous summer.

Malthus was a well-known capitalist, who had made his money by
speculation in railway shares. Stepan Arkadyevitch described what grouse
moors this Malthus had bought in the Tver province, and how they were
preserved, and of the carriages and dogcarts in which the shooting party
had been driven, and the luncheon pavilion that had been rigged up at
the marsh.

"I don’t understand you," said Levin, sitting up in the hay; "how is it
such people don’t disgust you? I can understand a lunch with Lafitte is
all very pleasant, but don’t you dislike just that very sumptuousness?
All these people, just like our spirit monopolists in old days, get
their money in a way that gains them the contempt of everyone. They
don’t care for their contempt, and then they use their dishonest gains
to buy off the contempt they have deserved."

"Perfectly true!" chimed in Vassenka Veslovsky. "Perfectly! Oblonsky, of
course, goes out of _bonhomie_, but other people say: ‘Well, Oblonsky
stays with them.’..."

"Not a bit of it." Levin could hear that Oblonsky was smiling as he
spoke. "I simply don’t consider him more dishonest than any other
wealthy merchant or nobleman. They’ve all made their money alike—by
their work and their intelligence."

"Oh, by what work? Do you call it work to get hold of concessions and
speculate with them?"

"Of course it’s work. Work in this sense, that if it were not for him
and others like him, there would have been no railways."

"But that’s not work, like the work of a peasant or a learned
profession."

"Granted, but it’s work in the sense that his activity produces a
result—the railways. But of course you think the railways useless."

"No, that’s another question; I am prepared to admit that they’re
useful. But all profit that is out of proportion to the labor expended
is dishonest."

"But who is to define what is proportionate?"

"Making profit by dishonest means, by trickery," said Levin, conscious
that he could not draw a distinct line between honesty and dishonesty.
"Such as banking, for instance," he went on. "It’s an evil—the amassing
of huge fortunes without labor, just the same thing as with the spirit
monopolies, it’s only the form that’s changed. _Le roi est mort, vive le
roi_. No sooner were the spirit monopolies abolished than the railways
came up, and banking companies; that, too, is profit without work."

