


Chapter 


The doctor was not yet up, and the footman said that "he had been up
late, and had given orders not to be waked, but would get up soon." The
footman was cleaning the lamp-chimneys, and seemed very busy about them.
This concentration of the footman upon his lamps, and his indifference
to what was passing in Levin, at first astounded him, but immediately on
considering the question he realized that no one knew or was bound to
know his feelings, and that it was all the more necessary to act calmly,
sensibly, and resolutely to get through this wall of indifference and
attain his aim.

"Don’t be in a hurry or let anything slip," Levin said to himself,
feeling a greater and greater flow of physical energy and attention to
all that lay before him to do.

Having ascertained that the doctor was not getting up, Levin considered
various plans, and decided on the following one: that Kouzma should go
for another doctor, while he himself should go to the chemist’s for
opium, and if when he came back the doctor had not yet begun to get up,
he would either by tipping the footman, or by force, wake the doctor at
all hazards.

At the chemist’s the lank shopman sealed up a packet of powders for a
coachman who stood waiting, and refused him opium with the same
callousness with which the doctor’s footman had cleaned his lamp
chimneys. Trying not to get flurried or out of temper, Levin mentioned
the names of the doctor and midwife, and explaining what the opium was
needed for, tried to persuade him. The assistant inquired in German
whether he should give it, and receiving an affirmative reply from
behind the partition, he took out a bottle and a funnel, deliberately
poured the opium from a bigger bottle into a little one, stuck on a
label, sealed it up, in spite of Levin’s request that he would not do
so, and was about to wrap it up too. This was more than Levin could
stand; he took the bottle firmly out of his hands, and ran to the big
glass doors. The doctor was not even now getting up, and the footman,
busy now in putting down the rugs, refused to wake him. Levin
deliberately took out a ten rouble note, and, careful to speak slowly,
though losing no time over the business, he handed him the note, and
explained that Pyotr Dmitrievitch (what a great and important personage
he seemed to Levin now, this Pyotr Dmitrievitch, who had been of so
little consequence in his eyes before!) had promised to come at any
time; that he would certainly not be angry! and that he must therefore
wake him at once.

The footman agreed, and went upstairs, taking Levin into the waiting
room.

Levin could hear through the door the doctor coughing, moving about,
washing, and saying something. Three minutes passed; it seemed to Levin
that more than an hour had gone by. He could not wait any longer.

"Pyotr Dmitrievitch, Pyotr Dmitrievitch!" he said in an imploring voice
at the open door. "For God’s sake, forgive me! See me as you are. It’s
been going on more than two hours already."

"In a minute; in a minute!" answered a voice, and to his amazement Levin
heard that the doctor was smiling as he spoke.

"For one instant."

"In a minute."

Two minutes more passed while the doctor was putting on his boots, and
two minutes more while the doctor put on his coat and combed his hair.

"Pyotr Dmitrievitch!" Levin was beginning again in a plaintive voice,
just as the doctor came in dressed and ready. "These people have no
conscience," thought Levin. "Combing his hair, while we’re dying!"

"Good morning!" the doctor said to him, shaking hands, and, as it were,
teasing him with his composure. "There’s no hurry. Well now?"

Trying to be as accurate as possible, Levin began to tell him every
unnecessary detail of his wife’s condition, interrupting his account
repeatedly with entreaties that the doctor would come with him at once.

"Oh, you needn’t be in any hurry. You don’t understand, you know. I’m
certain I’m not wanted, still I’ve promised, and if you like, I’ll come.
But there’s no hurry. Please sit down; won’t you have some coffee?"

Levin stared at him with eyes that asked whether he was laughing at him;
but the doctor had no notion of making fun of him.

"I know, I know," the doctor said, smiling; "I’m a married man myself;
and at these moments we husbands are very much to be pitied. I’ve a
patient whose husband always takes refuge in the stables on such
occasions."

"But what do you think, Pyotr Dmitrievitch? Do you suppose it may go all
right?"

"Everything points to a favorable issue."

"So you’ll come immediately?" said Levin, looking wrathfully at the
servant who was bringing in the coffee.

"In an hour’s time."

"Oh, for mercy’s sake!"

"Well, let me drink my coffee, anyway."

The doctor started upon his coffee. Both were silent.

"The Turks are really getting beaten, though. Did you read yesterday’s
telegrams?" said the doctor, munching some roll.

"No, I can’t stand it!" said Levin, jumping up. "So you’ll be with us in
a quarter of an hour."

"In half an hour."

"On your honor?"

When Levin got home, he drove up at the same time as the princess, and
they went up to the bedroom door together. The princess had tears in her
eyes, and her hands were shaking. Seeing Levin, she embraced him, and
burst into tears.

"Well, my dear Lizaveta Petrovna?" she queried, clasping the hand of the
midwife, who came out to meet them with a beaming and anxious face.

"She’s going on well," she said; "persuade her to lie down. She will be
easier so."

From the moment when he had waked up and understood what was going on,
Levin had prepared his mind to bear resolutely what was before him, and
without considering or anticipating anything, to avoid upsetting his
wife, and on the contrary to soothe her and keep up her courage. Without
allowing himself even to think of what was to come, of how it would end,
judging from his inquiries as to the usual duration of these ordeals,
Levin had in his imagination braced himself to bear up and to keep a
tight rein on his feelings for five hours, and it had seemed to him he
could do this. But when he came back from the doctor’s and saw her
sufferings again, he fell to repeating more and more frequently: "Lord,
have mercy on us, and succor us!" He sighed, and flung his head up, and
began to feel afraid he could not bear it, that he would burst into
tears or run away. Such agony it was to him. And only one hour had
passed.

But after that hour there passed another hour, two hours, three, the
full five hours he had fixed as the furthest limit of his sufferings,
and the position was still unchanged; and he was still bearing it
because there was nothing to be done but bear it; every instant feeling
that he had reached the utmost limits of his endurance, and that his
