and pulled Seryozha.

Alexey Alexandrovitch stroked his son’s hair, answered the governess’s
inquiries about his wife, and asked what the doctor had said of the
baby.

"The doctor said it was nothing serious, and he ordered a bath, sir."

"But she is still in pain," said Alexey Alexandrovitch, listening to the
baby’s screaming in the next room.

"I think it’s the wet-nurse, sir," the Englishwoman said firmly.

"What makes you think so?" he asked, stopping short.

"It’s just as it was at Countess Paul’s, sir. They gave the baby
medicine, and it turned out that the baby was simply hungry: the nurse
had no milk, sir."

Alexey Alexandrovitch pondered, and after standing still a few seconds
he went in at the other door. The baby was lying with its head thrown
back, stiffening itself in the nurse’s arms, and would not take the
plump breast offered it; and it never ceased screaming in spite of the
double hushing of the wet-nurse and the other nurse, who was bending
over her.

"Still no better?" said Alexey Alexandrovitch.

"She’s very restless," answered the nurse in a whisper.

"Miss Edwarde says that perhaps the wet-nurse has no milk," he said.

"I think so too, Alexey Alexandrovitch."

"Then why didn’t you say so?"

"Who’s one to say it to? Anna Arkadyevna still ill..." said the nurse
discontentedly.

The nurse was an old servant of the family. And in her simple words
there seemed to Alexey Alexandrovitch an allusion to his position.

The baby screamed louder than ever, struggling and sobbing. The nurse,
with a gesture of despair, went to it, took it from the wet-nurse’s
arms, and began walking up and down, rocking it.

"You must ask the doctor to examine the wet-nurse," said Alexey
Alexandrovitch. The smartly dressed and healthy-looking nurse,
frightened at the idea of losing her place, muttered something to
herself, and covering her bosom, smiled contemptuously at the idea of
doubts being cast on her abundance of milk. In that smile, too, Alexey
Alexandrovitch saw a sneer at his position.

"Luckless child!" said the nurse, hushing the baby, and still walking up
and down with it.

Alexey Alexandrovitch sat down, and with a despondent and suffering face
watched the nurse walking to and fro.

When the child at last was still, and had been put in a deep bed, and
the nurse, after smoothing the little pillow, had left her, Alexey
Alexandrovitch got up, and walking awkwardly on tiptoe, approached the
baby. For a minute he was still, and with the same despondent face gazed
at the baby; but all at once a smile, that moved his hair and the skin
of his forehead, came out on his face, and he went as softly out of the
room.

In the dining room he rang the bell, and told the servant who came in to
send again for the doctor. He felt vexed with his wife for not being
anxious about this exquisite baby, and in this vexed humor he had no
wish to go to her; he had no wish, either, to see Princess Betsy. But
his wife might wonder why he did not go to her as usual; and so,
overcoming his disinclination, he went towards the bedroom. As he walked
over the soft rug towards the door, he could not help overhearing a
conversation he did not want to hear.

"If he hadn’t been going away, I could have understood your answer and
his too. But your husband ought to be above that," Betsy was saying.

"It’s not for my husband; for myself I don’t wish it. Don’t say that!"
answered Anna’s excited voice.

"Yes, but you must care to say good-bye to a man who has shot himself on
your account...."

"That’s just why I don’t want to."

With a dismayed and guilty expression, Alexey Alexandrovitch stopped and
would have gone back unobserved. But reflecting that this would be
undignified, he turned back again, and clearing his throat, he went up
to the bedroom. The voices were silent, and he went in.

Anna, in a gray dressing gown, with a crop of short clustering black
curls on her round head, was sitting on a settee. The eagerness died out
of her face, as it always did, at the sight of her husband; she dropped
her head and looked round uneasily at Betsy. Betsy, dressed in the
height of the latest fashion, in a hat that towered somewhere over her
head like a shade on a lamp, in a blue dress with violet crossway
stripes slanting one way on the bodice and the other way on the skirt,
was sitting beside Anna, her tall flat figure held erect. Bowing her
head, she greeted Alexey Alexandrovitch with an ironical smile.

"Ah!" she said, as though surprised. "I’m very glad you’re at home. You
never put in an appearance anywhere, and I haven’t seen you ever since
Anna has been ill. I have heard all about it—your anxiety. Yes, you’re a
wonderful husband!" she said, with a meaning and affable air, as though
she were bestowing an order of magnanimity on him for his conduct to his
wife.

Alexey Alexandrovitch bowed frigidly, and kissing his wife’s hand, asked
how she was.

"Better, I think," she said, avoiding his eyes.

"But you’ve rather a feverish-looking color," he said, laying stress on
the word "feverish."

"We’ve been talking too much," said Betsy. "I feel it’s selfishness on
my part, and I am going away."

She got up, but Anna, suddenly flushing, quickly caught at her hand.

"No, wait a minute, please. I must tell you ... no, you." she turned to
Alexey Alexandrovitch, and her neck and brow were suffused with crimson.
"I won’t and can’t keep anything secret from you," she said.

Alexey Alexandrovitch cracked his fingers and bowed his head.

"Betsy’s been telling me that Count Vronsky wants to come here to say
good-bye before his departure for Tashkend." She did not look at her
husband, and was evidently in haste to have everything out, however hard
it might be for her. "I told her I could not receive him."

"You said, my dear, that it would depend on Alexey Alexandrovitch,"
Betsy corrected her.

"Oh, no, I can’t receive him; and what object would there...." She
stopped suddenly, and glanced inquiringly at her husband (he did not
look at her). "In short, I don’t wish it...."

Alexey Alexandrovitch advanced and would have taken her hand.

Her first impulse was to jerk back her hand from the damp hand with big
swollen veins that sought hers, but with an obvious effort to control
herself she pressed his hand.

"I am very grateful to you for your confidence, but..." he said, feeling
with confusion and annoyance that what he could decide easily and
clearly by himself, he could not discuss before Princess Tverskaya, who
to him stood for the incarnation of that brute force which would
