the day before at a corner table. They had nothing to talk about, as was
almost always the case at this time, and laying her hand on the table
she kept opening and shutting it, and laughed herself as she watched her
action. He remembered how he had kissed it and then had examined the
lines on the pink palm. "Have mercy on us again!" thought Levin,
crossing himself, bowing, and looking at the supple spring of the
deacon’s back bowing before him. "She took my hand then and examined the
lines ‘You’ve got a splendid hand,’ she said." And he looked at his own
hand and the short hand of the deacon. "Yes, now it will soon be over,"
he thought. "No, it seems to be beginning again," he thought, listening
to the prayers. "No, it’s just ending: there he is bowing down to the
ground. That’s always at the end."

The deacon’s hand in a plush cuff accepted a three-rouble note
unobtrusively, and the deacon said he would put it down in the register,
and his new boots creaking jauntily over the flagstones of the empty
church, he went to the altar. A moment later he peeped out thence and
beckoned to Levin. Thought, till then locked up, began to stir in
Levin’s head, but he made haste to drive it away. "It will come right
somehow," he thought, and went towards the altar-rails. He went up the
steps, and turning to the right saw the priest. The priest, a little old
man with a scanty grizzled beard and weary, good-natured eyes, was
standing at the altar-rails, turning over the pages of a missal. With a
slight bow to Levin he began immediately reading prayers in the official
voice. When he had finished them he bowed down to the ground and turned,
facing Levin.

"Christ is present here unseen, receiving your confession," he said,
pointing to the crucifix. "Do you believe in all the doctrines of the
Holy Apostolic Church?" the priest went on, turning his eyes away from
Levin’s face and folding his hands under his stole.

"I have doubted, I doubt everything," said Levin in a voice that jarred
on himself, and he ceased speaking.

The priest waited a few seconds to see if he would not say more, and
closing his eyes he said quickly, with a broad, Vladimirsky accent:

"Doubt is natural to the weakness of mankind, but we must pray that God
in His mercy will strengthen us. What are your special sins?" he added,
without the slightest interval, as though anxious not to waste time.

"My chief sin is doubt. I have doubts of everything, and for the most
part I am in doubt."

"Doubt is natural to the weakness of mankind," the priest repeated the
same words. "What do you doubt about principally?"

"I doubt of everything. I sometimes even have doubts of the existence of
God," Levin could not help saying, and he was horrified at the
impropriety of what he was saying. But Levin’s words did not, it seemed,
make much impression on the priest.

"What sort of doubt can there be of the existence of God?" he said
hurriedly, with a just perceptible smile.

Levin did not speak.

"What doubt can you have of the Creator when you behold His creation?"
the priest went on in the rapid customary jargon. "Who has decked the
heavenly firmament with its lights? Who has clothed the earth in its
beauty? How explain it without the Creator?" he said, looking
inquiringly at Levin.

Levin felt that it would be improper to enter upon a metaphysical
discussion with the priest, and so he said in reply merely what was a
direct answer to the question.

"I don’t know," he said.

"You don’t know! Then how can you doubt that God created all?" the
priest said, with good-humored perplexity.

"I don’t understand it at all," said Levin, blushing, and feeling that
his words were stupid, and that they could not be anything but stupid in
such a position.

"Pray to God and beseech Him. Even the holy fathers had doubts, and
prayed to God to strengthen their faith. The devil has great power, and
we must resist him. Pray to God, beseech Him. Pray to God," he repeated
hurriedly.

The priest paused for some time, as though meditating.

"You’re about, I hear, to marry the daughter of my parishioner and son
in the spirit, Prince Shtcherbatsky?" he resumed, with a smile. "An
excellent young lady."

"Yes," answered Levin, blushing for the priest. "What does he want to
ask me about this at confession for?" he thought.

And, as though answering his thought, the priest said to him:

"You are about to enter into holy matrimony, and God may bless you with
offspring. Well, what sort of bringing-up can you give your babes if you
do not overcome the temptation of the devil, enticing you to
infidelity?" he said, with gentle reproachfulness. "If you love your
child as a good father, you will not desire only wealth, luxury, honor
for your infant; you will be anxious for his salvation, his spiritual
enlightenment with the light of truth. Eh? What answer will you make him
when the innocent babe asks you: ‘Papa! who made all that enchants me in
this world—the earth, the waters, the sun, the flowers, the grass?’ Can
you say to him: ‘I don’t know’? You cannot but know, since the Lord God
in His infinite mercy has revealed it to us. Or your child will ask you:
‘What awaits me in the life beyond the tomb?’ What will you say to him
when you know nothing? How will you answer him? Will you leave him to
the allurements of the world and the devil? That’s not right," he said,
and he stopped, putting his head on one side and looking at Levin with
his kindly, gentle eyes.

Levin made no answer this time, not because he did not want to enter
upon a discussion with the priest, but because, so far, no one had ever
asked him such questions, and when his babes did ask him those
questions, it would be time enough to think about answering them.

"You are entering upon a time of life," pursued the priest, "when you
must choose your path and keep to it. Pray to God that He may in His
mercy aid you and have mercy on you!" he concluded. "Our Lord and God,
Jesus Christ, in the abundance and riches of His lovingkindness,
forgives this child..." and, finishing the prayer of absolution, the
priest blessed him and dismissed him.

On getting home that day, Levin had a delightful sense of relief at the
awkward position being over and having been got through without his
having to tell a lie. Apart from this, there remained a vague memory
that what the kind, nice old fellow had said had not been at all so
stupid as he had fancied at first, and that there was something in it
that must be cleared up.

"Of course, not now," thought Levin, "but some day later on." Levin felt
more than ever now that there was something not clear and not clean in
his soul, and that, in regard to religion, he was in the same position
which he perceived so clearly and disliked in others, and for which he
blamed his friend Sviazhsky.

Levin spent that evening with his betrothed at Dolly’s, and was in very
high spirits. To explain to Stepan Arkadyevitch the state of excitement
in which he found himself, he said that he was happy like a dog being
trained to jump through a hoop, who, having at last caught the idea, and
done what was required of him, whines and wags its tail, and jumps up to
the table and the windows in its delight.



Chapter 


On the day of the wedding, according to the Russian custom (the princess
and Darya Alexandrovna insisted on strictly keeping all the customs),
Levin did not see his betrothed, and dined at his hotel with three
