Golenishtchev, alluding to a conversation between them about Vronsky’s
despair of attaining this technique.

"Yes, yes, marvelous!" Golenishtchev and Anna assented. In spite of the
excited condition in which he was, the sentence about technique had sent
a pang to Mihailov’s heart, and looking angrily at Vronsky he suddenly
scowled. He had often heard this word technique, and was utterly unable
to understand what was understood by it. He knew that by this term was
understood a mechanical facility for painting or drawing, entirely apart
from its subject. He had noticed often that even in actual praise
technique was opposed to essential quality, as though one could paint
well something that was bad. He knew that a great deal of attention and
care was necessary in taking off the coverings, to avoid injuring the
creation itself, and to take off all the coverings; but there was no art
of painting—no technique of any sort—about it. If to a little child or
to his cook were revealed what he saw, it or she would have been able to
peel the wrappings off what was seen. And the most experienced and
adroit painter could not by mere mechanical facility paint anything if
the lines of the subject were not revealed to him first. Besides, he saw
that if it came to talking about technique, it was impossible to praise
him for it. In all he had painted and repainted he saw faults that hurt
his eyes, coming from want of care in taking off the wrappings—faults he
could not correct now without spoiling the whole. And in almost all the
figures and faces he saw, too, remnants of the wrappings not perfectly
removed that spoiled the picture.

"One thing might be said, if you will allow me to make the remark..."
observed Golenishtchev.

"Oh, I shall be delighted, I beg you," said Mihailov with a forced
smile.

"That is, that you make Him the man-god, and not the God-man. But I know
that was what you meant to do."

"I cannot paint a Christ that is not in my heart," said Mihailov
gloomily.

"Yes; but in that case, if you will allow me to say what I think....
Your picture is so fine that my observation cannot detract from it, and,
besides, it is only my personal opinion. With you it is different. Your
very motive is different. But let us take Ivanov. I imagine that if
Christ is brought down to the level of an historical character, it would
have been better for Ivanov to select some other historical subject,
fresh, untouched."

"But if this is the greatest subject presented to art?"

"If one looked one would find others. But the point is that art cannot
suffer doubt and discussion. And before the picture of Ivanov the
question arises for the believer and the unbeliever alike, ‘Is it God,
or is it not God?’ and the unity of the impression is destroyed."

"Why so? I think that for educated people," said Mihailov, "the question
cannot exist."

Golenishtchev did not agree with this, and confounded Mihailov by his
support of his first idea of the unity of the impression being essential
to art.

Mihailov was greatly perturbed, but he could say nothing in defense of
his own idea.



Chapter 


Anna and Vronsky had long been exchanging glances, regretting their
friend’s flow of cleverness. At last Vronsky, without waiting for the
artist, walked away to another small picture.

"Oh, how exquisite! What a lovely thing! A gem! How exquisite!" they
cried with one voice.

"What is it they’re so pleased with?" thought Mihailov. He had
positively forgotten that picture he had painted three years ago. He had
forgotten all the agonies and the ecstasies he had lived through with
that picture when for several months it had been the one thought
haunting him day and night. He had forgotten, as he always forgot, the
pictures he had finished. He did not even like to look at it, and had
only brought it out because he was expecting an Englishman who wanted to
buy it.

"Oh, that’s only an old study," he said.

"How fine!" said Golenishtchev, he too, with unmistakable sincerity,
falling under the spell of the picture.

Two boys were angling in the shade of a willow-tree. The elder had just
dropped in the hook, and was carefully pulling the float from behind a
bush, entirely absorbed in what he was doing. The other, a little
younger, was lying in the grass leaning on his elbows, with his tangled,
flaxen head in his hands, staring at the water with his dreamy blue
eyes. What was he thinking of?

The enthusiasm over this picture stirred some of the old feeling for it
in Mihailov, but he feared and disliked this waste of feeling for things
past, and so, even though this praise was grateful to him, he tried to
draw his visitors away to a third picture.

But Vronsky asked whether the picture was for sale. To Mihailov at that
moment, excited by visitors, it was extremely distasteful to speak of
money matters.

"It is put up there to be sold," he answered, scowling gloomily.

When the visitors had gone, Mihailov sat down opposite the picture of
Pilate and Christ, and in his mind went over what had been said, and
what, though not said, had been implied by those visitors. And, strange
to say, what had had such weight with him, while they were there and
while he mentally put himself at their point of view, suddenly lost all
importance for him. He began to look at his picture with all his own
full artist vision, and was soon in that mood of conviction of the
perfectibility, and so of the significance, of his picture—a conviction
essential to the most intense fervor, excluding all other interests—in
which alone he could work.

Christ’s foreshortened leg was not right, though. He took his palette
and began to work. As he corrected the leg he looked continually at the
figure of John in the background, which his visitors had not even
noticed, but which he knew was beyond perfection. When he had finished
the leg he wanted to touch that figure, but he felt too much excited for
it. He was equally unable to work when he was cold and when he was too
much affected and saw everything too much. There was only one stage in
the transition from coldness to inspiration, at which work was possible.
Today he was too much agitated. He would have covered the picture, but
he stopped, holding the cloth in his hand, and, smiling blissfully,
gazed a long while at the figure of John. At last, as it were
regretfully tearing himself away, he dropped the cloth, and, exhausted
but happy, went home.

Vronsky, Anna, and Golenishtchev, on their way home, were particularly
lively and cheerful. They talked of Mihailov and his pictures. The word
_talent_, by which they meant an inborn, almost physical, aptitude apart
from brain and heart, and in which they tried to find an expression for
all the artist had gained from life, recurred particularly often in
their talk, as though it were necessary for them to sum up what they had
no conception of, though they wanted to talk of it. They said that there
was no denying his talent, but that his talent could not develop for
want of education—the common defect of our Russian artists. But the
picture of the boys had imprinted itself on their memories, and they
were continually coming back to it. "What an exquisite thing! How he has
succeeded in it, and how simply! He doesn’t even comprehend how good it
is. Yes, I mustn’t let it slip; I must buy it," said Vronsky.



Chapter 

