
"Perhaps so," said Levin dryly, and he turned on his side. "Tomorrow,
early, I want to go shooting, and I won’t wake anyone, and shall set off
at daybreak."

"_Messieurs, venez vite!_" they heard the voice of Veslovsky coming
back. "_Charmante!_ I’ve made such a discovery. _Charmante!_ a perfect
Gretchen, and I’ve already made friends with her. Really, exceedingly
pretty," he declared in a tone of approval, as though she had been made
pretty entirely on his account, and he was expressing his satisfaction
with the entertainment that had been provided for him.

Levin pretended to be asleep, while Oblonsky, putting on his slippers,
and lighting a cigar, walked out of the barn, and soon their voices were
lost.

For a long while Levin could not get to sleep. He heard the horses
munching hay, then he heard the peasant and his elder boy getting ready
for the night, and going off for the night watch with the beasts, then
he heard the soldier arranging his bed on the other side of the barn,
with his nephew, the younger son of their peasant host. He heard the boy
in his shrill little voice telling his uncle what he thought about the
dogs, who seemed to him huge and terrible creatures, and asking what the
dogs were going to hunt next day, and the soldier in a husky, sleepy
voice, telling him the sportsmen were going in the morning to the marsh,
and would shoot with their guns; and then, to check the boy’s questions,
he said, "Go to sleep, Vaska; go to sleep, or you’ll catch it," and soon
after he began snoring himself, and everything was still. He could only
hear the snort of the horses, and the guttural cry of a snipe.

"Is it really only negative?" he repeated to himself. "Well, what of it?
It’s not my fault." And he began thinking about the next day.

"Tomorrow I’ll go out early, and I’ll make a point of keeping cool.
There are lots of snipe; and there are grouse too. When I come back
there’ll be the note from Kitty. Yes, Stiva may be right, I’m not manly
with her, I’m tied to her apron-strings.... Well, it can’t be helped!
Negative again...."

Half asleep, he heard the laughter and mirthful talk of Veslovsky and
Stepan Arkadyevitch. For an instant he opened his eyes: the moon was up,
and in the open doorway, brightly lighted up by the moonlight, they were
standing talking. Stepan Arkadyevitch was saying something of the
freshness of one girl, comparing her to a freshly peeled nut, and
Veslovsky with his infectious laugh was repeating some words, probably
said to him by a peasant: "Ah, you do your best to get round her!"
Levin, half asleep, said:

"Gentlemen, tomorrow before daylight!" and fell asleep.



Chapter 


Waking up at earliest dawn, Levin tried to wake his companions.
Vassenka, lying on his stomach, with one leg in a stocking thrust out,
was sleeping so soundly that he could elicit no response. Oblonsky, half
asleep, declined to get up so early. Even Laska, who was asleep, curled
up in the hay, got up unwillingly, and lazily stretched out and
straightened her hind legs one after the other. Getting on his boots and
stockings, taking his gun, and carefully opening the creaking door of
the barn, Levin went out into the road. The coachmen were sleeping in
their carriages, the horses were dozing. Only one was lazily eating
oats, dipping its nose into the manger. It was still gray out-of-doors.

"Why are you up so early, my dear?" the old woman, their hostess, said,
coming out of the hut and addressing him affectionately as an old
friend.

"Going shooting, granny. Do I go this way to the marsh?"

"Straight out at the back; by our threshing floor, my dear, and hemp
patches; there’s a little footpath." Stepping carefully with her
sunburnt, bare feet, the old woman conducted Levin, and moved back the
fence for him by the threshing floor.

"Straight on and you’ll come to the marsh. Our lads drove the cattle
there yesterday evening."

Laska ran eagerly forward along the little path. Levin followed her with
a light, rapid step, continually looking at the sky. He hoped the sun
would not be up before he reached the marsh. But the sun did not delay.
The moon, which had been bright when he went out, by now shone only like
a crescent of quicksilver. The pink flush of dawn, which one could not
help seeing before, now had to be sought to be discerned at all. What
were before undefined, vague blurs in the distant countryside could now
be distinctly seen. They were sheaves of rye. The dew, not visible till
the sun was up, wetted Levin’s legs and his blouse above his belt in the
high growing, fragrant hemp patch, from which the pollen had already
fallen out. In the transparent stillness of morning the smallest sounds
were audible. A bee flew by Levin’s ear with the whizzing sound of a
bullet. He looked carefully, and saw a second and a third. They were all
flying from the beehives behind the hedge, and they disappeared over the
hemp patch in the direction of the marsh. The path led straight to the
marsh. The marsh could be recognized by the mist which rose from it,
thicker in one place and thinner in another, so that the reeds and
willow bushes swayed like islands in this mist. At the edge of the marsh
and the road, peasant boys and men, who had been herding for the night,
were lying, and in the dawn all were asleep under their coats. Not far
from them were three hobbled horses. One of them clanked a chain. Laska
walked beside her master, pressing a little forward and looking round.
Passing the sleeping peasants and reaching the first reeds, Levin
examined his pistols and let his dog off. One of the horses, a sleek,
dark-brown three-year-old, seeing the dog, started away, switched its
tail and snorted. The other horses too were frightened, and splashing
through the water with their hobbled legs, and drawing their hoofs out
of the thick mud with a squelching sound, they bounded out of the marsh.
Laska stopped, looking ironically at the horses and inquiringly at
Levin. Levin patted Laska, and whistled as a sign that she might begin.

Laska ran joyfully and anxiously through the slush that swayed under
her.

Running into the marsh among the familiar scents of roots, marsh plants,
and slime, and the extraneous smell of horse dung, Laska detected at
once a smell that pervaded the whole marsh, the scent of that
strong-smelling bird that always excited her more than any other. Here
and there among the moss and marsh plants this scent was very strong,
but it was impossible to determine in which direction it grew stronger
or fainter. To find the direction, she had to go farther away from the
wind. Not feeling the motion of her legs, Laska bounded with a stiff
gallop, so that at each bound she could stop short, to the right, away
from the wind that blew from the east before sunrise, and turned facing
the wind. Sniffing in the air with dilated nostrils, she felt at once
that not their tracks only but they themselves were here before her, and
not one, but many. Laska slackened her speed. They were here, but where
precisely she could not yet determine. To find the very spot, she began
to make a circle, when suddenly her master’s voice drew her off. "Laska!
here?" he asked, pointing her to a different direction. She stopped,
asking him if she had better not go on doing as she had begun. But he
repeated his command in an angry voice, pointing to a spot covered with
water, where there could not be anything. She obeyed him, pretending she
was looking, so as to please him, went round it, and went back to her
former position, and was at once aware of the scent again. Now when he
was not hindering her, she knew what to do, and without looking at what
was under her feet, and to her vexation stumbling over a high stump into
the water, but righting herself with her strong, supple legs, she began
making the circle which was to make all clear to her. The scent of them
reached her, stronger and stronger, and more and more defined, and all
at once it became perfectly clear to her that one of them was here,
behind this tuft of reeds, five paces in front of her; she stopped, and
her whole body was still and rigid. On her short legs she could see
nothing in front of her, but by the scent she knew it was sitting not
more than five paces off. She stood still, feeling more and more
conscious of it, and enjoying it in anticipation. Her tail was stretched
straight and tense, and only wagging at the extreme end. Her mouth was
slightly open, her ears raised. One ear had been turned wrong side out
as she ran up, and she breathed heavily but warily, and still more
warily looked round, but more with her eyes than her head, to her
