turning her handsome, gently smiling face to him.

"Not one," said Sergey Ivanovitch. "Did you?"

She did not answer, busy with the children who thronged about her.

"That one too, near the twig," she pointed out to little Masha a little
fungus, split in half across its rosy cap by the dry grass from under
which it thrust itself. Varenka got up while Masha picked the fungus,
breaking it into two white halves. "This brings back my childhood," she
added, moving apart from the children beside Sergey Ivanovitch.

They walked on for some steps in silence. Varenka saw that he wanted to
speak; she guessed of what, and felt faint with joy and panic. They had
walked so far away that no one could hear them now, but still he did not
begin to speak. It would have been better for Varenka to be silent.
After a silence it would have been easier for them to say what they
wanted to say than after talking about mushrooms. But against her own
will, as it were accidentally, Varenka said:

"So you found nothing? In the middle of the wood there are always fewer,
though." Sergey Ivanovitch sighed and made no answer. He was annoyed
that she had spoken about the mushrooms. He wanted to bring her back to
the first words she had uttered about her childhood; but after a pause
of some length, as though against his own will, he made an observation
in response to her last words.

"I have heard that the white edible funguses are found principally at
the edge of the wood, though I can’t tell them apart."

Some minutes more passed, they moved still further away from the
children, and were quite alone. Varenka’s heart throbbed so that she
heard it beating, and felt that she was turning red and pale and red
again.

To be the wife of a man like Koznishev, after her position with Madame
Stahl, was to her imagination the height of happiness. Besides, she was
almost certain that she was in love with him. And this moment it would
have to be decided. She felt frightened. She dreaded both his speaking
and his not speaking.

Now or never it must be said—that Sergey Ivanovitch felt too. Everything
in the expression, the flushed cheeks and the downcast eyes of Varenka
betrayed a painful suspense. Sergey Ivanovitch saw it and felt sorry for
her. He felt even that to say nothing now would be a slight to her.
Rapidly in his own mind he ran over all the arguments in support of his
decision. He even said over to himself the words in which he meant to
put his offer, but instead of those words, some utterly unexpected
reflection that occurred to him made him ask:

"What is the difference between the ‘birch’ mushroom and the ‘white’
mushroom?"

Varenka’s lips quivered with emotion as she answered:

"In the top part there is scarcely any difference, it’s in the stalk."

And as soon as these words were uttered, both he and she felt that it
was over, that what was to have been said would not be said; and their
emotion, which had up to then been continually growing more intense,
began to subside.

"The birch mushroom’s stalk suggests a dark man’s chin after two days
without shaving," said Sergey Ivanovitch, speaking quite calmly now.

"Yes, that’s true," answered Varenka smiling, and unconsciously the
direction of their walk changed. They began to turn towards the
children. Varenka felt both sore and ashamed; at the same time she had a
sense of relief.

When he had got home again and went over the whole subject, Sergey
Ivanovitch thought his previous decision had been a mistaken one. He
could not be false to the memory of Marie.

"Gently, children, gently!" Levin shouted quite angrily to the children,
standing before his wife to protect her when the crowd of children flew
with shrieks of delight to meet them.

Behind the children Sergey Ivanovitch and Varenka walked out of the
wood. Kitty had no need to ask Varenka; she saw from the calm and
somewhat crestfallen faces of both that her plans had not come off.

"Well?" her husband questioned her as they were going home again.

"It doesn’t bite," said Kitty, her smile and manner of speaking
recalling her father, a likeness Levin often noticed with pleasure.

"How doesn’t bite?"

"I’ll show you," she said, taking her husband’s hand, lifting it to her
mouth, and just faintly brushing it with closed lips. "Like a kiss on a
priest’s hand."

"Which didn’t it bite with?" he said, laughing.

"Both. But it should have been like this..."

"There are some peasants coming..."

"Oh, they didn’t see."



Chapter 


During the time of the children’s tea the grown-up people sat in the
balcony and talked as though nothing had happened, though they all,
especially Sergey Ivanovitch and Varenka, were very well aware that
there had happened an event which, though negative, was of very great
importance. They both had the same feeling, rather like that of a
schoolboy after an examination, which has left him in the same class or
shut him out of the school forever. Everyone present, feeling too that
something had happened, talked eagerly about extraneous subjects. Levin
and Kitty were particularly happy and conscious of their love that
evening. And their happiness in their love seemed to imply a
disagreeable slur on those who would have liked to feel the same and
could not—and they felt a prick of conscience.

"Mark my words, Alexander will not come," said the old princess.

That evening they were expecting Stepan Arkadyevitch to come down by
train, and the old prince had written that possibly he might come too.

"And I know why," the princess went on; "he says that young people ought
to be left alone for a while at first."

"But papa has left us alone. We’ve never seen him," said Kitty.
"Besides, we’re not young people!—we’re old, married people by now."

"Only if he doesn’t come, I shall say good-bye to you children," said
the princess, sighing mournfully.

"What nonsense, mamma!" both the daughters fell upon her at once.

"How do you suppose he is feeling? Why, now..."

And suddenly there was an unexpected quiver in the princess’s voice. Her
daughters were silent, and looked at one another. "Maman always finds
something to be miserable about," they said in that glance. They did not
know that happy as the princess was in her daughter’s house, and useful
as she felt herself to be there, she had been extremely miserable, both
on her own account and her husband’s, ever since they had married their
last and favorite daughter, and the old home had been left empty.

"What is it, Agafea Mihalovna?" Kitty asked suddenly of Agafea
Mihalovna, who was standing with a mysterious air, and a face full of
meaning.

"About supper."
