friend.

"Alexey Alexandrovitch," she said, with desperate resolution looking him
in the face, "I asked you about Anna, you made me no answer. How is
she?"

"She is, I believe, quite well, Darya Alexandrovna," replied Alexey
Alexandrovitch, not looking at her.

"Alexey Alexandrovitch, forgive me, I have no right ... but I love Anna
as a sister, and esteem her; I beg, I beseech you to tell me what is
wrong between you? what fault do you find with her?"

Alexey Alexandrovitch frowned, and almost closing his eyes, dropped his
head.

"I presume that your husband has told you the grounds on which I
consider it necessary to change my attitude to Anna Arkadyevna?" he
said, not looking her in the face, but eyeing with displeasure
Shtcherbatsky, who was walking across the drawing room.

"I don’t believe it, I don’t believe it, I can’t believe it!" Dolly
said, clasping her bony hands before her with a vigorous gesture. She
rose quickly, and laid her hand on Alexey Alexandrovitch’s sleeve. "We
shall be disturbed here. Come this way, please."

Dolly’s agitation had an effect on Alexey Alexandrovitch. He got up and
submissively followed her to the schoolroom. They sat down to a table
covered with an oilcloth cut in slits by penknives.

"I don’t, I don’t believe it!" Dolly said, trying to catch his glance
that avoided her.

"One cannot disbelieve facts, Darya Alexandrovna," said he, with an
emphasis on the word "facts."

"But what has she done?" said Darya Alexandrovna. "What precisely has
she done?"

"She has forsaken her duty, and deceived her husband. That’s what she
has done," said he.

"No, no, it can’t be! No, for God’s sake, you are mistaken," said Dolly,
putting her hands to her temples and closing her eyes.

Alexey Alexandrovitch smiled coldly, with his lips alone, meaning to
signify to her and to himself the firmness of his conviction; but this
warm defense, though it could not shake him, reopened his wound. He
began to speak with greater heat.

"It is extremely difficult to be mistaken when a wife herself informs
her husband of the fact—informs him that eight years of her life, and a
son, all that’s a mistake, and that she wants to begin life again," he
said angrily, with a snort.

"Anna and sin—I cannot connect them, I cannot believe it!"

"Darya Alexandrovna," he said, now looking straight into Dolly’s kindly,
troubled face, and feeling that his tongue was being loosened in spite
of himself, "I would give a great deal for doubt to be still possible.
When I doubted, I was miserable, but it was better than now. When I
doubted, I had hope; but now there is no hope, and still I doubt of
everything. I am in such doubt of everything that I even hate my son,
and sometimes do not believe he is my son. I am very unhappy."

He had no need to say that. Darya Alexandrovna had seen that as soon as
he glanced into her face; and she felt sorry for him, and her faith in
the innocence of her friend began to totter.

"Oh, this is awful, awful! But can it be true that you are resolved on a
divorce?"

"I am resolved on extreme measures. There is nothing else for me to do."

"Nothing else to do, nothing else to do..." she replied, with tears in
her eyes. "Oh no, don’t say nothing else to do!" she said.

"What is horrible in a trouble of this kind is that one cannot, as in
any other—in loss, in death—bear one’s trouble in peace, but that one
must act," said he, as though guessing her thought. "One must get out of
the humiliating position in which one is placed; one can’t live _à
trois_."

"I understand, I quite understand that," said Dolly, and her head sank.
She was silent for a little, thinking of herself, of her own grief in
her family, and all at once, with an impulsive movement, she raised her
head and clasped her hands with an imploring gesture. "But wait a
little! You are a Christian. Think of her! What will become of her, if
you cast her off?"

"I have thought, Darya Alexandrovna, I have thought a great deal," said
Alexey Alexandrovitch. His face turned red in patches, and his dim eyes
looked straight before him. Darya Alexandrovna at that moment pitied him
with all her heart. "That was what I did indeed when she herself made
known to me my humiliation; I left everything as of old. I gave her a
chance to reform, I tried to save her. And with what result? She would
not regard the slightest request—that she should observe decorum," he
said, getting heated. "One may save anyone who does not want to be
ruined; but if the whole nature is so corrupt, so depraved, that ruin
itself seems to be her salvation, what’s to be done?"

"Anything, only not divorce!" answered Darya Alexandrovna

"But what is anything?"

"No, it is awful! She will be no one’s wife, she will be lost!"

"What can I do?" said Alexey Alexandrovitch, raising his shoulders and
his eyebrows. The recollection of his wife’s last act had so incensed
him that he had become frigid, as at the beginning of the conversation.
"I am very grateful for your sympathy, but I must be going," he said,
getting up.

"No, wait a minute. You must not ruin her. Wait a little; I will tell
you about myself. I was married, and my husband deceived me; in anger
and jealousy, I would have thrown up everything, I would myself.... But
I came to myself again; and who did it? Anna saved me. And here I am
living on. The children are growing up, my husband has come back to his
family, and feels his fault, is growing purer, better, and I live on....
I have forgiven it, and you ought to forgive!"

Alexey Alexandrovitch heard her, but her words had no effect on him now.
All the hatred of that day when he had resolved on a divorce had sprung
up again in his soul. He shook himself, and said in a shrill, loud
voice:—

"Forgive I cannot, and do not wish to, and I regard it as wrong. I have
done everything for this woman, and she has trodden it all in the mud to
which she is akin. I am not a spiteful man, I have never hated anyone,
but I hate her with my whole soul, and I cannot even forgive her,
because I hate her too much for all the wrong she has done me!" he said,
with tones of hatred in his voice.

"Love those that hate you...." Darya Alexandrovna whispered timorously.

Alexey Alexandrovitch smiled contemptuously. That he knew long ago, but
it could not be applied to his case.

"Love those that hate you, but to love those one hates is impossible.
Forgive me for having troubled you. Everyone has enough to bear in his
own grief!" And regaining his self-possession, Alexey Alexandrovitch
quietly took leave and went away.



Chapter 


When they rose from table, Levin would have liked to follow Kitty into
the drawing room; but he was afraid she might dislike this, as too
