"Varenka’s waiting," she said, carefully putting his hat on, seeing from
Sergey Ivanovitch’s smile that she might do so.

Varenka was standing at the door, dressed in a yellow print gown, with a
white kerchief on her head.

"I’m coming, I’m coming, Varvara Andreevna," said Sergey Ivanovitch,
finishing his cup of coffee, and putting into their separate pockets his
handkerchief and cigar-case.

"And how sweet my Varenka is! eh?" said Kitty to her husband, as soon as
Sergey Ivanovitch rose. She spoke so that Sergey Ivanovitch could hear,
and it was clear that she meant him to do so. "And how good-looking she
is—such a refined beauty! Varenka!" Kitty shouted. "Shall you be in the
mill copse? We’ll come out to you."

"You certainly forget your condition, Kitty," said the old princess,
hurriedly coming out at the door. "You mustn’t shout like that."

Varenka, hearing Kitty’s voice and her mother’s reprimand, went with
light, rapid steps up to Kitty. The rapidity of her movement, her
flushed and eager face, everything betrayed that something out of the
common was going on in her. Kitty knew what this was, and had been
watching her intently. She called Varenka at that moment merely in order
mentally to give her a blessing for the important event which, as Kitty
fancied, was bound to come to pass that day after dinner in the wood.

"Varenka, I should be very happy if a certain something were to happen,"
she whispered as she kissed her.

"And are you coming with us?" Varenka said to Levin in confusion,
pretending not to have heard what had been said.

"I am coming, but only as far as the threshing-floor, and there I shall
stop."

"Why, what do you want there?" said Kitty.

"I must go to have a look at the new wagons, and to check the invoice,"
said Levin; "and where will you be?"

"On the terrace."



Chapter 


On the terrace were assembled all the ladies of the party. They always
liked sitting there after dinner, and that day they had work to do there
too. Besides the sewing and knitting of baby clothes, with which all of
them were busy, that afternoon jam was being made on the terrace by a
method new to Agafea Mihalovna, without the addition of water. Kitty had
introduced this new method, which had been in use in her home. Agafea
Mihalovna, to whom the task of jam-making had always been intrusted,
considering that what had been done in the Levin household could not be
amiss, had nevertheless put water with the strawberries, maintaining
that the jam could not be made without it. She had been caught in the
act, and was now making jam before everyone, and it was to be proved to
her conclusively that jam could be very well made without water.

Agafea Mihalovna, her face heated and angry, her hair untidy, and her
thin arms bare to the elbows, was turning the preserving-pan over the
charcoal stove, looking darkly at the raspberries and devoutly hoping
they would stick and not cook properly. The princess, conscious that
Agafea Mihalovna’s wrath must be chiefly directed against her, as the
person responsible for the raspberry jam-making, tried to appear to be
absorbed in other things and not interested in the jam, talked of other
matters, but cast stealthy glances in the direction of the stove.

"I always buy my maids’ dresses myself, of some cheap material," the
princess said, continuing the previous conversation. "Isn’t it time to
skim it, my dear?" she added, addressing Agafea Mihalovna. "There’s not
the slightest need for you to do it, and it’s hot for you," she said,
stopping Kitty.

"I’ll do it," said Dolly, and getting up, she carefully passed the spoon
over the frothing sugar, and from time to time shook off the clinging
jam from the spoon by knocking it on a plate that was covered with
yellow-red scum and blood-colored syrup. "How they’ll enjoy this at
tea-time!" she thought of her children, remembering how she herself as a
child had wondered how it was the grown-up people did not eat what was
best of all—the scum of the jam.

"Stiva says it’s much better to give money." Dolly took up meanwhile the
weighty subject under discussion, what presents should be made to
servants. "But..."

"Money’s out of the question!" the princess and Kitty exclaimed with one
voice. "They appreciate a present..."

"Well, last year, for instance, I bought our Matrona Semyenovna, not a
poplin, but something of that sort," said the princess.

"I remember she was wearing it on your nameday."

"A charming pattern—so simple and refined,—I should have liked it
myself, if she hadn’t had it. Something like Varenka’s. So pretty and
inexpensive."

"Well, now I think it’s done," said Dolly, dropping the syrup from the
spoon.

"When it sets as it drops, it’s ready. Cook it a little longer, Agafea
Mihalovna."

"The flies!" said Agafea Mihalovna angrily. "It’ll be just the same,"
she added.

"Ah! how sweet it is! don’t frighten it!" Kitty said suddenly, looking
at a sparrow that had settled on the step and was pecking at the center
of a raspberry.

"Yes, but you keep a little further from the stove," said her mother.

"_À propos de Varenka_," said Kitty, speaking in French, as they had
been doing all the while, so that Agafea Mihalovna should not understand
them, "you know, mamma, I somehow expect things to be settled today. You
know what I mean. How splendid it would be!"

"But what a famous matchmaker she is!" said Dolly. "How carefully and
cleverly she throws them together!..."

"No; tell me, mamma, what do you think?"

"Why, what is one to think? He" (_he_ meant Sergey Ivanovitch) "might at
any time have been a match for anyone in Russia; now, of course, he’s
not quite a young man, still I know ever so many girls would be glad to
marry him even now.... She’s a very nice girl, but he might..."

"Oh, no, mamma, do understand why, for him and for her too, nothing
better could be imagined. In the first place, she’s charming!" said
Kitty, crooking one of her fingers.

"He thinks her very attractive, that’s certain," assented Dolly.

"Then he occupies such a position in society that he has no need to look
for either fortune or position in his wife. All he needs is a good,
sweet wife—a restful one."

"Well, with her he would certainly be restful," Dolly assented.

"Thirdly, that she should love him. And so it is ... that is, it would
be so splendid!... I look forward to seeing them coming out of the
forest—and everything settled. I shall see at once by their eyes. I
should be so delighted! What do you think, Dolly?"

"But don’t excite yourself. It’s not at all the thing for you to be
excited," said her mother.

