"Of course not," said Levin. "But I’m so happy that I don’t understand
anything. So you think he’ll make her an offer today?" he added after a
brief silence.

"I think so, and I don’t think so. Only, I’m awfully anxious for it.
Here, wait a minute." She stooped down and picked a wild camomile at the
edge of the path. "Come, count: he does propose, he doesn’t," she said,
giving him the flower.

"He does, he doesn’t," said Levin, tearing off the white petals.

"No, no!" Kitty, snatching at his hand, stopped him. She had been
watching his fingers with interest. "You picked off two."

"Oh, but see, this little one shan’t count to make up," said Levin,
tearing off a little half-grown petal. "Here’s the wagonette overtaking
us."

"Aren’t you tired, Kitty?" called the princess.

"Not in the least."

"If you are you can get in, as the horses are quiet and walking."

But it was not worth while to get in, they were quite near the place,
and all walked on together.



Chapter 


Varenka, with her white kerchief on her black hair, surrounded by the
children, gaily and good-humoredly looking after them, and at the same
time visibly excited at the possibility of receiving a declaration from
the man she cared for, was very attractive. Sergey Ivanovitch walked
beside her, and never left off admiring her. Looking at her, he recalled
all the delightful things he had heard from her lips, all the good he
knew about her, and became more and more conscious that the feeling he
had for her was something special that he had felt long, long ago, and
only once, in his early youth. The feeling of happiness in being near
her continually grew, and at last reached such a point that, as he put a
huge, slender-stalked agaric fungus in her basket, he looked straight
into her face, and noticing the flush of glad and alarmed excitement
that overspread her face, he was confused himself, and smiled to her in
silence a smile that said too much.

"If so," he said to himself, "I ought to think it over and make up my
mind, and not give way like a boy to the impulse of a moment."

"I’m going to pick by myself apart from all the rest, or else my efforts
will make no show," he said, and he left the edge of the forest where
they were walking on low silky grass between old birch trees standing
far apart, and went more into the heart of the wood, where between the
white birch trunks there were gray trunks of aspen and dark bushes of
hazel. Walking some forty paces away, Sergey Ivanovitch, knowing he was
out of sight, stood still behind a bushy spindle-tree in full flower
with its rosy red catkins. It was perfectly still all round him. Only
overhead in the birches under which he stood, the flies, like a swarm of
bees, buzzed unceasingly, and from time to time the children’s voices
were floated across to him. All at once he heard, not far from the edge
of the wood, the sound of Varenka’s contralto voice, calling Grisha, and
a smile of delight passed over Sergey Ivanovitch’s face. Conscious of
this smile, he shook his head disapprovingly at his own condition, and
taking out a cigar, he began lighting it. For a long while he could not
get a match to light against the trunk of a birch tree. The soft scales
of the white bark rubbed off the phosphorus, and the light went out. At
last one of the matches burned, and the fragrant cigar smoke, hovering
uncertainly in flat, wide coils, stretched away forwards and upwards
over a bush under the overhanging branches of a birch tree. Watching the
streak of smoke, Sergey Ivanovitch walked gently on, deliberating on his
position.

"Why not?" he thought. "If it were only a passing fancy or a passion, if
it were only this attraction—this mutual attraction (I can call it a
_mutual_ attraction), but if I felt that it was in contradiction with
the whole bent of my life—if I felt that in giving way to this
attraction I should be false to my vocation and my duty ... but it’s not
so. The only thing I can say against it is that, when I lost Marie, I
said to myself that I would remain faithful to her memory. That’s the
only thing I can say against my feeling.... That’s a great thing,"
Sergey Ivanovitch said to himself, feeling at the same time that this
consideration had not the slightest importance for him personally, but
would only perhaps detract from his romantic character in the eyes of
others. "But apart from that, however much I searched, I should never
find anything to say against my feeling. If I were choosing by
considerations of suitability alone, I could not have found anything
better."

However many women and girls he thought of whom he knew, he could not
think of a girl who united to such a degree all, positively all, the
qualities he would wish to see in his wife. She had all the charm and
freshness of youth, but she was not a child; and if she loved him, she
loved him consciously as a woman ought to love; that was one thing.
Another point: she was not only far from being worldly, but had an
unmistakable distaste for worldly society, and at the same time she knew
the world, and had all the ways of a woman of the best society, which
were absolutely essential to Sergey Ivanovitch’s conception of the woman
who was to share his life. Thirdly: she was religious, and not like a
child, unconsciously religious and good, as Kitty, for example, was, but
her life was founded on religious principles. Even in trifling matters,
Sergey Ivanovitch found in her all that he wanted in his wife: she was
poor and alone in the world, so she would not bring with her a mass of
relations and their influence into her husband’s house, as he saw now in
Kitty’s case. She would owe everything to her husband, which was what he
had always desired too for his future family life. And this girl, who
united all these qualities, loved him. He was a modest man, but he could
not help seeing it. And he loved her. There was one consideration
against it—his age. But he came of a long-lived family, he had not a
single gray hair, no one would have taken him for forty, and he
remembered Varenka’s saying that it was only in Russia that men of fifty
thought themselves old, and that in France a man of fifty considers
himself _dans la force de l’âge_, while a man of forty is _un jeune
homme_. But what did the mere reckoning of years matter when he felt as
young in heart as he had been twenty years ago? Was it not youth to feel
as he felt now, when coming from the other side to the edge of the wood
he saw in the glowing light of the slanting sunbeams the gracious figure
of Varenka in her yellow gown with her basket, walking lightly by the
trunk of an old birch tree, and when this impression of the sight of
Varenka blended so harmoniously with the beauty of the view, of the
yellow oatfield lying bathed in the slanting sunshine, and beyond it the
distant ancient forest flecked with yellow and melting into the blue of
the distance? His heart throbbed joyously. A softened feeling came over
him. He felt that he had made up his mind. Varenka, who had just
crouched down to pick a mushroom, rose with a supple movement and looked
round. Flinging away the cigar, Sergey Ivanovitch advanced with resolute
steps towards her.



Chapter 


"Varvara Andreevna, when I was very young, I set before myself the ideal
of the woman I loved and should be happy to call my wife. I have lived
through a long life, and now for the first time I have met what I
sought—in you. I love you, and offer you my hand."

Sergey Ivanovitch was saying this to himself while he was ten paces from
Varvara. Kneeling down, with her hands over the mushrooms to guard them
from Grisha, she was calling little Masha.

"Come here, little ones! There are so many!" she was saying in her
sweet, deep voice.

Seeing Sergey Ivanovitch approaching, she did not get up and did not
change her position, but everything told him that she felt his presence
and was glad of it.

"Well, did you find some?" she asked from under the white kerchief,
