
"Go, do go!" she said, looking at him with timid and guilty eyes.

He went out of the door without a word, and at once stumbled over Marya
Nikolaevna, who had heard of his arrival and had not dared to go in to
see him. She was just the same as when he saw her in Moscow; the same
woolen gown, and bare arms and neck, and the same good-naturedly stupid,
pockmarked face, only a little plumper.

"Well, how is he? how is he?"

"Very bad. He can’t get up. He has kept expecting you. He.... Are you
... with your wife?"

Levin did not for the first moment understand what it was confused her,
but she immediately enlightened him.

"I’ll go away. I’ll go down to the kitchen," she brought out. "Nikolay
Dmitrievitch will be delighted. He heard about it, and knows your lady,
and remembers her abroad."

Levin realized that she meant his wife, and did not know what answer to
make.

"Come along, come along to him!" he said.

But as soon as he moved, the door of his room opened and Kitty peeped
out. Levin crimsoned both from shame and anger with his wife, who had
put herself and him in such a difficult position; but Marya Nikolaevna
crimsoned still more. She positively shrank together and flushed to the
point of tears, and clutching the ends of her apron in both hands,
twisted them in her red fingers without knowing what to say and what to
do.

For the first instant Levin saw an expression of eager curiosity in the
eyes with which Kitty looked at this awful woman, so incomprehensible to
her; but it lasted only a single instant.

"Well! how is he?" she turned to her husband and then to her.

"But one can’t go on talking in the passage like this!" Levin said,
looking angrily at a gentleman who walked jauntily at that instant
across the corridor, as though about his affairs.

"Well then, come in," said Kitty, turning to Marya Nikolaevna, who had
recovered herself, but noticing her husband’s face of dismay, "or go on;
go, and then come for me," she said, and went back into the room.

Levin went to his brother’s room. He had not in the least expected what
he saw and felt in his brother’s room. He had expected to find him in
the same state of self-deception which he had heard was so frequent with
the consumptive, and which had struck him so much during his brother’s
visit in the autumn. He had expected to find the physical signs of the
approach of death more marked—greater weakness, greater emaciation, but
still almost the same condition of things. He had expected himself to
feel the same distress at the loss of the brother he loved and the same
horror in face of death as he had felt then, only in a greater degree.
And he had prepared himself for this; but he found something utterly
different.

In a little dirty room with the painted panels of its walls filthy with
spittle, and conversation audible through the thin partition from the
next room, in a stifling atmosphere saturated with impurities, on a
bedstead moved away from the wall, there lay covered with a quilt, a
body. One arm of this body was above the quilt, and the wrist, huge as a
rake-handle, was attached, inconceivably it seemed, to the thin, long
bone of the arm smooth from the beginning to the middle. The head lay
sideways on the pillow. Levin could see the scanty locks wet with sweat
on the temples and tense, transparent-looking forehead.

"It cannot be that that fearful body was my brother Nikolay?" thought
Levin. But he went closer, saw the face, and doubt became impossible. In
spite of the terrible change in the face, Levin had only to glance at
those eager eyes raised at his approach, only to catch the faint
movement of the mouth under the sticky mustache, to realize the terrible
truth that this death-like body was his living brother.

The glittering eyes looked sternly and reproachfully at his brother as
he drew near. And immediately this glance established a living
relationship between living men. Levin immediately felt the reproach in
the eyes fixed on him, and felt remorse at his own happiness.

When Konstantin took him by the hand, Nikolay smiled. The smile was
faint, scarcely perceptible, and in spite of the smile the stern
expression of the eyes was unchanged.

"You did not expect to find me like this," he articulated with effort.

"Yes ... no," said Levin, hesitating over his words. "How was it you
didn’t let me know before, that is, at the time of my wedding? I made
inquiries in all directions."

He had to talk so as not to be silent, and he did not know what to say,
especially as his brother made no reply, and simply stared without
dropping his eyes, and evidently penetrated to the inner meaning of each
word. Levin told his brother that his wife had come with him. Nikolay
expressed pleasure, but said he was afraid of frightening her by his
condition. A silence followed. Suddenly Nikolay stirred, and began to
say something. Levin expected something of peculiar gravity and
importance from the expression of his face, but Nikolay began speaking
of his health. He found fault with the doctor, regretting he had not a
celebrated Moscow doctor. Levin saw that he still hoped.

Seizing the first moment of silence, Levin got up, anxious to escape, if
only for an instant, from his agonizing emotion, and said that he would
go and fetch his wife.

"Very well, and I’ll tell her to tidy up here. It’s dirty and stinking
here, I expect. Marya! clear up the room," the sick man said with
effort. "Oh, and when you’ve cleared up, go away yourself," he added,
looking inquiringly at his brother.

Levin made no answer. Going out into the corridor, he stopped short. He
had said he would fetch his wife, but now, taking stock of the emotion
he was feeling, he decided that he would try on the contrary to persuade
her not to go in to the sick man. "Why should she suffer as I am
suffering?" he thought.

"Well, how is he?" Kitty asked with a frightened face.

"Oh, it’s awful, it’s awful! What did you come for?" said Levin.

Kitty was silent for a few seconds, looking timidly and ruefully at her
husband; then she went up and took him by the elbow with both hands.

"Kostya! take me to him; it will be easier for us to bear it together.
You only take me, take me to him, please, and go away," she said. "You
must understand that for me to see you, and not to see him, is far more
painful. There I might be a help to you and to him. Please, let me!" she
besought her husband, as though the happiness of her life depended on
it.

Levin was obliged to agree, and regaining his composure, and completely
forgetting about Marya Nikolaevna by now, he went again in to his
brother with Kitty.

Stepping lightly, and continually glancing at her husband, showing him a
valorous and sympathetic face, Kitty went into the sick-room, and,
turning without haste, noiselessly closed the door. With inaudible steps
she went quickly to the sick man’s bedside, and going up so that he had
not to turn his head, she immediately clasped in her fresh young hand
the skeleton of his huge hand, pressed it, and began speaking with that
soft eagerness, sympathetic and not jarring, which is peculiar to women.

"We have met, though we were not acquainted, at Soden," she said. "You
never thought I was to be your sister?"

"You would not have recognized me?" he said, with a radiant smile at her
entrance.

