generosity," she said, looking dreamily past Vronsky’s face. "I don’t
want a divorce; it’s all the same to me now. Only I don’t know what he
will decide about Seryozha."

He could not conceive how at this moment of their meeting she could
remember and think of her son, of divorce. What did it all matter?

"Don’t speak of that, don’t think of it," he said, turning her hand in
his, and trying to draw her attention to him; but still she did not look
at him.

"Oh, why didn’t I die! it would have been better," she said, and silent
tears flowed down both her cheeks; but she tried to smile, so as not to
wound him.

To decline the flattering and dangerous appointment at Tashkend would
have been, Vronsky had till then considered, disgraceful and impossible.
But now, without an instant’s consideration, he declined it, and
observing dissatisfaction in the most exalted quarters at this step, he
immediately retired from the army.

A month later Alexey Alexandrovitch was left alone with his son in his
house at Petersburg, while Anna and Vronsky had gone abroad, not having
obtained a divorce, but having absolutely declined all idea of one.




PART FIVE



Chapter 


Princess Shtcherbatskaya considered that it was out of the question for
the wedding to take place before Lent, just five weeks off, since not
half the trousseau could possibly be ready by that time. But she could
not but agree with Levin that to fix it for after Lent would be putting
it off too late, as an old aunt of Prince Shtcherbatsky’s was seriously
ill and might die, and then the mourning would delay the wedding still
longer. And therefore, deciding to divide the trousseau into two parts—a
larger and smaller trousseau—the princess consented to have the wedding
before Lent. She determined that she would get the smaller part of the
trousseau all ready now, and the larger part should be made later, and
she was much vexed with Levin because he was incapable of giving her a
serious answer to the question whether he agreed to this arrangement or
not. The arrangement was the more suitable as, immediately after the
wedding, the young people were to go to the country, where the more
important part of the trousseau would not be wanted.

Levin still continued in the same delirious condition in which it seemed
to him that he and his happiness constituted the chief and sole aim of
all existence, and that he need not now think or care about anything,
that everything was being done and would be done for him by others. He
had not even plans and aims for the future, he left its arrangement to
others, knowing that everything would be delightful. His brother Sergey
Ivanovitch, Stepan Arkadyevitch, and the princess guided him in doing
what he had to do. All he did was to agree entirely with everything
suggested to him. His brother raised money for him, the princess advised
him to leave Moscow after the wedding. Stepan Arkadyevitch advised him
to go abroad. He agreed to everything. "Do what you choose, if it amuses
you. I’m happy, and my happiness can be no greater and no less for
anything you do," he thought. When he told Kitty of Stepan
Arkadyevitch’s advice that they should go abroad, he was much surprised
that she did not agree to this, and had some definite requirements of
her own in regard to their future. She knew Levin had work he loved in
the country. She did not, as he saw, understand this work, she did not
even care to understand it. But that did not prevent her from regarding
it as a matter of great importance. And then she knew their home would
be in the country, and she wanted to go, not abroad where she was not
going to live, but to the place where their home would be. This
definitely expressed purpose astonished Levin. But since he did not care
either way, he immediately asked Stepan Arkadyevitch, as though it were
his duty, to go down to the country and to arrange everything there to
the best of his ability with the taste of which he had so much.

"But I say," Stepan Arkadyevitch said to him one day after he had come
back from the country, where he had got everything ready for the young
people’s arrival, "have you a certificate of having been at confession?"

"No. But what of it?"

"You can’t be married without it."

"_Aïe, aïe, aïe!_" cried Levin. "Why, I believe it’s nine years since
I’ve taken the sacrament! I never thought of it."

"You’re a pretty fellow!" said Stepan Arkadyevitch laughing, "and you
call me a Nihilist! But this won’t do, you know. You must take the
sacrament."

"When? There are four days left now."

Stepan Arkadyevitch arranged this also, and Levin had to go to
confession. To Levin, as to any unbeliever who respects the beliefs of
others, it was exceedingly disagreeable to be present at and take part
in church ceremonies. At this moment, in his present softened state of
feeling, sensitive to everything, this inevitable act of hypocrisy was
not merely painful to Levin, it seemed to him utterly impossible. Now,
in the heyday of his highest glory, his fullest flower, he would have to
be a liar or a scoffer. He felt incapable of being either. But though he
repeatedly plied Stepan Arkadyevitch with questions as to the
possibility of obtaining a certificate without actually communicating,
Stepan Arkadyevitch maintained that it was out of the question.

"Besides, what is it to you—two days? And he’s an awfully nice clever
old fellow. He’ll pull the tooth out for you so gently, you won’t notice
it."

Standing at the first litany, Levin attempted to revive in himself his
youthful recollections of the intense religious emotion he had passed
through between the ages of sixteen and seventeen.

But he was at once convinced that it was utterly impossible to him. He
attempted to look at it all as an empty custom, having no sort of
meaning, like the custom of paying calls. But he felt that he could not
do that either. Levin found himself, like the majority of his
contemporaries, in the vaguest position in regard to religion. Believe
he could not, and at the same time he had no firm conviction that it was
all wrong. And consequently, not being able to believe in the
significance of what he was doing nor to regard it with indifference as
an empty formality, during the whole period of preparing for the
sacrament he was conscious of a feeling of discomfort and shame at doing
what he did not himself understand, and what, as an inner voice told
him, was therefore false and wrong.

During the service he would first listen to the prayers, trying to
attach some meaning to them not discordant with his own views; then
feeling that he could not understand and must condemn them, he tried not
to listen to them, but to attend to the thoughts, observations, and
memories which floated through his brain with extreme vividness during
this idle time of standing in church.

He had stood through the litany, the evening service and the midnight
service, and the next day he got up earlier than usual, and without
having tea went at eight o’clock in the morning to the church for the
morning service and the confession.

There was no one in the church but a beggar soldier, two old women, and
the church officials. A young deacon, whose long back showed in two
distinct halves through his thin undercassock, met him, and at once
going to a little table at the wall read the exhortation. During the
reading, especially at the frequent and rapid repetition of the same
words, "Lord, have mercy on us!" which resounded with an echo, Levin
felt that thought was shut and sealed up, and that it must not be
touched or stirred now or confusion would be the result; and so standing
behind the deacon he went on thinking of his own affairs, neither
listening nor examining what was said. "It’s wonderful what expression
there is in her hand," he thought, remembering how they had been sitting
