asleep" referred not to him, but to Landau. The Frenchman was asleep as
well as Stepan Arkadyevitch. But Stepan Arkadyevitch’s being asleep
would have offended them, as he thought (though even this, he thought,
might not be so, as everything seemed so queer), while Landau’s being
asleep delighted them extremely, especially Countess Lidia Ivanovna.

_"Mon ami,"_ said Lidia Ivanovna, carefully holding the folds of her
silk gown so as not to rustle, and in her excitement calling Karenin not
Alexey Alexandrovitch, but _"mon ami," "donnez-lui la main. Vous voyez?
Sh!"_ she hissed at the footman as he came in again. "Not at home."

The Frenchman was asleep, or pretending to be asleep, with his head on
the back of his chair, and his moist hand, as it lay on his knee, made
faint movements, as though trying to catch something. Alexey
Alexandrovitch got up, tried to move carefully, but stumbled against the
table, went up and laid his hand in the Frenchman’s hand. Stepan
Arkadyevitch got up too, and opening his eyes wide, trying to wake
himself up if he were asleep, he looked first at one and then at the
other. It was all real. Stepan Arkadyevitch felt that his head was
getting worse and worse.

"_Que la personne qui est arrivee la derniere, celle qui demande,
qu’elle sorte! Qu’elle sorte!_" articulated the Frenchman, without
opening his eyes.

"_Vous m’excuserez, mais vous voyez.... Revenez vers dix heures, encore
mieux demain._"

"_Qu’elle sorte!_" repeated the Frenchman impatiently.

"_C’est moi, n’est-ce pas?_" And receiving an answer in the affirmative,
Stepan Arkadyevitch, forgetting the favor he had meant to ask of Lidia
Ivanovna, and forgetting his sister’s affairs, caring for nothing, but
filled with the sole desire to get away as soon as possible, went out on
tiptoe and ran out into the street as though from a plague-stricken
house. For a long while he chatted and joked with his cab-driver, trying
to recover his spirits.

At the French theater where he arrived for the last act, and afterwards
at the Tatar restaurant after his champagne, Stepan Arkadyevitch felt a
little refreshed in the atmosphere he was used to. But still he felt
quite unlike himself all that evening.

On getting home to Pyotr Oblonsky’s, where he was staying, Stepan
Arkadyevitch found a note from Betsy. She wrote to him that she was very
anxious to finish their interrupted conversation, and begged him to come
next day. He had scarcely read this note, and frowned at its contents,
when he heard below the ponderous tramp of the servants, carrying
something heavy.

Stepan Arkadyevitch went out to look. It was the rejuvenated Pyotr
Oblonsky. He was so drunk that he could not walk upstairs; but he told
them to set him on his legs when he saw Stepan Arkadyevitch, and
clinging to him, walked with him into his room and there began telling
him how he had spent the evening, and fell asleep doing so.

Stepan Arkadyevitch was in very low spirits, which happened rarely with
him, and for a long while he could not go to sleep. Everything he could
recall to his mind, everything was disgusting; but most disgusting of
all, as if it were something shameful, was the memory of the evening he
had spent at Countess Lidia Ivanovna’s.

Next day he received from Alexey Alexandrovitch a final answer, refusing
to grant Anna’s divorce, and he understood that this decision was based
on what the Frenchman had said in his real or pretended trance.



Chapter 


In order to carry through any undertaking in family life, there must
necessarily be either complete division between the husband and wife, or
loving agreement. When the relations of a couple are vacillating and
neither one thing nor the other, no sort of enterprise can be
undertaken.

Many families remain for years in the same place, though both husband
and wife are sick of it, simply because there is neither complete
division nor agreement between them.

Both Vronsky and Anna felt life in Moscow insupportable in the heat and
dust, when the spring sunshine was followed by the glare of summer, and
all the trees in the boulevards had long since been in full leaf, and
the leaves were covered with dust. But they did not go back to
Vozdvizhenskoe, as they had arranged to do long before; they went on
staying in Moscow, though they both loathed it, because of late there
had been no agreement between them.

The irritability that kept them apart had no external cause, and all
efforts to come to an understanding intensified it, instead of removing
it. It was an inner irritation, grounded in her mind on the conviction
that his love had grown less; in his, on regret that he had put himself
for her sake in a difficult position, which she, instead of lightening,
made still more difficult. Neither of them gave full utterance to their
sense of grievance, but they considered each other in the wrong, and
tried on every pretext to prove this to one another.

In her eyes the whole of him, with all his habits, ideas, desires, with
all his spiritual and physical temperament, was one thing—love for
women, and that love, she felt, ought to be entirely concentrated on her
alone. That love was less; consequently, as she reasoned, he must have
transferred part of his love to other women or to another woman—and she
was jealous. She was jealous not of any particular woman but of the
decrease of his love. Not having got an object for her jealousy, she was
on the lookout for it. At the slightest hint she transferred her
jealousy from one object to another. At one time she was jealous of
those low women with whom he might so easily renew his old bachelor
ties; then she was jealous of the society women he might meet; then she
was jealous of the imaginary girl whom he might want to marry, for whose
sake he would break with her. And this last form of jealousy tortured
her most of all, especially as he had unwarily told her, in a moment of
frankness, that his mother knew him so little that she had had the
audacity to try and persuade him to marry the young Princess Sorokina.

And being jealous of him, Anna was indignant against him and found
grounds for indignation in everything. For everything that was difficult
in her position she blamed him. The agonizing condition of suspense she
had passed in Moscow, the tardiness and indecision of Alexey
Alexandrovitch, her solitude—she put it all down to him. If he had loved
her he would have seen all the bitterness of her position, and would
have rescued her from it. For her being in Moscow and not in the
country, he was to blame too. He could not live buried in the country as
she would have liked to do. He must have society, and he had put her in
this awful position, the bitterness of which he would not see. And
again, it was his fault that she was forever separated from her son.

Even the rare moments of tenderness that came from time to time did not
soothe her; in his tenderness now she saw a shade of complacency, of
self-confidence, which had not been of old, and which exasperated her.

It was dusk. Anna was alone, and waiting for him to come back from a
bachelor dinner. She walked up and down in his study (the room where the
noise from the street was least heard), and thought over every detail of
their yesterday’s quarrel. Going back from the well-remembered,
offensive words of the quarrel to what had been the ground of it, she
arrived at last at its origin. For a long while she could hardly believe
that their dissension had arisen from a conversation so inoffensive, of
so little moment to either. But so it actually had been. It all arose
from his laughing at the girls’ high schools, declaring they were
useless, while she defended them. He had spoken slightingly of women’s
education in general, and had said that Hannah, Anna’s English protegée,
had not the slightest need to know anything of physics.

This irritated Anna. She saw in this a contemptuous reference to her
occupations. And she bethought her of a phrase to pay him back for the
pain he had given her. "I don’t expect you to understand me, my
feelings, as anyone who loved me might, but simple delicacy I did
expect," she said.

