was thinking of.

"But we take our stand on principle as the ideal," replied Pestsov in
his mellow bass. "Woman desires to have rights, to be independent,
educated. She is oppressed, humiliated by the consciousness of her
disabilities."

"And I’m oppressed and humiliated that they won’t engage me at the
Foundling," the old prince said again, to the huge delight of Turovtsin,
who in his mirth dropped his asparagus with the thick end in the sauce.



Chapter 


Everyone took part in the conversation except Kitty and Levin. At first,
when they were talking of the influence that one people has on another,
there rose to Levin’s mind what he had to say on the subject. But these
ideas, once of such importance in his eyes, seemed to come into his
brain as in a dream, and had now not the slightest interest for him. It
even struck him as strange that they should be so eager to talk of what
was of no use to anyone. Kitty, too, should, one would have supposed,
have been interested in what they were saying of the rights and
education of women. How often she had mused on the subject, thinking of
her friend abroad, Varenka, of her painful state of dependence, how
often she had wondered about herself what would become of her if she did
not marry, and how often she had argued with her sister about it! But it
did not interest her at all. She and Levin had a conversation of their
own, yet not a conversation, but some sort of mysterious communication,
which brought them every moment nearer, and stirred in both a sense of
glad terror before the unknown into which they were entering.

At first Levin, in answer to Kitty’s question how he could have seen her
last year in the carriage, told her how he had been coming home from the
mowing along the highroad and had met her.

"It was very, very early in the morning. You were probably only just
awake. Your mother was asleep in the corner. It was an exquisite
morning. I was walking along wondering who it could be in a
four-in-hand? It was a splendid set of four horses with bells, and in a
second you flashed by, and I saw you at the window—you were sitting like
this, holding the strings of your cap in both hands, and thinking
awfully deeply about something," he said, smiling. "How I should like to
know what you were thinking about then! Something important?"

"Wasn’t I dreadfully untidy?" she wondered, but seeing the smile of
ecstasy these reminiscences called up, she felt that the impression she
had made had been very good. She blushed and laughed with delight;
"Really I don’t remember."

"How nicely Turovtsin laughs!" said Levin, admiring his moist eyes and
shaking chest.

"Have you known him long?" asked Kitty.

"Oh, everyone knows him!"

"And I see you think he’s a horrid man?"

"Not horrid, but nothing in him."

"Oh, you’re wrong! And you must give up thinking so directly!" said
Kitty. "I used to have a very poor opinion of him too, but he, he’s an
awfully nice and wonderfully good-hearted man. He has a heart of gold."

"How could you find out what sort of heart he has?"

"We are great friends. I know him very well. Last winter, soon after ...
you came to see us," she said, with a guilty and at the same time
confiding smile, "all Dolly’s children had scarlet fever, and he
happened to come and see her. And only fancy," she said in a whisper,
"he felt so sorry for her that he stayed and began to help her look
after the children. Yes, and for three weeks he stopped with them, and
looked after the children like a nurse."

"I am telling Konstantin Dmitrievitch about Turovtsin in the scarlet
fever," she said, bending over to her sister.

"Yes, it was wonderful, noble!" said Dolly, glancing towards Turovtsin,
who had become aware they were talking of him, and smiling gently to
him. Levin glanced once more at Turovtsin, and wondered how it was he
had not realized all this man’s goodness before.

"I’m sorry, I’m sorry, and I’ll never think ill of people again!" he
said gaily, genuinely expressing what he felt at the moment.



Chapter 


Connected with the conversation that had sprung up on the rights of
women there were certain questions as to the inequality of rights in
marriage improper to discuss before the ladies. Pestsov had several
times during dinner touched upon these questions, but Sergey Ivanovitch
and Stepan Arkadyevitch carefully drew him off them.

When they rose from the table and the ladies had gone out, Pestsov did
not follow them, but addressing Alexey Alexandrovitch, began to expound
the chief ground of inequality. The inequality in marriage, in his
opinion, lay in the fact that the infidelity of the wife and the
infidelity of the husband are punished unequally, both by the law and by
public opinion. Stepan Arkadyevitch went hurriedly up to Alexey
Alexandrovitch and offered him a cigar.

"No, I don’t smoke," Alexey Alexandrovitch answered calmly, and as
though purposely wishing to show that he was not afraid of the subject,
he turned to Pestsov with a chilly smile.

"I imagine that such a view has a foundation in the very nature of
things," he said, and would have gone on to the drawing room. But at
this point Turovtsin broke suddenly and unexpectedly into the
conversation, addressing Alexey Alexandrovitch.

"You heard, perhaps, about Pryatchnikov?" said Turovtsin, warmed up by
the champagne he had drunk, and long waiting for an opportunity to break
the silence that had weighed on him. "Vasya Pryatchnikov," he said, with
a good-natured smile on his damp, red lips, addressing himself
principally to the most important guest, Alexey Alexandrovitch, "they
told me today he fought a duel with Kvitsky at Tver, and has killed
him."

Just as it always seems that one bruises oneself on a sore place, so
Stepan Arkadyevitch felt now that the conversation would by ill luck
fall every moment on Alexey Alexandrovitch’s sore spot. He would again
have got his brother-in-law away, but Alexey Alexandrovitch himself
inquired, with curiosity:

"What did Pryatchnikov fight about?"

"His wife. Acted like a man, he did! Called him out and shot him!"

"Ah!" said Alexey Alexandrovitch indifferently, and lifting his
eyebrows, he went into the drawing room.

"How glad I am you have come," Dolly said with a frightened smile,
meeting him in the outer drawing room. "I must talk to you. Let’s sit
here."

Alexey Alexandrovitch, with the same expression of indifference, given
him by his lifted eyebrows, sat down beside Darya Alexandrovna, and
smiled affectedly.

"It’s fortunate," said he, "especially as I was meaning to ask you to
excuse me, and to be taking leave. I have to start tomorrow."

Darya Alexandrovna was firmly convinced of Anna’s innocence, and she
felt herself growing pale and her lips quivering with anger at this
frigid, unfeeling man, who was so calmly intending to ruin her innocent
