within her. Reddening, she stretched out towards him expecting a kiss,
but he only patted her hair and said:

"These stupid chignons! There’s no getting at the real daughter. One
simply strokes the bristles of dead women. Well, Dolinka," he turned to
his elder daughter, "what’s your young buck about, hey?"

"Nothing, father," answered Dolly, understanding that her husband was
meant. "He’s always out; I scarcely ever see him," she could not resist
adding with a sarcastic smile.

"Why, hasn’t he gone into the country yet—to see about selling that
forest?"

"No, he’s still getting ready for the journey."

"Oh, that’s it!" said the prince. "And so am I to be getting ready for a
journey too? At your service," he said to his wife, sitting down. "And I
tell you what, Katia," he went on to his younger daughter, "you must
wake up one fine day and say to yourself: Why, I’m quite well, and
merry, and going out again with father for an early morning walk in the
frost. Hey?"

What her father said seemed simple enough, yet at these words Kitty
became confused and overcome like a detected criminal. "Yes, he sees it
all, he understands it all, and in these words he’s telling me that
though I’m ashamed, I must get over my shame." She could not pluck up
spirit to make any answer. She tried to begin, and all at once burst
into tears, and rushed out of the room.

"See what comes of your jokes!" the princess pounced down on her
husband. "You’re always..." she began a string of reproaches.

The prince listened to the princess’s scolding rather a long while
without speaking, but his face was more and more frowning.

"She’s so much to be pitied, poor child, so much to be pitied, and you
don’t feel how it hurts her to hear the slightest reference to the cause
of it. Ah! to be so mistaken in people!" said the princess, and by the
change in her tone both Dolly and the prince knew she was speaking of
Vronsky. "I don’t know why there aren’t laws against such base,
dishonorable people."

"Ah, I can’t bear to hear you!" said the prince gloomily, getting up
from his low chair, and seeming anxious to get away, yet stopping in the
doorway. "There are laws, madam, and since you’ve challenged me to it,
I’ll tell you who’s to blame for it all: you and you, you and nobody
else. Laws against such young gallants there have always been, and there
still are! Yes, if there has been nothing that ought not to have been,
old as I am, I’d have called him out to the barrier, the young dandy.
Yes, and now you physic her and call in these quacks."

The prince apparently had plenty more to say, but as soon as the
princess heard his tone she subsided at once, and became penitent, as
she always did on serious occasions.

"Alexander, Alexander," she whispered, moving to him and beginning to
weep.

As soon as she began to cry the prince too calmed down. He went up to
her.

"There, that’s enough, that’s enough! You’re wretched too, I know. It
can’t be helped. There’s no great harm done. God is merciful ...
thanks..." he said, not knowing what he was saying, as he responded to
the tearful kiss of the princess that he felt on his hand. And the
prince went out of the room.

Before this, as soon as Kitty went out of the room in tears, Dolly, with
her motherly, family instincts, had promptly perceived that here a
woman’s work lay before her, and she prepared to do it. She took off her
hat, and, morally speaking, tucked up her sleeves and prepared for
action. While her mother was attacking her father, she tried to restrain
her mother, so far as filial reverence would allow. During the prince’s
outburst she was silent; she felt ashamed for her mother, and tender
towards her father for so quickly being kind again. But when her father
left them she made ready for what was the chief thing needful—to go to
Kitty and console her.

"I’d been meaning to tell you something for a long while, mamma: did you
know that Levin meant to make Kitty an offer when he was here the last
time? He told Stiva so."

"Well, what then? I don’t understand..."

"So did Kitty perhaps refuse him?... She didn’t tell you so?"

"No, she has said nothing to me either of one or the other; she’s too
proud. But I know it’s all on account of the other."

"Yes, but suppose she has refused Levin, and she wouldn’t have refused
him if it hadn’t been for the other, I know. And then, he has deceived
her so horribly."

It was too terrible for the princess to think how she had sinned against
her daughter, and she broke out angrily.

"Oh, I really don’t understand! Nowadays they will all go their own way,
and mothers haven’t a word to say in anything, and then..."

"Mamma, I’ll go up to her."

"Well, do. Did I tell you not to?" said her mother.



Chapter 


When she went into Kitty’s little room, a pretty, pink little room, full
of knick-knacks in _vieux saxe,_ as fresh, and pink, and white, and gay
as Kitty herself had been two months ago, Dolly remembered how they had
decorated the room the year before together, with what love and gaiety.
Her heart turned cold when she saw Kitty sitting on a low chair near the
door, her eyes fixed immovably on a corner of the rug. Kitty glanced at
her sister, and the cold, rather ill-tempered expression of her face did
not change.

"I’m just going now, and I shall have to keep in and you won’t be able
to come to see me," said Dolly, sitting down beside her. "I want to talk
to you."

"What about?" Kitty asked swiftly, lifting her head in dismay.

"What should it be, but your trouble?"

"I have no trouble."

"Nonsense, Kitty. Do you suppose I could help knowing? I know all about
it. And believe me, it’s of so little consequence.... We’ve all been
through it."

Kitty did not speak, and her face had a stern expression.

"He’s not worth your grieving over him," pursued Darya Alexandrovna,
coming straight to the point.

"No, because he has treated me with contempt," said Kitty, in a breaking
voice. "Don’t talk of it! Please, don’t talk of it!"

"But who can have told you so? No one has said that. I’m certain he was
in love with you, and would still be in love with you, if it hadn’t...

"Oh, the most awful thing of all for me is this sympathizing!" shrieked
Kitty, suddenly flying into a passion. She turned round on her chair,
flushed crimson, and rapidly moving her fingers, pinched the clasp of
her belt first with one hand and then with the other. Dolly knew this
trick her sister had of clenching her hands when she was much excited;
she knew, too, that in moments of excitement Kitty was capable of
forgetting herself and saying a great deal too much, and Dolly would
