
"I don’t see that it was a joke, that..." Levin was beginning, but
Sergey Ivanovitch interrupted him.

"Every member of society is called upon to do his own special work,"
said he. "And men of thought are doing their work when they express
public opinion. And the single-hearted and full expression of public
opinion is the service of the press and a phenomenon to rejoice us at
the same time. Twenty years ago we should have been silent, but now we
have heard the voice of the Russian people, which is ready to rise as
one man and ready to sacrifice itself for its oppressed brethren; that
is a great step and a proof of strength."

"But it’s not only making a sacrifice, but killing Turks," said Levin
timidly. "The people make sacrifices and are ready to make sacrifices
for their soul, but not for murder," he added, instinctively connecting
the conversation with the ideas that had been absorbing his mind.

"For their soul? That’s a most puzzling expression for a natural science
man, do you understand? What sort of thing is the soul?" said Katavasov,
smiling.

"Oh, you know!"

"No, by God, I haven’t the faintest idea!" said Katavasov with a loud
roar of laughter.

"‘I bring not peace, but a sword,’ says Christ," Sergey Ivanovitch
rejoined for his part, quoting as simply as though it were the easiest
thing to understand the very passage that had always puzzled Levin most.

"That’s so, no doubt," the old man repeated again. He was standing near
them and responded to a chance glance turned in his direction.

"Ah, my dear fellow, you’re defeated, utterly defeated!" cried Katavasov
good-humoredly.

Levin reddened with vexation, not at being defeated, but at having
failed to control himself and being drawn into argument.

"No, I can’t argue with them," he thought; "they wear impenetrable
armor, while I’m naked."

He saw that it was impossible to convince his brother and Katavasov, and
he saw even less possibility of himself agreeing with them. What they
advocated was the very pride of intellect that had almost been his ruin.
He could not admit that some dozens of men, among them his brother, had
the right, on the ground of what they were told by some hundreds of glib
volunteers swarming to the capital, to say that they and the newspapers
were expressing the will and feeling of the people, and a feeling which
was expressed in vengeance and murder. He could not admit this, because
he neither saw the expression of such feelings in the people among whom
he was living, nor found them in himself (and he could not but consider
himself one of the persons making up the Russian people), and most of
all because he, like the people, did not know and could not know what is
for the general good, though he knew beyond a doubt that this general
good could be attained only by the strict observance of that law of
right and wrong which has been revealed to every man, and therefore he
could not wish for war or advocate war for any general objects whatever.
He said as Mihalitch did and the people, who had expressed their feeling
in the traditional invitations of the Varyagi: "Be princes and rule over
us. Gladly we promise complete submission. All the labor, all
humiliations, all sacrifices we take upon ourselves; but we will not
judge and decide." And now, according to Sergey Ivanovitch’s account,
the people had foregone this privilege they had bought at such a costly
price.

He wanted to say too that if public opinion were an infallible guide,
then why were not revolutions and the commune as lawful as the movement
in favor of the Slavonic peoples? But these were merely thoughts that
could settle nothing. One thing could be seen beyond doubt—that was that
at the actual moment the discussion was irritating Sergey Ivanovitch,
and so it was wrong to continue it. And Levin ceased speaking and then
called the attention of his guests to the fact that the storm clouds
were gathering, and that they had better be going home before it rained.



Chapter 


The old prince and Sergey Ivanovitch got into the trap and drove off;
the rest of the party hastened homewards on foot.

But the storm-clouds, turning white and then black, moved down so
quickly that they had to quicken their pace to get home before the rain.
The foremost clouds, lowering and black as soot-laden smoke, rushed with
extraordinary swiftness over the sky. They were still two hundred paces
from home and a gust of wind had already blown up, and every second the
downpour might be looked for.

The children ran ahead with frightened and gleeful shrieks. Darya
Alexandrovna, struggling painfully with her skirts that clung round her
legs, was not walking, but running, her eyes fixed on the children. The
men of the party, holding their hats on, strode with long steps beside
her. They were just at the steps when a big drop fell splashing on the
edge of the iron guttering. The children and their elders after them ran
into the shelter of the house, talking merrily.

"Katerina Alexandrovna?" Levin asked of Agafea Mihalovna, who met them
with kerchiefs and rugs in the hall.

"We thought she was with you," she said.

"And Mitya?"

"In the copse, he must be, and the nurse with him."

Levin snatched up the rugs and ran towards the copse.

In that brief interval of time the storm clouds had moved on, covering
the sun so completely that it was dark as an eclipse. Stubbornly, as
though insisting on its rights, the wind stopped Levin, and tearing the
leaves and flowers off the lime trees and stripping the white birch
branches into strange unseemly nakedness, it twisted everything on one
side—acacias, flowers, burdocks, long grass, and tall tree-tops. The
peasant girls working in the garden ran shrieking into shelter in the
servants’ quarters. The streaming rain had already flung its white veil
over all the distant forest and half the fields close by, and was
rapidly swooping down upon the copse. The wet of the rain spurting up in
tiny drops could be smelt in the air.

Holding his head bent down before him, and struggling with the wind that
strove to tear the wraps away from him, Levin was moving up to the copse
and had just caught sight of something white behind the oak tree, when
there was a sudden flash, the whole earth seemed on fire, and the vault
of heaven seemed crashing overhead. Opening his blinded eyes, Levin
gazed through the thick veil of rain that separated him now from the
copse, and to his horror the first thing he saw was the green crest of
the familiar oak-tree in the middle of the copse uncannily changing its
position. "Can it have been struck?" Levin hardly had time to think
when, moving more and more rapidly, the oak tree vanished behind the
other trees, and he heard the crash of the great tree falling upon the
others.

The flash of lightning, the crash of thunder, and the instantaneous
chill that ran through him were all merged for Levin in one sense of
terror.

"My God! my God! not on them!" he said.

And though he thought at once how senseless was his prayer that they
should not have been killed by the oak which had fallen now, he repeated
it, knowing that he could do nothing better than utter this senseless
prayer.

Running up to the place where they usually went, he did not find them
there.

They were at the other end of the copse under an old lime-tree; they
