The desire for life, waxing stronger with recovered health, was so
intense, and the conditions of life were so new and pleasant, that Anna
felt unpardonably happy. The more she got to know Vronsky, the more she
loved him. She loved him for himself, and for his love for her. Her
complete ownership of him was a continual joy to her. His presence was
always sweet to her. All the traits of his character, which she learned
to know better and better, were unutterably dear to her. His appearance,
changed by his civilian dress, was as fascinating to her as though she
were some young girl in love. In everything he said, thought, and did,
she saw something particularly noble and elevated. Her adoration of him
alarmed her indeed; she sought and could not find in him anything not
fine. She dared not show him her sense of her own insignificance beside
him. It seemed to her that, knowing this, he might sooner cease to love
her; and she dreaded nothing now so much as losing his love, though she
had no grounds for fearing it. But she could not help being grateful to
him for his attitude to her, and showing that she appreciated it. He,
who had in her opinion such a marked aptitude for a political career, in
which he would have been certain to play a leading part—he had
sacrificed his ambition for her sake, and never betrayed the slightest
regret. He was more lovingly respectful to her than ever, and the
constant care that she should not feel the awkwardness of her position
never deserted him for a single instant. He, so manly a man, never
opposed her, had indeed, with her, no will of his own, and was anxious,
it seemed, for nothing but to anticipate her wishes. And she could not
but appreciate this, even though the very intensity of his solicitude
for her, the atmosphere of care with which he surrounded her, sometimes
weighed upon her.

Vronsky, meanwhile, in spite of the complete realization of what he had
so long desired, was not perfectly happy. He soon felt that the
realization of his desires gave him no more than a grain of sand out of
the mountain of happiness he had expected. It showed him the mistake men
make in picturing to themselves happiness as the realization of their
desires. For a time after joining his life to hers, and putting on
civilian dress, he had felt all the delight of freedom in general of
which he had known nothing before, and of freedom in his love,—and he
was content, but not for long. He was soon aware that there was
springing up in his heart a desire for desires—_ennui_. Without
conscious intention he began to clutch at every passing caprice, taking
it for a desire and an object. Sixteen hours of the day must be occupied
in some way, since they were living abroad in complete freedom, outside
the conditions of social life which filled up time in Petersburg. As for
the amusements of bachelor existence, which had provided Vronsky with
entertainment on previous tours abroad, they could not be thought of,
since the sole attempt of the sort had led to a sudden attack of
depression in Anna, quite out of proportion with the cause—a late supper
with bachelor friends. Relations with the society of the place—foreign
and Russian—were equally out of the question owing to the irregularity
of their position. The inspection of objects of interest, apart from the
fact that everything had been seen already, had not for Vronsky, a
Russian and a sensible man, the immense significance Englishmen are able
to attach to that pursuit.

And just as the hungry stomach eagerly accepts every object it can get,
hoping to find nourishment in it, Vronsky quite unconsciously clutched
first at politics, then at new books, and then at pictures.

As he had from a child a taste for painting, and as, not knowing what to
spend his money on, he had begun collecting engravings, he came to a
stop at painting, began to take interest in it, and concentrated upon it
the unoccupied mass of desires which demanded satisfaction.

He had a ready appreciation of art, and probably, with a taste for
imitating art, he supposed himself to have the real thing essential for
an artist, and after hesitating for some time which style of painting to
select—religious, historical, realistic, or genre painting—he set to
work to paint. He appreciated all kinds, and could have felt inspired by
any one of them; but he had no conception of the possibility of knowing
nothing at all of any school of painting, and of being inspired directly
by what is within the soul, without caring whether what is painted will
belong to any recognized school. Since he knew nothing of this, and drew
his inspiration, not directly from life, but indirectly from life
embodied in art, his inspiration came very quickly and easily, and as
quickly and easily came his success in painting something very similar
to the sort of painting he was trying to imitate.

More than any other style he liked the French—graceful and effective—and
in that style he began to paint Anna’s portrait in Italian costume, and
the portrait seemed to him, and to everyone who saw it, extremely
successful.



Chapter 


The old neglected palazzo, with its lofty carved ceilings and frescoes
on the walls, with its floors of mosaic, with its heavy yellow stuff
curtains on the windows, with its vases on pedestals, and its open
fireplaces, its carved doors and gloomy reception rooms, hung with
pictures—this palazzo did much, by its very appearance after they had
moved into it, to confirm in Vronsky the agreeable illusion that he was
not so much a Russian country gentleman, a retired army officer, as an
enlightened amateur and patron of the arts, himself a modest artist who
had renounced the world, his connections, and his ambition for the sake
of the woman he loved.

The pose chosen by Vronsky with their removal into the palazzo was
completely successful, and having, through Golenishtchev, made
acquaintance with a few interesting people, for a time he was satisfied.
He painted studies from nature under the guidance of an Italian
professor of painting, and studied mediaeval Italian life. Mediaeval
Italian life so fascinated Vronsky that he even wore a hat and flung a
cloak over his shoulder in the mediaeval style, which, indeed, was
extremely becoming to him.

"Here we live, and know nothing of what’s going on," Vronsky said to
Golenishtchev as he came to see him one morning. "Have you seen
Mihailov’s picture?" he said, handing him a Russian gazette he had
received that morning, and pointing to an article on a Russian artist,
living in the very same town, and just finishing a picture which had
long been talked about, and had been bought beforehand. The article
reproached the government and the academy for letting so remarkable an
artist be left without encouragement and support.

"I’ve seen it," answered Golenishtchev. "Of course, he’s not without
talent, but it’s all in a wrong direction. It’s all the
Ivanov-Strauss-Renan attitude to Christ and to religious painting."

"What is the subject of the picture?" asked Anna.

"Christ before Pilate. Christ is represented as a Jew with all the
realism of the new school."

And the question of the subject of the picture having brought him to one
of his favorite theories, Golenishtchev launched forth into a
disquisition on it.

"I can’t understand how they can fall into such a gross mistake. Christ
always has His definite embodiment in the art of the great masters. And
therefore, if they want to depict, not God, but a revolutionist or a
sage, let them take from history a Socrates, a Franklin, a Charlotte
Corday, but not Christ. They take the very figure which cannot be taken
for their art, and then..."

"And is it true that this Mihailov is in such poverty?" asked Vronsky,
thinking that, as a Russian Maecenas, it was his duty to assist the
artist regardless of whether the picture were good or bad.

"I should say not. He’s a remarkable portrait-painter. Have you ever
seen his portrait of Madame Vassiltchikova? But I believe he doesn’t
care about painting any more portraits, and so very likely he is in
want. I maintain that..."

"Couldn’t we ask him to paint a portrait of Anna Arkadyevna?" said
Vronsky.

"Why mine?" said Anna. "After yours I don’t want another portrait.
Better have one of Annie" (so she called her baby girl). "Here she is,"
she added, looking out of the window at the handsome Italian nurse, who
