
"Ah, what I have been through! But do get in.... Ah, what I have been
through!" she repeated, when Sergey Ivanovitch had got in and sat down
beside her. "You can’t conceive it! For six weeks he did not speak to
anyone, and would not touch food except when I implored him. And not for
one minute could we leave him alone. We took away everything he could
have used against himself. We lived on the ground floor, but there was
no reckoning on anything. You know, of course, that he had shot himself
once already on her account," she said, and the old lady’s eyelashes
twitched at the recollection. "Yes, hers was the fitting end for such a
woman. Even the death she chose was low and vulgar."

"It’s not for us to judge, countess," said Sergey Ivanovitch; "but I can
understand that it has been very hard for you."

"Ah, don’t speak of it! I was staying on my estate, and he was with me.
A note was brought him. He wrote an answer and sent it off. We hadn’t an
idea that she was close by at the station. In the evening I had only
just gone to my room, when my Mary told me a lady had thrown herself
under the train. Something seemed to strike me at once. I knew it was
she. The first thing I said was, he was not to be told. But they’d told
him already. His coachman was there and saw it all. When I ran into his
room, he was beside himself—it was fearful to see him. He didn’t say a
word, but galloped off there. I don’t know to this day what happened
there, but he was brought back at death’s door. I shouldn’t have known
him. _Prostration complete,_ the doctor said. And that was followed
almost by madness. Oh, why talk of it!" said the countess with a wave of
her hand. "It was an awful time! No, say what you will, she was a bad
woman. Why, what is the meaning of such desperate passions? It was all
to show herself something out of the way. Well, and that she did do. She
brought herself to ruin and two good men—her husband and my unhappy
son."

"And what did her husband do?" asked Sergey Ivanovitch.

"He has taken her daughter. Alexey was ready to agree to anything at
first. Now it worries him terribly that he should have given his own
child away to another man. But he can’t take back his word. Karenin came
to the funeral. But we tried to prevent his meeting Alexey. For him, for
her husband, it was easier, anyway. She had set him free. But my poor
son was utterly given up to her. He had thrown up everything, his
career, me, and even then she had no mercy on him, but of set purpose
she made his ruin complete. No, say what you will, her very death was
the death of a vile woman, of no religious feeling. God forgive me, but
I can’t help hating the memory of her, when I look at my son’s misery!"

"But how is he now?"

"It was a blessing from Providence for us—this Servian war. I’m old, and
I don’t understand the rights and wrongs of it, but it’s come as a
providential blessing to him. Of course for me, as his mother, it’s
terrible; and what’s worse, they say, _ce n’est pas très bien vu a
Pétersbourg_. But it can’t be helped! It was the one thing that could
rouse him. Yashvin—a friend of his—he had lost all he had at cards and
he was going to Servia. He came to see him and persuaded him to go. Now
it’s an interest for him. Do please talk to him a little. I want to
distract his mind. He’s so low-spirited. And as bad luck would have it,
he has toothache too. But he’ll be delighted to see you. Please do talk
to him; he’s walking up and down on that side."

Sergey Ivanovitch said he would be very glad to, and crossed over to the
other side of the station.



Chapter 


In the slanting evening shadows cast by the baggage piled up on the
platform, Vronsky in his long overcoat and slouch hat, with his hands in
his pockets, strode up and down, like a wild beast in a cage, turning
sharply after twenty paces. Sergey Ivanovitch fancied, as he approached
him, that Vronsky saw him but was pretending not to see. This did not
affect Sergey Ivanovitch in the slightest. He was above all personal
considerations with Vronsky.

At that moment Sergey Ivanovitch looked upon Vronsky as a man taking an
important part in a great cause, and Koznishev thought it his duty to
encourage him and express his approval. He went up to him.

Vronsky stood still, looked intently at him, recognized him, and going a
few steps forward to meet him, shook hands with him very warmly.

"Possibly you didn’t wish to see me," said Sergey Ivanovitch, "but
couldn’t I be of use to you?"

"There’s no one I should less dislike seeing than you," said Vronsky.
"Excuse me; and there’s nothing in life for me to like."

"I quite understand, and I merely meant to offer you my services," said
Sergey Ivanovitch, scanning Vronsky’s face, full of unmistakable
suffering. "Wouldn’t it be of use to you to have a letter to Ristitch—to
Milan?"

"Oh, no!" Vronsky said, seeming to understand him with difficulty. "If
you don’t mind, let’s walk on. It’s so stuffy among the carriages. A
letter? No, thank you; to meet death one needs no letters of
introduction. Nor for the Turks..." he said, with a smile that was
merely of the lips. His eyes still kept their look of angry suffering.

"Yes; but you might find it easier to get into relations, which are
after all essential, with anyone prepared to see you. But that’s as you
like. I was very glad to hear of your intention. There have been so many
attacks made on the volunteers, and a man like you raises them in public
estimation."

"My use as a man," said Vronsky, "is that life’s worth nothing to me.
And that I’ve enough bodily energy to cut my way into their ranks, and
to trample on them or fall—I know that. I’m glad there’s something to
give my life for, for it’s not simply useless but loathsome to me.
Anyone’s welcome to it." And his jaw twitched impatiently from the
incessant gnawing toothache, that prevented him from even speaking with
a natural expression.

"You will become another man, I predict," said Sergey Ivanovitch,
feeling touched. "To deliver one’s brother-men from bondage is an aim
worth death and life. God grant you success outwardly—and inwardly
peace," he added, and he held out his hand. Vronsky warmly pressed his
outstretched hand.

"Yes, as a weapon I may be of some use. But as a man, I’m a wreck," he
jerked out.

He could hardly speak for the throbbing ache in his strong teeth, that
were like rows of ivory in his mouth. He was silent, and his eyes rested
on the wheels of the tender, slowly and smoothly rolling along the
rails.

And all at once a different pain, not an ache, but an inner trouble,
that set his whole being in anguish, made him for an instant forget his
toothache. As he glanced at the tender and the rails, under the
influence of the conversation with a friend he had not met since his
misfortune, he suddenly recalled _her_—that is, what was left of her
when he had run like one distraught into the cloak room of the railway
station—on the table, shamelessly sprawling out among strangers, the
bloodstained body so lately full of life; the head unhurt dropping back
with its weight of hair, and the curling tresses about the temples, and
the exquisite face, with red, half-opened mouth, the strange, fixed
expression, piteous on the lips and awful in the still open eyes, that
seemed to utter that fearful phrase—that he would be sorry for it—that
she had said when they were quarreling.

And he tried to think of her as she was when he met her the first time,
at a railway station too, mysterious, exquisite, loving, seeking and
giving happiness, and not cruelly revengeful as he remembered her on
that last moment. He tried to recall his best moments with her, but
those moments were poisoned forever. He could only think of her as
triumphant, successful in her menace of a wholly useless remorse never
to be effaced. He lost all consciousness of toothache, and his face
worked with sobs.
