heart would break with sympathy and pain.

But still the minutes passed by and the hours, and still hours more, and
his misery and horror grew and were more and more intense.

All the ordinary conditions of life, without which one can form no
conception of anything, had ceased to exist for Levin. He lost all sense
of time. Minutes—those minutes when she sent for him and he held her
moist hand, that would squeeze his hand with extraordinary violence and
then push it away—seemed to him hours, and hours seemed to him minutes.
He was surprised when Lizaveta Petrovna asked him to light a candle
behind a screen, and he found that it was five o’clock in the afternoon.
If he had been told it was only ten o’clock in the morning, he would not
have been more surprised. Where he was all this time, he knew as little
as the time of anything. He saw her swollen face, sometimes bewildered
and in agony, sometimes smiling and trying to reassure him. He saw the
old princess too, flushed and overwrought, with her gray curls in
disorder, forcing herself to gulp down her tears, biting her lips; he
saw Dolly too and the doctor, smoking fat cigarettes, and Lizaveta
Petrovna with a firm, resolute, reassuring face, and the old prince
walking up and down the hall with a frowning face. But why they came in
and went out, where they were, he did not know. The princess was with
the doctor in the bedroom, then in the study, where a table set for
dinner suddenly appeared; then she was not there, but Dolly was. Then
Levin remembered he had been sent somewhere. Once he had been sent to
move a table and sofa. He had done this eagerly, thinking it had to be
done for her sake, and only later on he found it was his own bed he had
been getting ready. Then he had been sent to the study to ask the doctor
something. The doctor had answered and then had said something about the
irregularities in the municipal council. Then he had been sent to the
bedroom to help the old princess to move the holy picture in its silver
and gold setting, and with the princess’s old waiting maid he had
clambered on a shelf to reach it and had broken the little lamp, and the
old servant had tried to reassure him about the lamp and about his wife,
and he carried the holy picture and set it at Kitty’s head, carefully
tucking it in behind the pillow. But where, when, and why all this had
happened, he could not tell. He did not understand why the old princess
took his hand, and looking compassionately at him, begged him not to
worry himself, and Dolly persuaded him to eat something and led him out
of the room, and even the doctor looked seriously and with commiseration
at him and offered him a drop of something.

All he knew and felt was that what was happening was what had happened
nearly a year before in the hotel of the country town at the deathbed of
his brother Nikolay. But that had been grief—this was joy. Yet that
grief and this joy were alike outside all the ordinary conditions of
life; they were loop-holes, as it were, in that ordinary life through
which there came glimpses of something sublime. And in the contemplation
of this sublime something the soul was exalted to inconceivable heights
of which it had before had no conception, while reason lagged behind,
unable to keep up with it.

"Lord, have mercy on us, and succor us!" he repeated to himself
incessantly, feeling, in spite of his long and, as it seemed, complete
alienation from religion, that he turned to God just as trustfully and
simply as he had in his childhood and first youth.

All this time he had two distinct spiritual conditions. One was away
from her, with the doctor, who kept smoking one fat cigarette after
another and extinguishing them on the edge of a full ash tray, with
Dolly, and with the old prince, where there was talk about dinner, about
politics, about Marya Petrovna’s illness, and where Levin suddenly
forgot for a minute what was happening, and felt as though he had waked
up from sleep; the other was in her presence, at her pillow, where his
heart seemed breaking and still did not break from sympathetic
suffering, and he prayed to God without ceasing. And every time he was
brought back from a moment of oblivion by a scream reaching him from the
bedroom, he fell into the same strange terror that had come upon him the
first minute. Every time he heard a shriek, he jumped up, ran to justify
himself, remembered on the way that he was not to blame, and he longed
to defend her, to help her. But as he looked at her, he saw again that
help was impossible, and he was filled with terror and prayed: "Lord,
have mercy on us, and help us!" And as time went on, both these
conditions became more intense; the calmer he became away from her,
completely forgetting her, the more agonizing became both her sufferings
and his feeling of helplessness before them. He jumped up, would have
liked to run away, but ran to her.

Sometimes, when again and again she called upon him, he blamed her; but
seeing her patient, smiling face, and hearing the words, "I am worrying
you," he threw the blame on God; but thinking of God, at once he fell to
beseeching God to forgive him and have mercy.



Chapter 


He did not know whether it was late or early. The candles had all burned
out. Dolly had just been in the study and had suggested to the doctor
that he should lie down. Levin sat listening to the doctor’s stories of
a quack mesmerizer and looking at the ashes of his cigarette. There had
been a period of repose, and he had sunk into oblivion. He had
completely forgotten what was going on now. He heard the doctor’s chat
and understood it. Suddenly there came an unearthly shriek. The shriek
was so awful that Levin did not even jump up, but holding his breath,
gazed in terrified inquiry at the doctor. The doctor put his head on one
side, listened, and smiled approvingly. Everything was so extraordinary
that nothing could strike Levin as strange. "I suppose it must be so,"
he thought, and still sat where he was. Whose scream was this? He jumped
up, ran on tiptoe to the bedroom, edged round Lizaveta Petrovna and the
princess, and took up his position at Kitty’s pillow. The scream had
subsided, but there was some change now. What it was he did not see and
did not comprehend, and he had no wish to see or comprehend. But he saw
it by the face of Lizaveta Petrovna. Lizaveta Petrovna’s face was stern
and pale, and still as resolute, though her jaws were twitching, and her
eyes were fixed intently on Kitty. Kitty’s swollen and agonized face, a
tress of hair clinging to her moist brow, was turned to him and sought
his eyes. Her lifted hands asked for his hands. Clutching his chill
hands in her moist ones, she began squeezing them to her face.

"Don’t go, don’t go! I’m not afraid, I’m not afraid!" she said rapidly.
"Mamma, take my earrings. They bother me. You’re not afraid? Quick,
quick, Lizaveta Petrovna..."

She spoke quickly, very quickly, and tried to smile. But suddenly her
face was drawn, she pushed him away.

"Oh, this is awful! I’m dying, I’m dying! Go away!" she shrieked, and
again he heard that unearthly scream.

Levin clutched at his head and ran out of the room.

"It’s nothing, it’s nothing, it’s all right," Dolly called after him.

But they might say what they liked, he knew now that all was over. He
stood in the next room, his head leaning against the door post, and
heard shrieks, howls such as he had never heard before, and he knew that
what had been Kitty was uttering these shrieks. He had long ago ceased
to wish for the child. By now he loathed this child. He did not even
wish for her life now, all he longed for was the end of this awful
anguish.

"Doctor! What is it? What is it? By God!" he said, snatching at the
doctor’s hand as he came up.

"It’s the end," said the doctor. And the doctor’s face was so grave as
he said it that Levin took _the end_ as meaning her death.

Beside himself, he ran into the bedroom. The first thing he saw was the
face of Lizaveta Petrovna. It was even more frowning and stern. Kitty’s
face he did not know. In the place where it had been was something that
was fearful in its strained distortion and in the sounds that came from
it. He fell down with his head on the wooden framework of the bed,
feeling that his heart was bursting. The awful scream never paused, it
became still more awful, and as though it had reached the utmost limit
of terror, suddenly it ceased. Levin could not believe his ears, but
there could be no doubt; the scream had ceased and he heard a subdued
stir and bustle, and hurried breathing, and her voice, gasping, alive,
tender, and blissful, uttered softly, "It’s over!"
