what, she had gone up to him, and did as she was doing.

"Let us go to mamma!" she said, taking him by the hand. For a long while
he could say nothing, not so much because he was afraid of desecrating
the loftiness of his emotion by a word, as that every time he tried to
say something, instead of words he felt that tears of happiness were
welling up. He took her hand and kissed it.

"Can it be true?" he said at last in a choked voice. "I can’t believe
you love me, dear!"

She smiled at that "dear," and at the timidity with which he glanced at
her.

"Yes!" she said significantly, deliberately. "I am so happy!"

Not letting go his hands, she went into the drawing room. The princess,
seeing them, breathed quickly, and immediately began to cry and then
immediately began to laugh, and with a vigorous step Levin had not
expected, ran up to him, and hugging his head, kissed him, wetting his
cheeks with her tears.

"So it is all settled! I am glad. Love her. I am glad.... Kitty!"

"You’ve not been long settling things," said the old prince, trying to
seem unmoved; but Levin noticed that his eyes were wet when he turned to
him.

"I’ve long, always wished for this!" said the prince, taking Levin by
the arm and drawing him towards himself. "Even when this little
feather-head fancied..."

"Papa!" shrieked Kitty, and shut his mouth with her hands.

"Well, I won’t!" he said. "I’m very, very ... plea... Oh, what a fool I
am..."

He embraced Kitty, kissed her face, her hand, her face again, and made
the sign of the cross over her.

And there came over Levin a new feeling of love for this man, till then
so little known to him, when he saw how slowly and tenderly Kitty kissed
his muscular hand.



Chapter 


The princess sat in her armchair, silent and smiling; the prince sat
down beside her. Kitty stood by her father’s chair, still holding his
hand. All were silent.

The princess was the first to put everything into words, and to
translate all thoughts and feelings into practical questions. And all
equally felt this strange and painful for the first minute.

"When is it to be? We must have the benediction and announcement. And
when’s the wedding to be? What do you think, Alexander?"

"Here he is," said the old prince, pointing to Levin—"he’s the principal
person in the matter."

"When?" said Levin blushing. "Tomorrow; If you ask me, I should say, the
benediction today and the wedding tomorrow."

"Come, _mon cher_, that’s nonsense!"

"Well, in a week."

"He’s quite mad."

"No, why so?"

"Well, upon my word!" said the mother, smiling, delighted at this haste.
"How about the trousseau?"

"Will there really be a trousseau and all that?" Levin thought with
horror. "But can the trousseau and the benediction and all that—can it
spoil my happiness? Nothing can spoil it!" He glanced at Kitty, and
noticed that she was not in the least, not in the very least, disturbed
by the idea of the trousseau. "Then it must be all right," he thought.

"Oh, I know nothing about it; I only said what I should like," he said
apologetically.

"We’ll talk it over, then. The benediction and announcement can take
place now. That’s very well."

The princess went up to her husband, kissed him, and would have gone
away, but he kept her, embraced her, and, tenderly as a young lover,
kissed her several times, smiling. The old people were obviously muddled
for a moment, and did not quite know whether it was they who were in
love again or their daughter. When the prince and the princess had gone,
Levin went up to his betrothed and took her hand. He was self-possessed
now and could speak, and he had a great deal he wanted to tell her. But
he said not at all what he had to say.

"How I knew it would be so! I never hoped for it; and yet in my heart I
was always sure," he said. "I believe that it was ordained."

"And I!" she said. "Even when...." She stopped and went on again,
looking at him resolutely with her truthful eyes, "Even when I thrust
from me my happiness. I always loved you alone, but I was carried away.
I ought to tell you.... Can you forgive that?"

"Perhaps it was for the best. You will have to forgive me so much. I
ought to tell you..."

This was one of the things he had meant to speak about. He had resolved
from the first to tell her two things—that he was not chaste as she was,
and that he was not a believer. It was agonizing, but he considered he
ought to tell her both these facts.

"No, not now, later!" he said.

"Very well, later, but you must certainly tell me. I’m not afraid of
anything. I want to know everything. Now it is settled."

He added: "Settled that you’ll take me whatever I may be—you won’t give
me up? Yes?"

"Yes, yes."

Their conversation was interrupted by Mademoiselle Linon, who with an
affected but tender smile came to congratulate her favorite pupil.
Before she had gone, the servants came in with their congratulations.
Then relations arrived, and there began that state of blissful absurdity
from which Levin did not emerge till the day after his wedding. Levin
was in a continual state of awkwardness and discomfort, but the
intensity of his happiness went on all the while increasing. He felt
continually that a great deal was being expected of him—what, he did not
know; and he did everything he was told, and it all gave him happiness.
He had thought his engagement would have nothing about it like others,
that the ordinary conditions of engaged couples would spoil his special
happiness; but it ended in his doing exactly as other people did, and
his happiness being only increased thereby and becoming more and more
special, more and more unlike anything that had ever happened.

"Now we shall have sweetmeats to eat," said Mademoiselle Linon—and Levin
drove off to buy sweetmeats.

"Well, I’m very glad," said Sviazhsky. "I advise you to get the bouquets
from Fomin’s."

"Oh, are they wanted?" And he drove to Fomin’s.

His brother offered to lend him money, as he would have so many
expenses, presents to give....

