play with me—he wants to leave me without a shirt to my back, and so do
I him. And so we fight it out, and that’s the pleasure of it."

"Well, but suppose you were married," said Anna, "how would it be for
your wife?"

Yashvin laughed.

"That’s why I’m not married, and never mean to be."

"And Helsingfors?" said Vronsky, entering into the conversation and
glancing at Anna’s smiling face. Meeting his eyes, Anna’s face instantly
took a coldly severe expression as though she were saying to him: "It’s
not forgotten. It’s all the same."

"Were you really in love?" she said to Yashvin.

"Oh heavens! ever so many times! But you see, some men can play but only
so that they can always lay down their cards when the hour of a
_rendezvous_ comes, while I can take up love, but only so as not to be
late for my cards in the evening. That’s how I manage things."

"No, I didn’t mean that, but the real thing." She would have said
_Helsingfors_, but would not repeat the word used by Vronsky.

Voytov, who was buying the horse, came in. Anna got up and went out of
the room.

Before leaving the house, Vronsky went into her room. She would have
pretended to be looking for something on the table, but ashamed of
making a pretense, she looked straight in his face with cold eyes.

"What do you want?" she asked in French.

"To get the guarantee for Gambetta, I’ve sold him," he said, in a tone
which said more clearly than words, "I’ve no time for discussing things,
and it would lead to nothing."

"I’m not to blame in any way," he thought. "If she will punish herself,
_tant pis pour elle._" But as he was going he fancied that she said
something, and his heart suddenly ached with pity for her.

"Eh, Anna?" he queried.

"I said nothing," she answered just as coldly and calmly.

"Oh, nothing, _tant pis_ then," he thought, feeling cold again, and he
turned and went out. As he was going out he caught a glimpse in the
looking glass of her face, white, with quivering lips. He even wanted to
stop and to say some comforting word to her, but his legs carried him
out of the room before he could think what to say. The whole of that day
he spent away from home, and when he came in late in the evening the
maid told him that Anna Arkadyevna had a headache and begged him not to
go in to her.



Chapter 


Never before had a day been passed in quarrel. Today was the first time.
And this was not a quarrel. It was the open acknowledgment of complete
coldness. Was it possible to glance at her as he had glanced when he
came into the room for the guarantee?—to look at her, see her heart was
breaking with despair, and go out without a word with that face of
callous composure? He was not merely cold to her, he hated her because
he loved another woman—that was clear.

And remembering all the cruel words he had said, Anna supplied, too, the
words that he had unmistakably wished to say and could have said to her,
and she grew more and more exasperated.

"I won’t prevent you," he might say. "You can go where you like. You
were unwilling to be divorced from your husband, no doubt so that you
might go back to him. Go back to him. If you want money, I’ll give it to
you. How many roubles do you want?"

All the most cruel words that a brutal man could say, he said to her in
her imagination, and she could not forgive him for them, as though he
had actually said them.

"But didn’t he only yesterday swear he loved me, he, a truthful and
sincere man? Haven’t I despaired for nothing many times already?" she
said to herself afterwards.

All that day, except for the visit to Wilson’s, which occupied two
hours, Anna spent in doubts whether everything were over or whether
there were still hope of reconciliation, whether she should go away at
once or see him once more. She was expecting him the whole day, and in
the evening, as she went to her own room, leaving a message for him that
her head ached, she said to herself, "If he comes in spite of what the
maid says, it means that he loves me still. If not, it means that all is
over, and then I will decide what I’m to do!..."

In the evening she heard the rumbling of his carriage stop at the
entrance, his ring, his steps and his conversation with the servant; he
believed what was told him, did not care to find out more, and went to
his own room. So then everything was over.

And death rose clearly and vividly before her mind as the sole means of
bringing back love for her in his heart, of punishing him and of gaining
the victory in that strife which the evil spirit in possession of her
heart was waging with him.

Now nothing mattered: going or not going to Vozdvizhenskoe, getting or
not getting a divorce from her husband—all that did not matter. The one
thing that mattered was punishing him. When she poured herself out her
usual dose of opium, and thought that she had only to drink off the
whole bottle to die, it seemed to her so simple and easy, that she began
musing with enjoyment on how he would suffer, and repent and love her
memory when it would be too late. She lay in bed with open eyes, by the
light of a single burned-down candle, gazing at the carved cornice of
the ceiling and at the shadow of the screen that covered part of it,
while she vividly pictured to herself how he would feel when she would
be no more, when she would be only a memory to him. "How could I say
such cruel things to her?" he would say. "How could I go out of the room
without saying anything to her? But now she is no more. She has gone
away from us forever. She is...." Suddenly the shadow of the screen
wavered, pounced on the whole cornice, the whole ceiling; other shadows
from the other side swooped to meet it, for an instant the shadows
flitted back, but then with fresh swiftness they darted forward,
wavered, commingled, and all was darkness. "Death!" she thought. And
such horror came upon her that for a long while she could not realize
where she was, and for a long while her trembling hands could not find
the matches and light another candle, instead of the one that had burned
down and gone out. "No, anything—only to live! Why, I love him! Why, he
loves me! This has been before and will pass," she said, feeling that
tears of joy at the return to life were trickling down her cheeks. And
to escape from her panic she went hurriedly to his room.

He was asleep there, and sleeping soundly. She went up to him, and
holding the light above his face, she gazed a long while at him. Now
when he was asleep, she loved him so that at the sight of him she could
not keep back tears of tenderness. But she knew that if he waked up he
would look at her with cold eyes, convinced that he was right, and that
before telling him of her love, she would have to prove to him that he
had been wrong in his treatment of her. Without waking him, she went
back, and after a second dose of opium she fell towards morning into a
heavy, incomplete sleep, during which she never quite lost
consciousness.

In the morning she was waked by a horrible nightmare, which had recurred
several times in her dreams, even before her connection with Vronsky. A
little old man with unkempt beard was doing something bent down over
some iron, muttering meaningless French words, and she, as she always
did in this nightmare (it was what made the horror of it), felt that
this peasant was taking no notice of her, but was doing something
horrible with the iron—over her. And she waked up in a cold sweat.

When she got up, the previous day came back to her as though veiled in
