
The men went into the dining-room and went up to a table, laid with six
sorts of spirits and as many kinds of cheese, some with little silver
spades and some without, caviar, herrings, preserves of various kinds,
and plates with slices of French bread.

The men stood round the strong-smelling spirits and salt delicacies, and
the discussion of the Russification of Poland between Koznishev,
Karenin, and Pestsov died down in anticipation of dinner.

Sergey Ivanovitch was unequaled in his skill in winding up the most
heated and serious argument by some unexpected pinch of Attic salt that
changed the disposition of his opponent. He did this now.

Alexey Alexandrovitch had been maintaining that the Russification of
Poland could only be accomplished as a result of larger measures which
ought to be introduced by the Russian government.

Pestsov insisted that one country can only absorb another when it is the
more densely populated.

Koznishev admitted both points, but with limitations. As they were going
out of the drawing room to conclude the argument, Koznishev said,
smiling:

"So, then, for the Russification of our foreign populations there is but
one method—to bring up as many children as one can. My brother and I are
terribly in fault, I see. You married men, especially you, Stepan
Arkadyevitch, are the real patriots: what number have you reached?" he
said, smiling genially at their host and holding out a tiny wine glass
to him.

Everyone laughed, and Stepan Arkadyevitch with particular good humor.

"Oh, yes, that’s the best method!" he said, munching cheese and filling
the wine-glass with a special sort of spirit. The conversation dropped
at the jest.

"This cheese is not bad. Shall I give you some?" said the master of the
house. "Why, have you been going in for gymnastics again?" he asked
Levin, pinching his muscle with his left hand. Levin smiled, bent his
arm, and under Stepan Arkadyevitch’s fingers the muscles swelled up like
a sound cheese, hard as a knob of iron, through the fine cloth of the
coat.

"What biceps! A perfect Samson!"

"I imagine great strength is needed for hunting bears," observed Alexey
Alexandrovitch, who had the mistiest notions about the chase. He cut off
and spread with cheese a wafer of bread fine as a spider-web.

Levin smiled.

"Not at all. Quite the contrary; a child can kill a bear," he said, with
a slight bow moving aside for the ladies, who were approaching the
table.

"You have killed a bear, I’ve been told!" said Kitty, trying assiduously
to catch with her fork a perverse mushroom that would slip away, and
setting the lace quivering over her white arm. "Are there bears on your
place?" she added, turning her charming little head to him and smiling.

There was apparently nothing extraordinary in what she said, but what
unutterable meaning there was for him in every sound, in every turn of
her lips, her eyes, her hand as she said it! There was entreaty for
forgiveness, and trust in him, and tenderness—soft, timid tenderness—and
promise and hope and love for him, which he could not but believe in and
which choked him with happiness.

"No, we’ve been hunting in the Tver province. It was coming back from
there that I met your _beaufrère_ in the train, or your _beaufrère’s_
brother-in-law," he said with a smile. "It was an amusing meeting."

And he began telling with droll good-humor how, after not sleeping all
night, he had, wearing an old fur-lined, full-skirted coat, got into
Alexey Alexandrovitch’s compartment.

"The conductor, forgetting the proverb, would have chucked me out on
account of my attire; but thereupon I began expressing my feelings in
elevated language, and ... you, too," he said, addressing Karenin and
forgetting his name, "at first would have ejected me on the ground of
the old coat, but afterwards you took my part, for which I am extremely
grateful."

"The rights of passengers generally to choose their seats are too
ill-defined," said Alexey Alexandrovitch, rubbing the tips of his
fingers on his handkerchief.

"I saw you were in uncertainty about me," said Levin, smiling
good-naturedly, "but I made haste to plunge into intellectual
conversation to smooth over the defects of my attire." Sergey
Ivanovitch, while he kept up a conversation with their hostess, had one
ear for his brother, and he glanced askance at him. "What is the matter
with him today? Why such a conquering hero?" he thought. He did not know
that Levin was feeling as though he had grown wings. Levin knew she was
listening to his words and that she was glad to listen to him. And this
was the only thing that interested him. Not in that room only, but in
the whole world, there existed for him only himself, with enormously
increased importance and dignity in his own eyes, and she. He felt
himself on a pinnacle that made him giddy, and far away down below were
all those nice excellent Karenins, Oblonskys, and all the world.

Quite without attracting notice, without glancing at them, as though
there were no other places left, Stepan Arkadyevitch put Levin and Kitty
side by side.

"Oh, you may as well sit there," he said to Levin.

The dinner was as choice as the china, in which Stepan Arkadyevitch was
a connoisseur. The _soupe Marie-Louise_ was a splendid success; the tiny
pies eaten with it melted in the mouth and were irreproachable. The two
footmen and Matvey, in white cravats, did their duty with the dishes and
wines unobtrusively, quietly, and swiftly. On the material side the
dinner was a success; it was no less so on the immaterial. The
conversation, at times general and at times between individuals, never
paused, and towards the end the company was so lively that the men rose
from the table, without stopping speaking, and even Alexey
Alexandrovitch thawed.



Chapter 


Pestsov liked thrashing an argument out to the end, and was not
satisfied with Sergey Ivanovitch’s words, especially as he felt the
injustice of his view.

"I did not mean," he said over the soup, addressing Alexey
Alexandrovitch, "mere density of population alone, but in conjunction
with fundamental ideas, and not by means of principles."

"It seems to me," Alexey Alexandrovitch said languidly, and with no
haste, "that that’s the same thing. In my opinion, influence over
another people is only possible to the people which has the higher
development, which..."

"But that’s just the question," Pestsov broke in in his bass.

He was always in a hurry to speak, and seemed always to put his whole
soul into what he was saying. "In what are we to make higher development
consist? The English, the French, the Germans, which is at the highest
stage of development? Which of them will nationalize the other? We see
the Rhine provinces have been turned French, but the Germans are not at
a lower stage!" he shouted. "There is another law at work there."

"I fancy that the greater influence is always on the side of true
civilization," said Alexey Alexandrovitch, slightly lifting his
eyebrows.

