boy. His little body bent forward with his nightshirt unbuttoned, he was
stretching and still yawning. The instant his lips came together they
curved into a blissfully sleepy smile, and with that smile he slowly and
deliciously rolled back again.

"Seryozha!" she whispered, going noiselessly up to him.

When she was parted from him, and all this latter time when she had been
feeling a fresh rush of love for him, she had pictured him as he was at
four years old, when she had loved him most of all. Now he was not even
the same as when she had left him; he was still further from the
four-year-old baby, more grown and thinner. How thin his face was, how
short his hair was! What long hands! How he had changed since she left
him! But it was he with his head, his lips, his soft neck and broad
little shoulders.

"Seryozha!" she repeated just in the child’s ear.

He raised himself again on his elbow, turned his tangled head from side
to side as though looking for something, and opened his eyes. Slowly and
inquiringly he looked for several seconds at his mother standing
motionless before him, then all at once he smiled a blissful smile, and
shutting his eyes, rolled not backwards but towards her into her arms.

"Seryozha! my darling boy!" she said, breathing hard and putting her
arms round his plump little body. "Mother!" he said, wriggling about in
her arms so as to touch her hands with different parts of him.

Smiling sleepily still with closed eyes, he flung fat little arms round
her shoulders, rolled towards her, with the delicious sleepy warmth and
fragrance that is only found in children, and began rubbing his face
against her neck and shoulders.

"I know," he said, opening his eyes; "it’s my birthday today. I knew
you’d come. I’ll get up directly."

And saying that he dropped asleep.

Anna looked at him hungrily; she saw how he had grown and changed in her
absence. She knew, and did not know, the bare legs so long now, that
were thrust out below the quilt, those short-cropped curls on his neck
in which she had so often kissed him. She touched all this and could say
nothing; tears choked her.

"What are you crying for, mother?" he said, waking completely up.
"Mother, what are you crying for?" he cried in a tearful voice.

"I won’t cry ... I’m crying for joy. It’s so long since I’ve seen you. I
won’t, I won’t," she said, gulping down her tears and turning away.
"Come, it’s time for you to dress now," she added, after a pause, and,
never letting go his hands, she sat down by his bedside on the chair,
where his clothes were put ready for him.

"How do you dress without me? How..." she tried to begin talking simply
and cheerfully, but she could not, and again she turned away.

"I don’t have a cold bath, papa didn’t order it. And you’ve not seen
Vassily Lukitch? He’ll come in soon. Why, you’re sitting on my clothes!"

And Seryozha went off into a peal of laughter. She looked at him and
smiled.

"Mother, darling, sweet one!" he shouted, flinging himself on her again
and hugging her. It was as though only now, on seeing her smile, he
fully grasped what had happened.

"I don’t want that on," he said, taking off her hat. And as it were,
seeing her afresh without her hat, he fell to kissing her again.

"But what did you think about me? You didn’t think I was dead?"

"I never believed it."

"You didn’t believe it, my sweet?"

"I knew, I knew!" he repeated his favorite phrase, and snatching the
hand that was stroking his hair, he pressed the open palm to his mouth
and kissed it.



Chapter 


Meanwhile Vassily Lukitch had not at first understood who this lady was,
and had learned from their conversation that it was no other person than
the mother who had left her husband, and whom he had not seen, as he had
entered the house after her departure. He was in doubt whether to go in
or not, or whether to communicate with Alexey Alexandrovitch. Reflecting
finally that his duty was to get Seryozha up at the hour fixed, and that
it was therefore not his business to consider who was there, the mother
or anyone else, but simply to do his duty, he finished dressing, went to
the door and opened it.

But the embraces of the mother and child, the sound of their voices, and
what they were saying, made him change his mind.

He shook his head, and with a sigh he closed the door. "I’ll wait
another ten minutes," he said to himself, clearing his throat and wiping
away tears.

Among the servants of the household there was intense excitement all
this time. All had heard that their mistress had come, and that
Kapitonitch had let her in, and that she was even now in the nursery,
and that their master always went in person to the nursery at nine
o’clock, and every one fully comprehended that it was impossible for the
husband and wife to meet, and that they must prevent it. Korney, the
valet, going down to the hall porter’s room, asked who had let her in,
and how it was he had done so, and ascertaining that Kapitonitch had
admitted her and shown her up, he gave the old man a talking-to. The
hall porter was doggedly silent, but when Korney told him he ought to be
sent away, Kapitonitch darted up to him, and waving his hands in
Korney’s face, began:

"Oh yes, to be sure you’d not have let her in! After ten years’ service,
and never a word but of kindness, and there you’d up and say, ‘Be off,
go along, get away with you!’ Oh yes, you’re a shrewd one at politics, I
dare say! You don’t need to be taught how to swindle the master, and to
filch fur coats!"

"Soldier!" said Korney contemptuously, and he turned to the nurse who
was coming in. "Here, what do you think, Marya Efimovna: he let her in
without a word to anyone," Korney said addressing her. "Alexey
Alexandrovitch will be down immediately—and go into the nursery!"

"A pretty business, a pretty business!" said the nurse. "You, Korney
Vassilievitch, you’d best keep him some way or other, the master, while
I’ll run and get her away somehow. A pretty business!"

When the nurse went into the nursery, Seryozha was telling his mother
how he and Nadinka had had a fall in sledging downhill, and had turned
over three times. She was listening to the sound of his voice, watching
his face and the play of expression on it, touching his hand, but she
did not follow what he was saying. She must go, she must leave him,—this
was the only thing she was thinking and feeling. She heard the steps of
Vassily Lukitch coming up to the door and coughing; she heard, too, the
steps of the nurse as she came near; but she sat like one turned to
stone, incapable of beginning to speak or to get up.

"Mistress, darling!" began the nurse, going up to Anna and kissing her
hands and shoulders. "God has brought joy indeed to our boy on his
birthday. You aren’t changed one bit."

"Oh, nurse dear, I didn’t know you were in the house," said Anna,
rousing herself for a moment.

"I’m not living here, I’m living with my daughter. I came for the
birthday, Anna Arkadyevna, darling!"

The nurse suddenly burst into tears, and began kissing her hand again.
