male, and military, and popular instruction on the new model, and
finally, the district council—the marshal of the province, Snetkov, was
a nobleman of the old school,—dissipating an immense fortune, a
good-hearted man, honest after his own fashion, but utterly without any
comprehension of the needs of modern days. He always took, in every
question, the side of the nobility; he was positively antagonistic to
the spread of popular education, and he succeeded in giving a purely
party character to the district council which ought by rights to be of
such an immense importance. What was needed was to put in his place a
fresh, capable, perfectly modern man, of contemporary ideas, and to
frame their policy so as from the rights conferred upon the nobles, not
as the nobility, but as an element of the district council, to extract
all the powers of self-government that could possibly be derived from
them. In the wealthy Kashinsky province, which always took the lead of
other provinces in everything, there was now such a preponderance of
forces that this policy, once carried through properly there, might
serve as a model for other provinces for all Russia. And hence the whole
question was of the greatest importance. It was proposed to elect as
marshal in place of Snetkov either Sviazhsky, or, better still,
Nevyedovsky, a former university professor, a man of remarkable
intelligence and a great friend of Sergey Ivanovitch.

The meeting was opened by the governor, who made a speech to the nobles,
urging them to elect the public functionaries, not from regard for
persons, but for the service and welfare of their fatherland, and hoping
that the honorable nobility of the Kashinsky province would, as at all
former elections, hold their duty as sacred, and vindicate the exalted
confidence of the monarch.

When he had finished with his speech, the governor walked out of the
hall, and the noblemen noisily and eagerly—some even
enthusiastically—followed him and thronged round him while he put on his
fur coat and conversed amicably with the marshal of the province. Levin,
anxious to see into everything and not to miss anything, stood there too
in the crowd, and heard the governor say: "Please tell Marya Ivanovna my
wife is very sorry she couldn’t come to the Home." And thereupon the
nobles in high good-humor sorted out their fur coats and all drove off
to the cathedral.

In the cathedral Levin, lifting his hand like the rest and repeating the
words of the archdeacon, swore with most terrible oaths to do all the
governor had hoped they would do. Church services always affected Levin,
and as he uttered the words "I kiss the cross," and glanced round at the
crowd of young and old men repeating the same, he felt touched.

On the second and third days there was business relating to the finances
of the nobility and the female high school, of no importance whatever,
as Sergey Ivanovitch explained, and Levin, busy seeing after his own
affairs, did not attend the meetings. On the fourth day the auditing of
the marshal’s accounts took place at the high table of the marshal of
the province. And then there occurred the first skirmish between the new
party and the old. The committee who had been deputed to verify the
accounts reported to the meeting that all was in order. The marshal of
the province got up, thanked the nobility for their confidence, and shed
tears. The nobles gave him a loud welcome, and shook hands with him. But
at that instant a nobleman of Sergey Ivanovitch’s party said that he had
heard that the committee had not verified the accounts, considering such
a verification an insult to the marshal of the province. One of the
members of the committee incautiously admitted this. Then a small
gentleman, very young-looking but very malignant, began to say that it
would probably be agreeable to the marshal of the province to give an
account of his expenditures of the public moneys, and that the misplaced
delicacy of the members of the committee was depriving him of this moral
satisfaction. Then the members of the committee tried to withdraw their
admission, and Sergey Ivanovitch began to prove that they must logically
admit either that they had verified the accounts or that they had not,
and he developed this dilemma in detail. Sergey Ivanovitch was answered
by the spokesman of the opposite party. Then Sviazhsky spoke, and then
the malignant gentleman again. The discussion lasted a long time and
ended in nothing. Levin was surprised that they should dispute upon this
subject so long, especially as, when he asked Sergey Ivanovitch whether
he supposed that money had been misappropriated, Sergey Ivanovitch
answered:

"Oh, no! He’s an honest man. But those old-fashioned methods of paternal
family arrangements in the management of provincial affairs must be
broken down."

On the fifth day came the elections of the district marshals. It was
rather a stormy day in several districts. In the Seleznevsky district
Sviazhsky was elected unanimously without a ballot, and he gave a dinner
that evening.



Chapter 


The sixth day was fixed for the election of the marshal of the province.

The rooms, large and small, were full of noblemen in all sorts of
uniforms. Many had come only for that day. Men who had not seen each
other for years, some from the Crimea, some from Petersburg, some from
abroad, met in the rooms of the Hall of Nobility. There was much
discussion around the governor’s table under the portrait of the Tsar.

The nobles, both in the larger and the smaller rooms, grouped themselves
in camps, and from their hostile and suspicious glances, from the
silence that fell upon them when outsiders approached a group, and from
the way that some, whispering together, retreated to the farther
corridor, it was evident that each side had secrets from the other. In
appearance the noblemen were sharply divided into two classes: the old
and the new. The old were for the most part either in old uniforms of
the nobility, buttoned up closely, with spurs and hats, or in their own
special naval, cavalry, infantry, or official uniforms. The uniforms of
the older men were embroidered in the old-fashioned way with epaulets on
their shoulders; they were unmistakably tight and short in the waist, as
though their wearers had grown out of them. The younger men wore the
uniform of the nobility with long waists and broad shoulders, unbuttoned
over white waistcoats, or uniforms with black collars and with the
embroidered badges of justices of the peace. To the younger men belonged
the court uniforms that here and there brightened up the crowd.

But the division into young and old did not correspond with the division
of parties. Some of the young men, as Levin observed, belonged to the
old party; and some of the very oldest noblemen, on the contrary, were
whispering with Sviazhsky, and were evidently ardent partisans of the
new party.

Levin stood in the smaller room, where they were smoking and taking
light refreshments, close to his own friends, and listening to what they
were saying, he conscientiously exerted all his intelligence trying to
understand what was said. Sergey Ivanovitch was the center round which
the others grouped themselves. He was listening at that moment to
Sviazhsky and Hliustov, the marshal of another district, who belonged to
their party. Hliustov would not agree to go with his district to ask
Snetkov to stand, while Sviazhsky was persuading him to do so, and
Sergey Ivanovitch was approving of the plan. Levin could not make out
why the opposition was to ask the marshal to stand whom they wanted to
supersede.

Stepan Arkadyevitch, who had just been drinking and taking some lunch,
came up to them in his uniform of a gentleman of the bedchamber, wiping
his lips with a perfumed handkerchief of bordered batiste.

"We are placing our forces," he said, pulling out his whiskers, "Sergey
Ivanovitch!"

And listening to the conversation, he supported Sviazhsky’s contention.

"One district’s enough, and Sviazhsky’s obviously of the opposition," he
said, words evidently intelligible to all except Levin.

"Why, Kostya, you here too! I suppose you’re converted, eh?" he added,
turning to Levin and drawing his arm through his. Levin would have been
glad indeed to be converted, but could not make out what the point was,
and retreating a few steps from the speakers, he explained to Stepan
Arkadyevitch his inability to understand why the marshal of the province
should be asked to stand.

