bachelor friends, casually brought together at his rooms. These were
Sergey Ivanovitch, Katavasov, a university friend, now professor of
natural science, whom Levin had met in the street and insisted on taking
home with him, and Tchirikov, his best man, a Moscow conciliation-board
judge, Levin’s companion in his bear-hunts. The dinner was a very merry
one: Sergey Ivanovitch was in his happiest mood, and was much amused by
Katavasov’s originality. Katavasov, feeling his originality was
appreciated and understood, made the most of it. Tchirikov always gave a
lively and good-humored support to conversation of any sort.

"See, now," said Katavasov, drawling his words from a habit acquired in
the lecture-room, "what a capable fellow was our friend Konstantin
Dmitrievitch. I’m not speaking of present company, for he’s absent. At
the time he left the university he was fond of science, took an interest
in humanity; now one-half of his abilities is devoted to deceiving
himself, and the other to justifying the deceit."

"A more determined enemy of matrimony than you I never saw," said Sergey
Ivanovitch.

"Oh, no, I’m not an enemy of matrimony. I’m in favor of division of
labor. People who can do nothing else ought to rear people while the
rest work for their happiness and enlightenment. That’s how I look at
it. To muddle up two trades is the error of the amateur; I’m not one of
their number."

"How happy I shall be when I hear that you’re in love!" said Levin.
"Please invite me to the wedding."

"I’m in love now."

"Yes, with a cuttlefish! You know," Levin turned to his brother, "Mihail
Semyonovitch is writing a work on the digestive organs of the..."

"Now, make a muddle of it! It doesn’t matter what about. And the fact
is, I certainly do love cuttlefish."

"But that’s no hindrance to your loving your wife."

"The cuttlefish is no hindrance. The wife is the hindrance."

"Why so?"

"Oh, you’ll see! You care about farming, hunting,—well, you’d better
look out!"

"Arhip was here today; he said there were a lot of elks in Prudno, and
two bears," said Tchirikov.

"Well, you must go and get them without me."

"Ah, that’s the truth," said Sergey Ivanovitch. "And you may say
good-bye to bear-hunting for the future—your wife won’t allow it!"

Levin smiled. The picture of his wife not letting him go was so pleasant
that he was ready to renounce the delights of looking upon bears
forever.

"Still, it’s a pity they should get those two bears without you. Do you
remember last time at Hapilovo? That was a delightful hunt!" said
Tchirikov.

Levin had not the heart to disillusion him of the notion that there
could be something delightful apart from her, and so said nothing.

"There’s some sense in this custom of saying good-bye to bachelor life,"
said Sergey Ivanovitch. "However happy you may be, you must regret your
freedom."

"And confess there is a feeling that you want to jump out of the window,
like Gogol’s bridegroom?"

"Of course there is, but it isn’t confessed," said Katavasov, and he
broke into loud laughter.

"Oh, well, the window’s open. Let’s start off this instant to Tver!
There’s a big she-bear; one can go right up to the lair. Seriously,
let’s go by the five o’clock! And here let them do what they like," said
Tchirikov, smiling.

"Well, now, on my honor," said Levin, smiling, "I can’t find in my heart
that feeling of regret for my freedom."

"Yes, there’s such a chaos in your heart just now that you can’t find
anything there," said Katavasov. "Wait a bit, when you set it to rights
a little, you’ll find it!"

"No; if so, I should have felt a little, apart from my feeling" (he
could not say love before them) "and happiness, a certain regret at
losing my freedom.... On the contrary, I am glad at the very loss of my
freedom."

"Awful! It’s a hopeless case!" said Katavasov. "Well, let’s drink to his
recovery, or wish that a hundredth part of his dreams may be
realized—and that would be happiness such as never has been seen on
earth!"

Soon after dinner the guests went away to be in time to be dressed for
the wedding.

When he was left alone, and recalled the conversation of these bachelor
friends, Levin asked himself: had he in his heart that regret for his
freedom of which they had spoken? He smiled at the question. "Freedom!
What is freedom for? Happiness is only in loving and wishing her wishes,
thinking her thoughts, that is to say, not freedom at all—that’s
happiness!"

"But do I know her ideas, her wishes, her feelings?" some voice suddenly
whispered to him. The smile died away from his face, and he grew
thoughtful. And suddenly a strange feeling came upon him. There came
over him a dread and doubt—doubt of everything.

"What if she does not love me? What if she’s marrying me simply to be
married? What if she doesn’t see herself what she’s doing?" he asked
himself. "She may come to her senses, and only when she is being married
realize that she does not and cannot love me." And strange, most evil
thoughts of her began to come to him. He was jealous of Vronsky, as he
had been a year ago, as though the evening he had seen her with Vronsky
had been yesterday. He suspected she had not told him everything.

He jumped up quickly. "No, this can’t go on!" he said to himself in
despair. "I’ll go to her; I’ll ask her; I’ll say for the last time: we
are free, and hadn’t we better stay so? Anything’s better than endless
misery, disgrace, unfaithfulness!" With despair in his heart and bitter
anger against all men, against himself, against her, he went out of the
hotel and drove to her house.

He found her in one of the back rooms. She was sitting on a chest and
making some arrangements with her maid, sorting over heaps of dresses of
different colors, spread on the backs of chairs and on the floor.

"Ah!" she cried, seeing him, and beaming with delight. "Kostya!
Konstantin Dmitrievitch!" (These latter days she used these names almost
alternately.) "I didn’t expect you! I’m going through my wardrobe to see
what’s for whom..."

"Oh! that’s very nice!" he said gloomily, looking at the maid.

"You can go, Dunyasha, I’ll call you presently," said Kitty. "Kostya,
what’s the matter?" she asked, definitely adopting this familiar name as
soon as the maid had gone out. She noticed his strange face, agitated
and gloomy, and a panic came over her.

"Kitty! I’m in torture. I can’t suffer alone," he said with despair in
his voice, standing before her and looking imploringly into her eyes. He
saw already from her loving, truthful face, that nothing could come of
what he had meant to say, but yet he wanted her to reassure him herself.
"I’ve come to say that there’s still time. This can all be stopped and
set right."

