
"I told him about it," Stepan Arkadyevitch said to his sister, nodding
at Levin.

"You shouldn’t have. My writing is something after the fashion of those
little baskets and carving which Liza Mertsalova used to sell me from
the prisons. She had the direction of the prison department in that
society," she turned to Levin; "and they were miracles of patience, the
work of those poor wretches."

And Levin saw a new trait in this woman, who attracted him so
extraordinarily. Besides wit, grace, and beauty, she had truth. She had
no wish to hide from him all the bitterness of her position. As she said
that she sighed, and her face suddenly taking a hard expression, looked
as it were turned to stone. With that expression on her face she was
more beautiful than ever; but the expression was new; it was utterly
unlike that expression, radiant with happiness and creating happiness,
which had been caught by the painter in her portrait. Levin looked more
than once at the portrait and at her figure, as taking her brother’s arm
she walked with him to the high doors and he felt for her a tenderness
and pity at which he wondered himself.

She asked Levin and Vorkuev to go into the drawing room, while she
stayed behind to say a few words to her brother. "About her divorce,
about Vronsky, and what he’s doing at the club, about me?" wondered
Levin. And he was so keenly interested by the question of what she was
saying to Stepan Arkadyevitch, that he scarcely heard what Vorkuev was
telling him of the qualities of the story for children Anna Arkadyevna
had written.

At tea the same pleasant sort of talk, full of interesting matter,
continued. There was not a single instant when a subject for
conversation was to seek; on the contrary, it was felt that one had
hardly time to say what one had to say, and eagerly held back to hear
what the others were saying. And all that was said, not only by her, but
by Vorkuev and Stepan Arkadyevitch—all, so it seemed to Levin, gained
peculiar significance from her appreciation and her criticism. While he
followed this interesting conversation, Levin was all the time admiring
her—her beauty, her intelligence, her culture, and at the same time her
directness and genuine depth of feeling. He listened and talked, and all
the while he was thinking of her inner life, trying to divine her
feelings. And though he had judged her so severely hitherto, now by some
strange chain of reasoning he was justifying her and was also sorry for
her, and afraid that Vronsky did not fully understand her. At eleven
o’clock, when Stepan Arkadyevitch got up to go (Vorkuev had left
earlier), it seemed to Levin that he had only just come. Regretfully
Levin too rose.

"Good-bye," she said, holding his hand and glancing into his face with a
winning look. "I am very glad _que la glace est rompue._"

She dropped his hand, and half closed her eyes.

"Tell your wife that I love her as before, and that if she cannot pardon
me my position, then my wish for her is that she may never pardon it. To
pardon it, one must go through what I have gone through, and may God
spare her that."

"Certainly, yes, I will tell her..." Levin said, blushing.



Chapter 


"What a marvelous, sweet and unhappy woman!" he was thinking, as he
stepped out into the frosty air with Stepan Arkadyevitch.

"Well, didn’t I tell you?" said Stepan Arkadyevitch, seeing that Levin
had been completely won over.

"Yes," said Levin dreamily, "an extraordinary woman! It’s not her
cleverness, but she has such wonderful depth of feeling. I’m awfully
sorry for her!"

"Now, please God, everything will soon be settled. Well, well, don’t be
hard on people in future," said Stepan Arkadyevitch, opening the
carriage door. "Good-bye; we don’t go the same way."

Still thinking of Anna, of everything, even the simplest phrase in their
conversation with her, and recalling the minutest changes in her
expression, entering more and more into her position, and feeling
sympathy for her, Levin reached home.

At home Kouzma told Levin that Katerina Alexandrovna was quite well, and
that her sisters had not long been gone, and he handed him two letters.
Levin read them at once in the hall, that he might not over look them
later. One was from Sokolov, his bailiff. Sokolov wrote that the corn
could not be sold, that it was fetching only five and a half roubles,
and that more than that could not be got for it. The other letter was
from his sister. She scolded him for her business being still unsettled.

"Well, we must sell it at five and a half if we can’t get more," Levin
decided the first question, which had always before seemed such a
weighty one, with extraordinary facility on the spot. "It’s
extraordinary how all one’s time is taken up here," he thought,
considering the second letter. He felt himself to blame for not having
got done what his sister had asked him to do for her. "Today, again,
I’ve not been to the court, but today I’ve certainly not had time." And
resolving that he would not fail to do it next day, he went up to his
wife. As he went in, Levin rapidly ran through mentally the day he had
spent. All the events of the day were conversations, conversations he
had heard and taken part in. All the conversations were upon subjects
which, if he had been alone at home, he would never have taken up, but
here they were very interesting. And all these conversations were right
enough, only in two places there was something not quite right. One was
what he had said about the carp, the other was something not "quite the
thing" in the tender sympathy he was feeling for Anna.

Levin found his wife low-spirited and dull. The dinner of the three
sisters had gone off very well, but then they had waited and waited for
him, all of them had felt dull, the sisters had departed, and she had
been left alone.

"Well, and what have you been doing?" she asked him, looking straight
into his eyes, which shone with rather a suspicious brightness. But that
she might not prevent his telling her everything, she concealed her
close scrutiny of him, and with an approving smile listened to his
account of how he had spent the evening.

"Well, I’m very glad I met Vronsky. I felt quite at ease and natural
with him. You understand, I shall try not to see him, but I’m glad that
this awkwardness is all over," he said, and remembering that by way of
trying not to see him, he had immediately gone to call on Anna, he
blushed. "We talk about the peasants drinking; I don’t know which drinks
most, the peasantry or our own class; the peasants do on holidays,
but..."

But Kitty took not the slightest interest in discussing the drinking
habits of the peasants. She saw that he blushed, and she wanted to know
why.

"Well, and then where did you go?"

"Stiva urged me awfully to go and see Anna Arkadyevna."

And as he said this, Levin blushed even more, and his doubts as to
whether he had done right in going to see Anna were settled once for
all. He knew now that he ought not to have done so.

Kitty’s eyes opened in a curious way and gleamed at Anna’s name, but
controlling herself with an effort, she concealed her emotion and
deceived him.

"Oh!" was all she said.

"I’m sure you won’t be angry at my going. Stiva begged me to, and Dolly
wished it," Levin went on.

"Oh, no!" she said, but he saw in her eyes a constraint that boded him
