insisted on their taking separate sets of rooms in Petersburg, and that
even now he was not coming to her alone, as though he were trying to
avoid meeting her face to face.

"But he ought to tell me so. I must know that it is so. If I knew it,
then I know what I should do," she said to herself, utterly unable to
picture to herself the position she would be in if she were convinced of
his not caring for her. She thought he had ceased to love her, she felt
close upon despair, and consequently she felt exceptionally alert. She
rang for her maid and went to her dressing room. As she dressed, she
took more care over her appearance than she had done all those days, as
though he might, if he had grown cold to her, fall in love with her
again because she had dressed and arranged her hair in the way most
becoming to her.

She heard the bell ring before she was ready. When she went into the
drawing room it was not he, but Yashvin, who met her eyes. Vronsky was
looking through the photographs of her son, which she had forgotten on
the table, and he made no haste to look round at her.

"We have met already," she said, putting her little hand into the huge
hand of Yashvin, whose bashfulness was so queerly out of keeping with
his immense frame and coarse face. "We met last year at the races. Give
them to me," she said, with a rapid movement snatching from Vronsky the
photographs of her son, and glancing significantly at him with flashing
eyes. "Were the races good this year? Instead of them I saw the races in
the Corso in Rome. But you don’t care for life abroad," she said with a
cordial smile. "I know you and all your tastes, though I have seen so
little of you."

"I’m awfully sorry for that, for my tastes are mostly bad," said
Yashvin, gnawing at his left mustache.

Having talked a little while, and noticing that Vronsky glanced at the
clock, Yashvin asked her whether she would be staying much longer in
Petersburg, and unbending his huge figure reached after his cap.

"Not long, I think," she said hesitatingly, glancing at Vronsky.

"So then we shan’t meet again?"

"Come and dine with me," said Anna resolutely, angry it seemed with
herself for her embarrassment, but flushing as she always did when she
defined her position before a fresh person. "The dinner here is not
good, but at least you will see him. There is no one of his old friends
in the regiment Alexey cares for as he does for you."

"Delighted," said Yashvin with a smile, from which Vronsky could see
that he liked Anna very much.

Yashvin said good-bye and went away; Vronsky stayed behind.

"Are you going too?" she said to him.

"I’m late already," he answered. "Run along! I’ll catch you up in a
moment," he called to Yashvin.

She took him by the hand, and without taking her eyes off him, gazed at
him while she ransacked her mind for the words to say that would keep
him.

"Wait a minute, there’s something I want to say to you," and taking his
broad hand she pressed it on her neck. "Oh, was it right my asking him
to dinner?"

"You did quite right," he said with a serene smile that showed his even
teeth, and he kissed her hand.

"Alexey, you have not changed to me?" she said, pressing his hand in
both of hers. "Alexey, I am miserable here. When are we going away?"

"Soon, soon. You wouldn’t believe how disagreeable our way of living
here is to me too," he said, and he drew away his hand.

"Well, go, go!" she said in a tone of offense, and she walked quickly
away from him.



Chapter 


When Vronsky returned home, Anna was not yet home. Soon after he had
left, some lady, so they told him, had come to see her, and she had gone
out with her. That she had gone out without leaving word where she was
going, that she had not yet come back, and that all the morning she had
been going about somewhere without a word to him—all this, together with
the strange look of excitement in her face in the morning, and the
recollection of the hostile tone with which she had before Yashvin
almost snatched her son’s photographs out of his hands, made him
serious. He decided he absolutely must speak openly with her. And he
waited for her in her drawing room. But Anna did not return alone, but
brought with her her old unmarried aunt, Princess Oblonskaya. This was
the lady who had come in the morning, and with whom Anna had gone out
shopping. Anna appeared not to notice Vronsky’s worried and inquiring
expression, and began a lively account of her morning’s shopping. He saw
that there was something working within her; in her flashing eyes, when
they rested for a moment on him, there was an intense concentration, and
in her words and movements there was that nervous rapidity and grace
which, during the early period of their intimacy, had so fascinated him,
but which now so disturbed and alarmed him.

The dinner was laid for four. All were gathered together and about to go
into the little dining room when Tushkevitch made his appearance with a
message from Princess Betsy. Princess Betsy begged her to excuse her not
having come to say good-bye; she had been indisposed, but begged Anna to
come to her between half-past six and nine o’clock. Vronsky glanced at
Anna at the precise limit of time, so suggestive of steps having been
taken that she should meet no one; but Anna appeared not to notice it.

"Very sorry that I can’t come just between half-past six and nine," she
said with a faint smile.

"The princess will be very sorry."

"And so am I."

"You’re going, no doubt, to hear Patti?" said Tushkevitch.

"Patti? You suggest the idea to me. I would go if it were possible to
get a box."

"I can get one," Tushkevitch offered his services.

"I should be very, very grateful to you," said Anna. "But won’t you dine
with us?"

Vronsky gave a hardly perceptible shrug. He was at a complete loss to
understand what Anna was about. What had she brought the old Princess
Oblonskaya home for, what had she made Tushkevitch stay to dinner for,
and, most amazing of all, why was she sending him for a box? Could she
possibly think in her position of going to Patti’s benefit, where all
the circle of her acquaintances would be? He looked at her with serious
eyes, but she responded with that defiant, half-mirthful, half-desperate
look, the meaning of which he could not comprehend. At dinner Anna was
in aggressively high spirits—she almost flirted both with Tushkevitch
and with Yashvin. When they got up from dinner and Tushkevitch had gone
to get a box at the opera, Yashvin went to smoke, and Vronsky went down
with him to his own rooms. After sitting there for some time he ran
upstairs. Anna was already dressed in a low-necked gown of light silk
and velvet that she had had made in Paris, and with costly white lace on
her head, framing her face, and particularly becoming, showing up her
dazzling beauty.

"Are you really going to the theater?" he said, trying not to look at
her.

"Why do you ask with such alarm?" she said, wounded again at his not
looking at her. "Why shouldn’t I go?"

