"Yes, yes ... just so..." Oblonsky said, sighing. "That’s what I’ve come
for. At least not solely for that ... I’ve been made a _Kammerherr_; of
course, one has to say thank you. But the chief thing was having to
settle this."

"Well, God help you!" said Betsy.

After accompanying Betsy to the outside hall, once more kissing her hand
above the glove, at the point where the pulse beats, and murmuring to
her such unseemly nonsense that she did not know whether to laugh or be
angry, Stepan Arkadyevitch went to his sister. He found her in tears.

Although he happened to be bubbling over with good spirits, Stepan
Arkadyevitch immediately and quite naturally fell into the sympathetic,
poetically emotional tone which harmonized with her mood. He asked her
how she was, and how she had spent the morning.

"Very, very miserably. Today and this morning and all past days and days
to come," she said.

"I think you’re giving way to pessimism. You must rouse yourself, you
must look life in the face. I know it’s hard, but..."

"I have heard it said that women love men even for their vices," Anna
began suddenly, "but I hate him for his virtues. I can’t live with him.
Do you understand? the sight of him has a physical effect on me, it
makes me beside myself. I can’t, I can’t live with him. What am I to do?
I have been unhappy, and used to think one couldn’t be more unhappy, but
the awful state of things I am going through now, I could never have
conceived. Would you believe it, that knowing he’s a good man, a
splendid man, that I’m not worth his little finger, still I hate him. I
hate him for his generosity. And there’s nothing left for me but..."

She would have said death, but Stepan Arkadyevitch would not let her
finish.

"You are ill and overwrought," he said; "believe me, you’re exaggerating
dreadfully. There’s nothing so terrible in it."

And Stepan Arkadyevitch smiled. No one else in Stepan Arkadyevitch’s
place, having to do with such despair, would have ventured to smile (the
smile would have seemed brutal); but in his smile there was so much of
sweetness and almost feminine tenderness that his smile did not wound,
but softened and soothed. His gentle, soothing words and smiles were as
soothing and softening as almond oil. And Anna soon felt this.

"No, Stiva," she said, "I’m lost, lost! worse than lost! I can’t say yet
that all is over; on the contrary, I feel that it’s not over. I’m an
overstrained string that must snap. But it’s not ended yet ... and it
will have a fearful end."

"No matter, we must let the string be loosened, little by little.
There’s no position from which there is no way of escape."

"I have thought, and thought. Only one..."

Again he knew from her terrified eyes that this one way of escape in her
thought was death, and he would not let her say it.

"Not at all," he said. "Listen to me. You can’t see your own position as
I can. Let me tell you candidly my opinion." Again he smiled discreetly
his almond-oil smile. "I’ll begin from the beginning. You married a man
twenty years older than yourself. You married him without love and not
knowing what love was. It was a mistake, let’s admit."

"A fearful mistake!" said Anna.

"But I repeat, it’s an accomplished fact. Then you had, let us say, the
misfortune to love a man not your husband. That was a misfortune; but
that, too, is an accomplished fact. And your husband knew it and forgave
it." He stopped at each sentence, waiting for her to object, but she
made no answer. "That’s so. Now the question is: can you go on living
with your husband? Do you wish it? Does he wish it?"

"I know nothing, nothing."

"But you said yourself that you can’t endure him."

"No, I didn’t say so. I deny it. I can’t tell, I don’t know anything
about it."

"Yes, but let..."

"You can’t understand. I feel I’m lying head downwards in a sort of pit,
but I ought not to save myself. And I can’t . . ."

"Never mind, we’ll slip something under and pull you out. I understand
you: I understand that you can’t take it on yourself to express your
wishes, your feelings."

"There’s nothing, nothing I wish ... except for it to be all over."

"But he sees this and knows it. And do you suppose it weighs on him any
less than on you? You’re wretched, he’s wretched, and what good can come
of it? while divorce would solve the difficulty completely." With some
effort Stepan Arkadyevitch brought out his central idea, and looked
significantly at her.

She said nothing, and shook her cropped head in dissent. But from the
look in her face, that suddenly brightened into its old beauty, he saw
that if she did not desire this, it was simply because it seemed to her
unattainable happiness.

"I’m awfully sorry for you! And how happy I should be if I could arrange
things!" said Stepan Arkadyevitch, smiling more boldly. "Don’t speak,
don’t say a word! God grant only that I may speak as I feel. I’m going
to him."

Anna looked at him with dreamy, shining eyes, and said nothing.



Chapter 


Stepan Arkadyevitch, with the same somewhat solemn expression with which
he used to take his presidential chair at his board, walked into Alexey
Alexandrovitch’s room. Alexey Alexandrovitch was walking about his room
with his hands behind his back, thinking of just what Stepan
Arkadyevitch had been discussing with his wife.

"I’m not interrupting you?" said Stepan Arkadyevitch, on the sight of
his brother-in-law becoming suddenly aware of a sense of embarrassment
unusual with him. To conceal this embarrassment he took out a cigarette
case he had just bought that opened in a new way, and sniffing the
leather, took a cigarette out of it.

"No. Do you want anything?" Alexey Alexandrovitch asked without
eagerness.

"Yes, I wished ... I wanted ... yes, I wanted to talk to you," said
Stepan Arkadyevitch, with surprise aware of an unaccustomed timidity.

This feeling was so unexpected and so strange that he did not believe it
was the voice of conscience telling him that what he was meaning to do
was wrong.

Stepan Arkadyevitch made an effort and struggled with the timidity that
had come over him.

"I hope you believe in my love for my sister and my sincere affection
and respect for you," he said, reddening.

Alexey Alexandrovitch stood still and said nothing, but his face struck
Stepan Arkadyevitch by its expression of an unresisting sacrifice.

"I intended ... I wanted to have a little talk with you about my sister
and your mutual position," he said, still struggling with an
unaccustomed constraint.

