and he could not make his state of mind at that moment fit into the rest
of his life.

He could not admit that at that moment he knew the truth, and that now
he was wrong; for as soon as he began thinking calmly about it, it all
fell to pieces. He could not admit that he was mistaken then, for his
spiritual condition then was precious to him, and to admit that it was a
proof of weakness would have been to desecrate those moments. He was
miserably divided against himself, and strained all his spiritual forces
to the utmost to escape from this condition.



Chapter 


These doubts fretted and harassed him, growing weaker or stronger from
time to time, but never leaving him. He read and thought, and the more
he read and the more he thought, the further he felt from the aim he was
pursuing.

Of late in Moscow and in the country, since he had become convinced that
he would find no solution in the materialists, he had read and re-read
thoroughly Plato, Spinoza, Kant, Schelling, Hegel, and Schopenhauer, the
philosophers who gave a non-materialistic explanation of life.

Their ideas seemed to him fruitful when he was reading or was himself
seeking arguments to refute other theories, especially those of the
materialists; but as soon as he began to read or sought for himself a
solution of problems, the same thing always happened. As long as he
followed the fixed definition of obscure words such as _spirit, will,
freedom, essence,_ purposely letting himself go into the snare of words
the philosophers set for him, he seemed to comprehend something. But he
had only to forget the artificial train of reasoning, and to turn from
life itself to what had satisfied him while thinking in accordance with
the fixed definitions, and all this artificial edifice fell to pieces at
once like a house of cards, and it became clear that the edifice had
been built up out of those transposed words, apart from anything in life
more important than reason.

At one time, reading Schopenhauer, he put in place of his will the word
_love_, and for a couple of days this new philosophy charmed him, till
he removed a little away from it. But then, when he turned from life
itself to glance at it again, it fell away too, and proved to be the
same muslin garment with no warmth in it.

His brother Sergey Ivanovitch advised him to read the theological works
of Homiakov. Levin read the second volume of Homiakov’s works, and in
spite of the elegant, epigrammatic, argumentative style which at first
repelled him, he was impressed by the doctrine of the church he found in
them. He was struck at first by the idea that the apprehension of divine
truths had not been vouchsafed to man, but to a corporation of men bound
together by love—to the church. What delighted him was the thought how
much easier it was to believe in a still existing living church,
embracing all the beliefs of men, and having God at its head, and
therefore holy and infallible, and from it to accept the faith in God,
in the creation, the fall, the redemption, than to begin with God, a
mysterious, far-away God, the creation, etc. But afterwards, on reading
a Catholic writer’s history of the church, and then a Greek orthodox
writer’s history of the church, and seeing that the two churches, in
their very conception infallible, each deny the authority of the other,
Homiakov’s doctrine of the church lost all its charm for him, and this
edifice crumbled into dust like the philosophers’ edifices.

All that spring he was not himself, and went through fearful moments of
horror.

"Without knowing what I am and why I am here, life’s impossible; and
that I can’t know, and so I can’t live," Levin said to himself.

"In infinite time, in infinite matter, in infinite space, is formed a
bubble-organism, and that bubble lasts a while and bursts, and that
bubble is Me."

It was an agonizing error, but it was the sole logical result of ages of
human thought in that direction.

This was the ultimate belief on which all the systems elaborated by
human thought in almost all their ramifications rested. It was the
prevalent conviction, and of all other explanations Levin had
unconsciously, not knowing when or how, chosen it, as anyway the
clearest, and made it his own.

But it was not merely a falsehood, it was the cruel jeer of some wicked
power, some evil, hateful power, to whom one could not submit.

He must escape from this power. And the means of escape every man had in
his own hands. He had but to cut short this dependence on evil. And
there was one means—death.

And Levin, a happy father and husband, in perfect health, was several
times so near suicide that he hid the cord that he might not be tempted
to hang himself, and was afraid to go out with his gun for fear of
shooting himself.

But Levin did not shoot himself, and did not hang himself; he went on
living.



Chapter 


When Levin thought what he was and what he was living for, he could find
no answer to the questions and was reduced to despair, but he left off
questioning himself about it. It seemed as though he knew both what he
was and for what he was living, for he acted and lived resolutely and
without hesitation. Indeed, in these latter days he was far more decided
and unhesitating in life than he had ever been.

When he went back to the country at the beginning of June, he went back
also to his usual pursuits. The management of the estate, his relations
with the peasants and the neighbors, the care of his household, the
management of his sister’s and brother’s property, of which he had the
direction, his relations with his wife and kindred, the care of his
child, and the new bee-keeping hobby he had taken up that spring, filled
all his time.

These things occupied him now, not because he justified them to himself
by any sort of general principles, as he had done in former days; on the
contrary, disappointed by the failure of his former efforts for the
general welfare, and too much occupied with his own thought and the mass
of business with which he was burdened from all sides, he had completely
given up thinking of the general good, and he busied himself with all
this work simply because it seemed to him that he must do what he was
doing—that he could not do otherwise. In former days—almost from
childhood, and increasingly up to full manhood—when he had tried to do
anything that would be good for all, for humanity, for Russia, for the
whole village, he had noticed that the idea of it had been pleasant, but
the work itself had always been incoherent, that then he had never had a
full conviction of its absolute necessity, and that the work that had
begun by seeming so great, had grown less and less, till it vanished
into nothing. But now, since his marriage, when he had begun to confine
himself more and more to living for himself, though he experienced no
delight at all at the thought of the work he was doing, he felt a
complete conviction of its necessity, saw that it succeeded far better
than in old days, and that it kept on growing more and more.

Now, involuntarily it seemed, he cut more and more deeply into the soil
like a plough, so that he could not be drawn out without turning aside
the furrow.

To live the same family life as his father and forefathers—that is, in
the same condition of culture—and to bring up his children in the same,
was incontestably necessary. It was as necessary as dining when one was
hungry. And to do this, just as it was necessary to cook dinner, it was
necessary to keep the mechanism of agriculture at Pokrovskoe going so as
to yield an income. Just as incontestably as it was necessary to repay a
debt was it necessary to keep the property in such a condition that his
son, when he received it as a heritage, would say "thank you" to his
