"What? I don’t understand. What is the matter?"

"What I have said a thousand times over, and can’t help thinking ...
that I’m not worthy of you. You couldn’t consent to marry me. Think a
little. You’ve made a mistake. Think it over thoroughly. You can’t love
me.... If ... better say so," he said, not looking at her. "I shall be
wretched. Let people say what they like; anything’s better than
misery.... Far better now while there’s still time...."

"I don’t understand," she answered, panic-stricken; "you mean you want
to give it up ... don’t want it?"

"Yes, if you don’t love me."

"You’re out of your mind!" she cried, turning crimson with vexation. But
his face was so piteous, that she restrained her vexation, and flinging
some clothes off an arm-chair, she sat down beside him. "What are you
thinking? tell me all."

"I am thinking you can’t love me. What can you love me for?"

"My God! what can I do?..." she said, and burst into tears.

"Oh! what have I done?" he cried, and kneeling before her, he fell to
kissing her hands.

When the princess came into the room five minutes later, she found them
completely reconciled. Kitty had not simply assured him that she loved
him, but had gone so far—in answer to his question, what she loved him
for—as to explain what for. She told him that she loved him because she
understood him completely, because she knew what he would like, and
because everything he liked was good. And this seemed to him perfectly
clear. When the princess came to them, they were sitting side by side on
the chest, sorting the dresses and disputing over Kitty’s wanting to
give Dunyasha the brown dress she had been wearing when Levin proposed
to her, while he insisted that that dress must never be given away, but
Dunyasha must have the blue one.

"How is it you don’t see? She’s a brunette, and it won’t suit her....
I’ve worked it all out."

Hearing why he had come, the princess was half humorously, half
seriously angry with him, and sent him home to dress and not to hinder
Kitty’s hair-dressing, as Charles the hair-dresser was just coming.

"As it is, she’s been eating nothing lately and is losing her looks, and
then you must come and upset her with your nonsense," she said to him.
"Get along with you, my dear!"

Levin, guilty and shamefaced, but pacified, went back to his hotel. His
brother, Darya Alexandrovna, and Stepan Arkadyevitch, all in full dress,
were waiting for him to bless him with the holy picture. There was no
time to lose. Darya Alexandrovna had to drive home again to fetch her
curled and pomaded son, who was to carry the holy pictures after the
bride. Then a carriage had to be sent for the best man, and another that
would take Sergey Ivanovitch away would have to be sent back....
Altogether there were a great many most complicated matters to be
considered and arranged. One thing was unmistakable, that there must be
no delay, as it was already half-past six.

Nothing special happened at the ceremony of benediction with the holy
picture. Stepan Arkadyevitch stood in a comically solemn pose beside his
wife, took the holy picture, and telling Levin to bow down to the
ground, he blessed him with his kindly, ironical smile, and kissed him
three times; Darya Alexandrovna did the same, and immediately was in a
hurry to get off, and again plunged into the intricate question of the
destinations of the various carriages.

"Come, I’ll tell you how we’ll manage: you drive in our carriage to
fetch him, and Sergey Ivanovitch, if he’ll be so good, will drive there
and then send his carriage."

"Of course; I shall be delighted."

"We’ll come on directly with him. Are your things sent off?" said Stepan
Arkadyevitch.

"Yes," answered Levin, and he told Kouzma to put out his clothes for him
to dress.



Chapter 


A crowd of people, principally women, was thronging round the church
lighted up for the wedding. Those who had not succeeded in getting into
the main entrance were crowding about the windows, pushing, wrangling,
and peeping through the gratings.

More than twenty carriages had already been drawn up in ranks along the
street by the police. A police officer, regardless of the frost, stood
at the entrance, gorgeous in his uniform. More carriages were
continually driving up, and ladies wearing flowers and carrying their
trains, and men taking off their helmets or black hats kept walking into
the church. Inside the church both lusters were already lighted, and all
the candles before the holy pictures. The gilt on the red ground of the
holy picture-stand, and the gilt relief on the pictures, and the silver
of the lusters and candlesticks, and the stones of the floor, and the
rugs, and the banners above in the choir, and the steps of the altar,
and the old blackened books, and the cassocks and surplices—all were
flooded with light. On the right side of the warm church, in the crowd
of frock coats and white ties, uniforms and broadcloth, velvet, satin,
hair and flowers, bare shoulders and arms and long gloves, there was
discreet but lively conversation that echoed strangely in the high
cupola. Every time there was heard the creak of the opened door the
conversation in the crowd died away, and everybody looked round
expecting to see the bride and bridegroom come in. But the door had
opened more than ten times, and each time it was either a belated guest
or guests, who joined the circle of the invited on the right, or a
spectator, who had eluded or softened the police officer, and went to
join the crowd of outsiders on the left. Both the guests and the outside
public had by now passed through all the phases of anticipation.

At first they imagined that the bride and bridegroom would arrive
immediately, and attached no importance at all to their being late. Then
they began to look more and more often towards the door, and to talk of
whether anything could have happened. Then the long delay began to be
positively discomforting, and relations and guests tried to look as if
they were not thinking of the bridegroom but were engrossed in
conversation.

The head deacon, as though to remind them of the value of his time,
coughed impatiently, making the window-panes quiver in their frames. In
the choir the bored choristers could be heard trying their voices and
blowing their noses. The priest was continually sending first the beadle
and then the deacon to find out whether the bridegroom had not come,
more and more often he went himself, in a lilac vestment and an
embroidered sash, to the side door, expecting to see the bridegroom. At
last one of the ladies, glancing at her watch, said, "It really is
strange, though!" and all the guests became uneasy and began loudly
expressing their wonder and dissatisfaction. One of the bridegroom’s
best men went to find out what had happened. Kitty meanwhile had long
ago been quite ready, and in her white dress and long veil and wreath of
orange blossoms she was standing in the drawing-room of the
Shtcherbatskys’ house with her sister, Madame Lvova, who was her
bridal-mother. She was looking out of the window, and had been for over
half an hour anxiously expecting to hear from the best man that her
bridegroom was at the church.

Levin meanwhile, in his trousers, but without his coat and waistcoat,
was walking to and fro in his room at the hotel, continually putting his
head out of the door and looking up and down the corridor. But in the
corridor there was no sign of the person he was looking for and he came
back in despair, and frantically waving his hands addressed Stepan
Arkadyevitch, who was smoking serenely.

"Was ever a man in such a fearful fool’s position?" he said.

"Yes, it is stupid," Stepan Arkadyevitch assented, smiling soothingly.
