strangers, with this fashionable tone that was so new to Darya
Alexandrovna, she felt ill at ease. What she disliked particularly was
seeing Princess Varvara ready to overlook everything for the sake of the
comforts she enjoyed.

As a general principle, abstractly, Dolly approved of Anna’s action; but
to see the man for whose sake her action had been taken was disagreeable
to her. Moreover, she had never liked Vronsky. She thought him very
proud, and saw nothing in him of which he could be proud except his
wealth. But against her own will, here in his own house, he overawed her
more than ever, and she could not be at ease with him. She felt with him
the same feeling she had had with the maid about her dressing jacket.
Just as with the maid she had felt not exactly ashamed, but embarrassed
at her darns, so she felt with him not exactly ashamed, but embarrassed
at herself.

Dolly was ill at ease, and tried to find a subject of conversation. Even
though she supposed that, through his pride, praise of his house and
garden would be sure to be disagreeable to him, she did all the same
tell him how much she liked his house.

"Yes, it’s a very fine building, and in the good old-fashioned style,"
he said.

"I like so much the court in front of the steps. Was that always so?"

"Oh, no!" he said, and his face beamed with pleasure. "If you could only
have seen that court last spring!"

And he began, at first rather diffidently, but more and more carried
away by the subject as he went on, to draw her attention to the various
details of the decoration of his house and garden. It was evident that,
having devoted a great deal of trouble to improve and beautify his home,
Vronsky felt a need to show off the improvements to a new person, and
was genuinely delighted at Darya Alexandrovna’s praise.

"If you would care to look at the hospital, and are not tired, indeed,
it’s not far. Shall we go?" he said, glancing into her face to convince
himself that she was not bored. "Are you coming, Anna?" he turned to
her.

"We will come, won’t we?" she said, addressing Sviazhsky. "_Mais il ne
faut pas laisser le pauvre Veslovsky et Tushkevitch se morfondre là dans
le bateau._ We must send and tell them."

"Yes, this is a monument he is setting up here," said Anna, turning to
Dolly with that sly smile of comprehension with which she had previously
talked about the hospital.

"Oh, it’s a work of real importance!" said Sviazhsky. But to show he was
not trying to ingratiate himself with Vronsky, he promptly added some
slightly critical remarks.

"I wonder, though, count," he said, "that while you do so much for the
health of the peasants, you take so little interest in the schools."

"_C’est devenu tellement commun les écoles,_" said Vronsky. "You
understand it’s not on that account, but it just happens so, my interest
has been diverted elsewhere. This way then to the hospital," he said to
Darya Alexandrovna, pointing to a turning out of the avenue.

The ladies put up their parasols and turned into the side path. After
going down several turnings, and going through a little gate, Darya
Alexandrovna saw standing on rising ground before her a large
pretentious-looking red building, almost finished. The iron roof, which
was not yet painted, shone with dazzling brightness in the sunshine.
Beside the finished building another had been begun, surrounded by
scaffolding. Workmen in aprons, standing on scaffolds, were laying
bricks, pouring mortar out of vats, and smoothing it with trowels.

"How quickly work gets done with you!" said Sviazhsky. "When I was here
last time the roof was not on."

"By the autumn it will all be ready. Inside almost everything is done,"
said Anna.

"And what’s this new building?"

"That’s the house for the doctor and the dispensary," answered Vronsky,
seeing the architect in a short jacket coming towards him; and excusing
himself to the ladies, he went to meet him.

Going round a hole where the workmen were slaking lime, he stood still
with the architect and began talking rather warmly.

"The front is still too low," he said to Anna, who had asked what was
the matter.

"I said the foundation ought to be raised," said Anna.

"Yes, of course it would have been much better, Anna Arkadyevna," said
the architect, "but now it’s too late."

"Yes, I take a great interest in it," Anna answered Sviazhsky, who was
expressing his surprise at her knowledge of architecture. "This new
building ought to have been in harmony with the hospital. It was an
afterthought, and was begun without a plan."

Vronsky, having finished his talk with the architect, joined the ladies,
and led them inside the hospital.

Although they were still at work on the cornices outside and were
painting on the ground floor, upstairs almost all the rooms were
finished. Going up the broad cast-iron staircase to the landing, they
walked into the first large room. The walls were stuccoed to look like
marble, the huge plate-glass windows were already in, only the parquet
floor was not yet finished, and the carpenters, who were planing a block
of it, left their work, taking off the bands that fastened their hair,
to greet the gentry.

"This is the reception room," said Vronsky. "Here there will be a desk,
tables, and benches, and nothing more."

"This way; let us go in here. Don’t go near the window," said Anna,
trying the paint to see if it were dry. "Alexey, the paint’s dry
already," she added.

From the reception room they went into the corridor. Here Vronsky showed
them the mechanism for ventilation on a novel system. Then he showed
them marble baths, and beds with extraordinary springs. Then he showed
them the wards one after another, the storeroom, the linen room, then
the heating stove of a new pattern, then the trolleys, which would make
no noise as they carried everything needed along the corridors, and many
other things. Sviazhsky, as a connoisseur in the latest mechanical
improvements, appreciated everything fully. Dolly simply wondered at all
she had not seen before, and, anxious to understand it all, made minute
inquiries about everything, which gave Vronsky great satisfaction.

"Yes, I imagine that this will be the solitary example of a properly
fitted hospital in Russia," said Sviazhsky.

"And won’t you have a lying-in ward?" asked Dolly. "That’s so much
needed in the country. I have often..."

In spite of his usual courtesy, Vronsky interrupted her.

"This is not a lying-in home, but a hospital for the sick, and is
intended for all diseases, except infectious complaints," he said. "Ah!
look at this," and he rolled up to Darya Alexandrovna an invalid chair
that had just been ordered for the convalescents. "Look." He sat down in
the chair and began moving it. "The patient can’t walk—still too weak,
perhaps, or something wrong with his legs, but he must have air, and he
moves, rolls himself along...."

Darya Alexandrovna was interested by everything. She liked everything
very much, but most of all she liked Vronsky himself with his natural,
simple-hearted eagerness. "Yes, he’s a very nice, good man," she thought
several times, not hearing what he said, but looking at him and
penetrating into his expression, while she mentally put herself in
Anna’s place. She liked him so much just now with his eager interest
