
"_Oh, ja,_" answered the German. _"Es ist ein ganz einfaches Ding,"_ and
he began to explain the construction of the machine.

"It’s a pity it doesn’t bind too. I saw one at the Vienna exhibition,
which binds with a wire," said Sviazhsky. "They would be more profitable
in use."

_"Es kommt drauf an.... Der Preis vom Draht muss ausgerechnet werden."_
And the German, roused from his taciturnity, turned to Vronsky. _"Das
lässt sich ausrechnen, Erlaucht."_ The German was just feeling in the
pocket where were his pencil and the notebook he always wrote in, but
recollecting that he was at a dinner, and observing Vronsky’s chilly
glance, he checked himself. _"Zu compliziert, macht zu viel Klopot,"_ he
concluded.

_"Wünscht man Dochots, so hat man auch Klopots,"_ said Vassenka
Veslovsky, mimicking the German. _"J’adore l’allemand,"_ he addressed
Anna again with the same smile.

_"Cessez,"_ she said with playful severity.

"We expected to find you in the fields, Vassily Semyonitch," she said to
the doctor, a sickly-looking man; "have you been there?"

"I went there, but I had taken flight," the doctor answered with gloomy
jocoseness.

"Then you’ve taken a good constitutional?"

"Splendid!"

"Well, and how was the old woman? I hope it’s not typhus?"

"Typhus it is not, but it’s taking a bad turn."

"What a pity!" said Anna, and having thus paid the dues of civility to
her domestic circle, she turned to her own friends.

"It would be a hard task, though, to construct a machine from your
description, Anna Arkadyevna," Sviazhsky said jestingly.

"Oh, no, why so?" said Anna with a smile that betrayed that she knew
there was something charming in her disquisitions upon the machine that
had been noticed by Sviazhsky. This new trait of girlish coquettishness
made an unpleasant impression on Dolly.

"But Anna Arkadyevna’s knowledge of architecture is marvelous," said
Tushkevitch.

"To be sure, I heard Anna Arkadyevna talking yesterday about plinths and
damp-courses," said Veslovsky. "Have I got it right?"

"There’s nothing marvelous about it, when one sees and hears so much of
it," said Anna. "But, I dare say, you don’t even know what houses are
made of?"

Darya Alexandrovna saw that Anna disliked the tone of raillery that
existed between her and Veslovsky, but fell in with it against her will.

Vronsky acted in this matter quite differently from Levin. He obviously
attached no significance to Veslovsky’s chattering; on the contrary, he
encouraged his jests.

"Come now, tell us, Veslovsky, how are the stones held together?"

"By cement, of course."

"Bravo! And what is cement?"

"Oh, some sort of paste ... no, putty," said Veslovsky, raising a
general laugh.

The company at dinner, with the exception of the doctor, the architect,
and the steward, who remained plunged in gloomy silence, kept up a
conversation that never paused, glancing off one subject, fastening on
another, and at times stinging one or the other to the quick. Once Darya
Alexandrovna felt wounded to the quick, and got so hot that she
positively flushed and wondered afterwards whether she had said anything
extreme or unpleasant. Sviazhsky began talking of Levin, describing his
strange view that machinery is simply pernicious in its effects on
Russian agriculture.

"I have not the pleasure of knowing this M. Levin," Vronsky said,
smiling, "but most likely he has never seen the machines he condemns; or
if he has seen and tried any, it must have been after a queer fashion,
some Russian imitation, not a machine from abroad. What sort of views
can anyone have on such a subject?"

"Turkish views, in general," Veslovsky said, turning to Anna with a
smile.

"I can’t defend his opinions," Darya Alexandrovna said, firing up; "but
I can say that he’s a highly cultivated man, and if he were here he
would know very well how to answer you, though I am not capable of doing
so."

"I like him extremely, and we are great friends," Sviazhsky said,
smiling good-naturedly. "_Mais pardon, il est un petit peu toqué;_ he
maintains, for instance, that district councils and arbitration boards
are all of no use, and he is unwilling to take part in anything."

"It’s our Russian apathy," said Vronsky, pouring water from an iced
decanter into a delicate glass on a high stem; "we’ve no sense of the
duties our privileges impose upon us, and so we refuse to recognize
these duties."

"I know no man more strict in the performance of his duties," said Darya
Alexandrovna, irritated by Vronsky’s tone of superiority.

"For my part," pursued Vronsky, who was evidently for some reason or
other keenly affected by this conversation, "such as I am, I am, on the
contrary, extremely grateful for the honor they have done me, thanks to
Nikolay Ivanitch" (he indicated Sviazhsky), "in electing me a justice of
the peace. I consider that for me the duty of being present at the
session, of judging some peasants’ quarrel about a horse, is as
important as anything I can do. And I shall regard it as an honor if
they elect me for the district council. It’s only in that way I can pay
for the advantages I enjoy as a landowner. Unluckily they don’t
understand the weight that the big landowners ought to have in the
state."

It was strange to Darya Alexandrovna to hear how serenely confident he
was of being right at his own table. She thought how Levin, who believed
the opposite, was just as positive in his opinions at his own table. But
she loved Levin, and so she was on his side.

"So we can reckon upon you, count, for the coming elections?" said
Sviazhsky. "But you must come a little beforehand, so as to be on the
spot by the eighth. If you would do me the honor to stop with me."

"I rather agree with your beau-frère," said Anna, "though not quite on
the same ground as he," she added with a smile. "I’m afraid that we have
too many of these public duties in these latter days. Just as in old
days there were so many government functionaries that one had to call in
a functionary for every single thing, so now everyone’s doing some sort
of public duty. Alexey has been here now six months, and he’s a member,
I do believe, of five or six different public bodies. _Du train que cela
va,_ the whole time will be wasted on it. And I’m afraid that with such
a multiplicity of these bodies, they’ll end in being a mere form. How
many are you a member of, Nikolay Ivanitch?" she turned to
Sviazhsky—"over twenty, I fancy."

Anna spoke lightly, but irritation could be discerned in her tone. Darya
Alexandrovna, watching Anna and Vronsky attentively, detected it
instantly. She noticed, too, that as she spoke Vronsky’s face had
immediately taken a serious and obstinate expression. Noticing this, and
that Princess Varvara at once made haste to change the conversation by
talking of Petersburg acquaintances, and remembering what Vronsky had
without apparent connection said in the garden of his work in the
