
In Levin’s eyes she was to blame for having allowed such relations to
arise, and still more to blame for showing so awkwardly that she did not
like them.

"Why, how can one want to go to bed!" said Stepan Arkadyevitch, who,
after drinking several glasses of wine at supper, was now in his most
charming and sentimental humor. "Look, Kitty," he said, pointing to the
moon, which had just risen behind the lime trees—"how exquisite!
Veslovsky, this is the time for a serenade. You know, he has a splendid
voice; we practiced songs together along the road. He has brought some
lovely songs with him, two new ones. Varvara Andreevna and he must sing
some duets."

When the party had broken up, Stepan Arkadyevitch walked a long while
about the avenue with Veslovsky; their voices could be heard singing one
of the new songs.

Levin hearing these voices sat scowling in an easy-chair in his wife’s
bedroom, and maintained an obstinate silence when she asked him what was
wrong. But when at last with a timid glance she hazarded the question:
"Was there perhaps something you disliked about Veslovsky?"—it all burst
out, and he told her all. He was humiliated himself at what he was
saying, and that exasperated him all the more.

He stood facing her with his eyes glittering menacingly under his
scowling brows, and he squeezed his strong arms across his chest, as
though he were straining every nerve to hold himself in. The expression
of his face would have been grim, and even cruel, if it had not at the
same time had a look of suffering which touched her. His jaws were
twitching, and his voice kept breaking.

"You must understand that I’m not jealous, that’s a nasty word. I can’t
be jealous, and believe that.... I can’t say what I feel, but this is
awful.... I’m not jealous, but I’m wounded, humiliated that anybody dare
think, that anybody dare look at you with eyes like that."

"Eyes like what?" said Kitty, trying as conscientiously as possible to
recall every word and gesture of that evening and every shade implied in
them.

At the very bottom of her heart she did think there had been something
precisely at the moment when he had crossed over after her to the other
end of the table; but she dared not own it even to herself, and would
have been even more unable to bring herself to say so to him, and so
increase his suffering.

"And what can there possibly be attractive about me as I am now?..."

"Ah!" he cried, clutching at his head, "you shouldn’t say that!... If
you had been attractive then..."

"Oh, no, Kostya, oh, wait a minute, oh, do listen!" she said, looking at
him with an expression of pained commiseration. "Why, what can you be
thinking about! When for me there’s no one in the world, no one, no
one!... Would you like me never to see anyone?"

For the first minute she had been offended at his jealousy; she was
angry that the slightest amusement, even the most innocent, should be
forbidden her; but now she would readily have sacrificed, not merely
such trifles, but everything, for his peace of mind, to save him from
the agony he was suffering.

"You must understand the horror and comedy of my position," he went on
in a desperate whisper; "that he’s in my house, that he’s done nothing
improper positively except his free and easy airs and the way he sits on
his legs. He thinks it’s the best possible form, and so I’m obliged to
be civil to him."

"But, Kostya, you’re exaggerating," said Kitty, at the bottom of her
heart rejoicing at the depth of his love for her, shown now in his
jealousy.

"The most awful part of it all is that you’re just as you always are,
and especially now when to me you’re something sacred, and we’re so
happy, so particularly happy—and all of a sudden a little wretch....
He’s not a little wretch; why should I abuse him? I have nothing to do
with him. But why should my, and your, happiness..."

"Do you know, I understand now what it’s all come from," Kitty was
beginning.

"Well, what? what?"

"I saw how you looked while we were talking at supper."

"Well, well!" Levin said in dismay.

She told him what they had been talking about. And as she told him, she
was breathless with emotion. Levin was silent for a space, then he
scanned her pale and distressed face, and suddenly he clutched at his
head.

"Katya, I’ve been worrying you! Darling, forgive me! It’s madness!
Katya, I’m a criminal. And how could you be so distressed at such
idiocy?"

"Oh, I was sorry for you."

"For me? for me? How mad I am!... But why make you miserable? It’s awful
to think that any outsider can shatter our happiness."

"It’s humiliating too, of course."

"Oh, then I’ll keep him here all the summer, and will overwhelm him with
civility," said Levin, kissing her hands. "You shall see. Tomorrow....
Oh, yes, we are going tomorrow."



Chapter 


Next day, before the ladies were up, the wagonette and a trap for the
shooting party were at the door, and Laska, aware since early morning
that they were going shooting, after much whining and darting to and
fro, had sat herself down in the wagonette beside the coachman, and,
disapproving of the delay, was excitedly watching the door from which
the sportsmen still did not come out. The first to come out was Vassenka
Veslovsky, in new high boots that reached half-way up his thick thighs,
in a green blouse, with a new Russian leather cartridge-belt, and in his
Scotch cap with ribbons, with a brand-new English gun without a sling.
Laska flew up to him, welcomed him, and jumping up, asked him in her own
way whether the others were coming soon, but getting no answer from him,
she returned to her post of observation and sank into repose again, her
head on one side, and one ear pricked up to listen. At last the door
opened with a creak, and Stepan Arkadyevitch’s spot-and-tan pointer Krak
flew out, running round and round and turning over in the air. Stepan
Arkadyevitch himself followed with a gun in his hand and a cigar in his
mouth.

"Good dog, good dog, Krak!" he cried encouragingly to the dog, who put
his paws up on his chest, catching at his game bag. Stepan Arkadyevitch
was dressed in rough leggings and spats, in torn trousers and a short
coat. On his head there was a wreck of a hat of indefinite form, but his
gun of a new patent was a perfect gem, and his game bag and cartridge
belt, though worn, were of the very best quality.

Vassenka Veslovsky had had no notion before that it was truly _chic_ for
a sportsman to be in tatters, but to have his shooting outfit of the
best quality. He saw it now as he looked at Stepan Arkadyevitch, radiant
in his rags, graceful, well-fed, and joyous, a typical Russian nobleman.
And he made up his mind that next time he went shooting he would
certainly adopt the same get-up.

"Well, and what about our host?" he asked.

"A young wife," said Stepan Arkadyevitch, smiling.

"Yes, and such a charming one!"
