
"And how is she?"

Korney in his morning apron ran downstairs.

"Very ill," he answered. "There was a consultation yesterday, and the
doctor’s here now."

"Take my things," said Alexey Alexandrovitch, and feeling some relief at
the news that there was still hope of her death, he went into the hall.

On the hatstand there was a military overcoat. Alexey Alexandrovitch
noticed it and asked:

"Who is here?"

"The doctor, the midwife, and Count Vronsky."

Alexey Alexandrovitch went into the inner rooms.

In the drawing room there was no one; at the sound of his steps there
came out of her boudoir the midwife in a cap with lilac ribbons.

She went up to Alexey Alexandrovitch, and with the familiarity given by
the approach of death took him by the arm and drew him towards the
bedroom.

"Thank God you’ve come! She keeps on about you and nothing but you," she
said.

"Make haste with the ice!" the doctor’s peremptory voice said from the
bedroom.

Alexey Alexandrovitch went into her boudoir.

At the table, sitting sideways in a low chair, was Vronsky, his face
hidden in his hands, weeping. He jumped up at the doctor’s voice, took
his hands from his face, and saw Alexey Alexandrovitch. Seeing the
husband, he was so overwhelmed that he sat down again, drawing his head
down to his shoulders, as if he wanted to disappear; but he made an
effort over himself, got up and said:

"She is dying. The doctors say there is no hope. I am entirely in your
power, only let me be here ... though I am at your disposal. I..."

Alexey Alexandrovitch, seeing Vronsky’s tears, felt a rush of that
nervous emotion always produced in him by the sight of other people’s
suffering, and turning away his face, he moved hurriedly to the door,
without hearing the rest of his words. From the bedroom came the sound
of Anna’s voice saying something. Her voice was lively, eager, with
exceedingly distinct intonations. Alexey Alexandrovitch went into the
bedroom, and went up to the bed. She was lying turned with her face
towards him. Her cheeks were flushed crimson, her eyes glittered, her
little white hands thrust out from the sleeves of her dressing gown were
playing with the quilt, twisting it about. It seemed as though she were
not only well and blooming, but in the happiest frame of mind. She was
talking rapidly, musically, and with exceptionally correct articulation
and expressive intonation.

"For Alexey—I am speaking of Alexey Alexandrovitch (what a strange and
awful thing that both are Alexey, isn’t it?)—Alexey would not refuse me.
I should forget, he would forgive.... But why doesn’t he come? He’s so
good he doesn’t know himself how good he is. Ah, my God, what agony!
Give me some water, quick! Oh, that will be bad for her, my little girl!
Oh, very well then, give her to a nurse. Yes, I agree, it’s better in
fact. He’ll be coming; it will hurt him to see her. Give her to the
nurse."

"Anna Arkadyevna, he has come. Here he is!" said the midwife, trying to
attract her attention to Alexey Alexandrovitch.

"Oh, what nonsense!" Anna went on, not seeing her husband. "No, give her
to me; give me my little one! He has not come yet. You say he won’t
forgive me, because you don’t know him. No one knows him. I’m the only
one, and it was hard for me even. His eyes I ought to know—Seryozha has
just the same eyes—and I can’t bear to see them because of it. Has
Seryozha had his dinner? I know everyone will forget him. He would not
forget. Seryozha must be moved into the corner room, and Mariette must
be asked to sleep with him."

All of a sudden she shrank back, was silent; and in terror, as though
expecting a blow, as though to defend herself, she raised her hands to
her face. She had seen her husband.

"No, no!" she began. "I am not afraid of him; I am afraid of death.
Alexey, come here. I am in a hurry, because I’ve no time, I’ve not long
left to live; the fever will begin directly and I shall understand
nothing more. Now I understand, I understand it all, I see it all!"

Alexey Alexandrovitch’s wrinkled face wore an expression of agony; he
took her by the hand and tried to say something, but he could not utter
it; his lower lip quivered, but he still went on struggling with his
emotion, and only now and then glanced at her. And each time he glanced
at her, he saw her eyes gazing at him with such passionate and
triumphant tenderness as he had never seen in them.

"Wait a minute, you don’t know ... stay a little, stay!..." She stopped,
as though collecting her ideas. "Yes," she began; "yes, yes, yes. This
is what I wanted to say. Don’t be surprised at me. I’m still the
same.... But there is another woman in me, I’m afraid of her: she loved
that man, and I tried to hate you, and could not forget about her that
used to be. I’m not that woman. Now I’m my real self, all myself. I’m
dying now, I know I shall die, ask him. Even now I feel—see here, the
weights on my feet, on my hands, on my fingers. My fingers—see how huge
they are! But this will soon all be over.... Only one thing I want:
forgive me, forgive me quite. I’m terrible, but my nurse used to tell
me; the holy martyr—what was her name? She was worse. And I’ll go to
Rome; there’s a wilderness, and there I shall be no trouble to any one,
only I’ll take Seryozha and the little one.... No, you can’t forgive me!
I know, it can’t be forgiven! No, no, go away, you’re too good!" She
held his hand in one burning hand, while she pushed him away with the
other.

The nervous agitation of Alexey Alexandrovitch kept increasing, and had
by now reached such a point that he ceased to struggle with it. He
suddenly felt that what he had regarded as nervous agitation was on the
contrary a blissful spiritual condition that gave him all at once a new
happiness he had never known. He did not think that the Christian law
that he had been all his life trying to follow, enjoined on him to
forgive and love his enemies; but a glad feeling of love and forgiveness
for his enemies filled his heart. He knelt down, and laying his head in
the curve of her arm, which burned him as with fire through the sleeve,
he sobbed like a little child. She put her arm around his head, moved
towards him, and with defiant pride lifted up her eyes.

"That is he. I knew him! Now, forgive me, everyone, forgive me!...
They’ve come again; why don’t they go away?... Oh, take these cloaks off
me!"

The doctor unloosed her hands, carefully laying her on the pillow, and
covered her up to the shoulders. She lay back submissively, and looked
before her with beaming eyes.

"Remember one thing, that I needed nothing but forgiveness, and I want
nothing more.... Why doesn’t _he_ come?" she said, turning to the door
towards Vronsky. "Do come, do come! Give him your hand."

Vronsky came to the side of the bed, and seeing Anna, again hid his face
in his hands.

"Uncover your face—look at him! He’s a saint," she said. "Oh! uncover
your face, do uncover it!" she said angrily. "Alexey Alexandrovitch, do
uncover his face! I want to see him."

Alexey Alexandrovitch took Vronsky’s hands and drew them away from his
face, which was awful with the expression of agony and shame upon it.

"Give him your hand. Forgive him."

Alexey Alexandrovitch gave him his hand, not attempting to restrain the
