And he had actually flushed with vexation, and had said something
unpleasant. She could not recall her answer, but at that point, with an
unmistakable desire to wound her too, he had said:

"I feel no interest in your infatuation over this girl, that’s true,
because I see it’s unnatural."

The cruelty with which he shattered the world she had built up for
herself so laboriously to enable her to endure her hard life, the
injustice with which he had accused her of affectation, of
artificiality, aroused her.

"I am very sorry that nothing but what’s coarse and material is
comprehensible and natural to you," she said and walked out of the room.

When he had come in to her yesterday evening, they had not referred to
the quarrel, but both felt that the quarrel had been smoothed over, but
was not at an end.

Today he had not been at home all day, and she felt so lonely and
wretched in being on bad terms with him that she wanted to forget it
all, to forgive him, and be reconciled with him; she wanted to throw the
blame on herself and to justify him.

"I am myself to blame. I’m irritable, I’m insanely jealous. I will make
it up with him, and we’ll go away to the country; there I shall be more
at peace."

"Unnatural!" She suddenly recalled the word that had stung her most of
all, not so much the word itself as the intent to wound her with which
it was said. "I know what he meant; he meant—unnatural, not loving my
own daughter, to love another person’s child. What does he know of love
for children, of my love for Seryozha, whom I’ve sacrificed for him? But
that wish to wound me! No, he loves another woman, it must be so."

And perceiving that, while trying to regain her peace of mind, she had
gone round the same circle that she had been round so often before, and
had come back to her former state of exasperation, she was horrified at
herself. "Can it be impossible? Can it be beyond me to control myself?"
she said to herself, and began again from the beginning. "He’s truthful,
he’s honest, he loves me. I love him, and in a few days the divorce will
come. What more do I want? I want peace of mind and trust, and I will
take the blame on myself. Yes, now when he comes in, I will tell him I
was wrong, though I was not wrong, and we will go away tomorrow."

And to escape thinking any more, and being overcome by irritability, she
rang, and ordered the boxes to be brought up for packing their things
for the country.

At ten o’clock Vronsky came in.



Chapter 


"Well, was it nice?" she asked, coming out to meet him with a penitent
and meek expression.

"Just as usual," he answered, seeing at a glance that she was in one of
her good moods. He was used by now to these transitions, and he was
particularly glad to see it today, as he was in a specially good humor
himself.

"What do I see? Come, that’s good!" he said, pointing to the boxes in
the passage.

"Yes, we must go. I went out for a drive, and it was so fine I longed to
be in the country. There’s nothing to keep you, is there?"

"It’s the one thing I desire. I’ll be back directly, and we’ll talk it
over; I only want to change my coat. Order some tea."

And he went into his room.

There was something mortifying in the way he had said "Come, that’s
good," as one says to a child when it leaves off being naughty, and
still more mortifying was the contrast between her penitent and his
self-confident tone; and for one instant she felt the lust of strife
rising up in her again, but making an effort she conquered it, and met
Vronsky as good-humoredly as before.

When he came in she told him, partly repeating phrases she had prepared
beforehand, how she had spent the day, and her plans for going away.

"You know it came to me almost like an inspiration," she said. "Why wait
here for the divorce? Won’t it be just the same in the country? I can’t
wait any longer! I don’t want to go on hoping, I don’t want to hear
anything about the divorce. I have made up my mind it shall not have any
more influence on my life. Do you agree?"

"Oh, yes!" he said, glancing uneasily at her excited face.

"What did you do? Who was there?" she said, after a pause.

Vronsky mentioned the names of the guests. "The dinner was first rate,
and the boat race, and it was all pleasant enough, but in Moscow they
can never do anything without something _ridicule_. A lady of a sort
appeared on the scene, teacher of swimming to the Queen of Sweden, and
gave us an exhibition of her skill."

"How? did she swim?" asked Anna, frowning.

"In an absurd red _costume de natation;_ she was old and hideous too. So
when shall we go?"

"What an absurd fancy! Why, did she swim in some special way, then?"
said Anna, not answering.

"There was absolutely nothing in it. That’s just what I say, it was
awfully stupid. Well, then, when do you think of going?"

Anna shook her head as though trying to drive away some unpleasant idea.

"When? Why, the sooner the better! By tomorrow we shan’t be ready. The
day after tomorrow."

"Yes ... oh, no, wait a minute! The day after tomorrow’s Sunday, I have
to be at maman’s," said Vronsky, embarrassed, because as soon as he
uttered his mother’s name he was aware of her intent, suspicious eyes.
His embarrassment confirmed her suspicion. She flushed hotly and drew
away from him. It was now not the Queen of Sweden’s swimming-mistress
who filled Anna’s imagination, but the young Princess Sorokina. She was
staying in a village near Moscow with Countess Vronskaya.

"Can’t you go tomorrow?" she said.

"Well, no! The deeds and the money for the business I’m going there for
I can’t get by tomorrow," he answered.

"If so, we won’t go at all."

"But why so?"

"I shall not go later. Monday or never!"

"What for?" said Vronsky, as though in amazement. "Why, there’s no
meaning in it!"

"There’s no meaning in it to you, because you care nothing for me. You
don’t care to understand my life. The one thing that I cared for here
was Hannah. You say it’s affectation. Why, you said yesterday that I
don’t love my daughter, that I love this English girl, that it’s
unnatural. I should like to know what life there is for me that could be
natural!"

For an instant she had a clear vision of what she was doing, and was
horrified at how she had fallen away from her resolution. But even
though she knew it was her own ruin, she could not restrain herself,
could not keep herself from proving to him that he was wrong, could not
