give way to him.

"I never said that; I said I did not sympathize with this sudden
passion."

"How is it, though you boast of your straightforwardness, you don’t tell
the truth?"

"I never boast, and I never tell lies," he said slowly, restraining his
rising anger. "It’s a great pity if you can’t respect..."

"Respect was invented to cover the empty place where love should be. And
if you don’t love me any more, it would be better and more honest to say
so."

"No, this is becoming unbearable!" cried Vronsky, getting up from his
chair; and stopping short, facing her, he said, speaking deliberately:
"What do you try my patience for?" looking as though he might have said
much more, but was restraining himself. "It has limits."

"What do you mean by that?" she cried, looking with terror at the
undisguised hatred in his whole face, and especially in his cruel,
menacing eyes.

"I mean to say..." he was beginning, but he checked himself. "I must ask
what it is you want of me?"

"What can I want? All I can want is that you should not desert me, as
you think of doing," she said, understanding all he had not uttered.
"But that I don’t want; that’s secondary. I want love, and there is
none. So then all is over."

She turned towards the door.

"Stop! sto-op!" said Vronsky, with no change in the gloomy lines of his
brows, though he held her by the hand. "What is it all about? I said
that we must put off going for three days, and on that you told me I was
lying, that I was not an honorable man."

"Yes, and I repeat that the man who reproaches me with having sacrificed
everything for me," she said, recalling the words of a still earlier
quarrel, "that he’s worse than a dishonorable man—he’s a heartless man."

"Oh, there are limits to endurance!" he cried, and hastily let go her
hand.

"He hates me, that’s clear," she thought, and in silence, without
looking round, she walked with faltering steps out of the room. "He
loves another woman, that’s even clearer," she said to herself as she
went into her own room. "I want love, and there is none. So, then, all
is over." She repeated the words she had said, "and it must be ended."

"But how?" she asked herself, and she sat down in a low chair before the
looking glass.

Thoughts of where she would go now, whether to the aunt who had brought
her up, to Dolly, or simply alone abroad, and of what _he_ was doing now
alone in his study; whether this was the final quarrel, or whether
reconciliation were still possible; and of what all her old friends at
Petersburg would say of her now; and of how Alexey Alexandrovitch would
look at it, and many other ideas of what would happen now after this
rupture, came into her head; but she did not give herself up to them
with all her heart. At the bottom of her heart was some obscure idea
that alone interested her, but she could not get clear sight of it.
Thinking once more of Alexey Alexandrovitch, she recalled the time of
her illness after her confinement, and the feeling which never left her
at that time. "Why didn’t I die?" and the words and the feeling of that
time came back to her. And all at once she knew what was in her soul.
Yes, it was that idea which alone solved all. "Yes, to die!... And the
shame and disgrace of Alexey Alexandrovitch and of Seryozha, and my
awful shame, it will all be saved by death. To die! and he will feel
remorse; will be sorry; will love me; he will suffer on my account."
With the trace of a smile of commiseration for herself she sat down in
the armchair, taking off and putting on the rings on her left hand,
vividly picturing from different sides his feelings after her death.

Approaching footsteps—his steps—distracted her attention. As though
absorbed in the arrangement of her rings, she did not even turn to him.

He went up to her, and taking her by the hand, said softly:

"Anna, we’ll go the day after tomorrow, if you like. I agree to
everything."

She did not speak.

"What is it?" he urged.

"You know," she said, and at the same instant, unable to restrain
herself any longer, she burst into sobs.

"Cast me off!" she articulated between her sobs. "I’ll go away tomorrow
... I’ll do more. What am I? An immoral woman! A stone round your neck.
I don’t want to make you wretched, I don’t want to! I’ll set you free.
You don’t love me; you love someone else!"

Vronsky besought her to be calm, and declared that there was no trace of
foundation for her jealousy; that he had never ceased, and never would
cease, to love her; that he loved her more than ever.

"Anna, why distress yourself and me so?" he said to her, kissing her
hands. There was tenderness now in his face, and she fancied she caught
the sound of tears in his voice, and she felt them wet on her hand. And
instantly Anna’s despairing jealousy changed to a despairing passion of
tenderness. She put her arms round him, and covered with kisses his
head, his neck, his hands.



Chapter 


Feeling that the reconciliation was complete, Anna set eagerly to work
in the morning preparing for their departure. Though it was not settled
whether they should go on Monday or Tuesday, as they had each given way
to the other, Anna packed busily, feeling absolutely indifferent whether
they went a day earlier or later. She was standing in her room over an
open box, taking things out of it, when he came in to see her earlier
than usual, dressed to go out.

"I’m going off at once to see maman; she can send me the money by
Yegorov. And I shall be ready to go tomorrow," he said.

Though she was in such a good mood, the thought of his visit to his
mother’s gave her a pang.

"No, I shan’t be ready by then myself," she said; and at once reflected,
"so then it was possible to arrange to do as I wished." "No, do as you
meant to do. Go into the dining room, I’m coming directly. It’s only to
turn out those things that aren’t wanted," she said, putting something
more on the heap of frippery that lay in Annushka’s arms.

Vronsky was eating his beefsteak when she came into the dining-room.

"You wouldn’t believe how distasteful these rooms have become to me,"
she said, sitting down beside him to her coffee. "There’s nothing more
awful than these _chambres garnies_. There’s no individuality in them,
no soul. These clocks, and curtains, and, worst of all, the
wallpapers—they’re a nightmare. I think of Vozdvizhenskoe as the
promised land. You’re not sending the horses off yet?"

"No, they will come after us. Where are you going to?"

"I wanted to go to Wilson’s to take some dresses to her. So it’s really
to be tomorrow?" she said in a cheerful voice; but suddenly her face
changed.

Vronsky’s valet came in to ask him to sign a receipt for a telegram from
Petersburg. There was nothing out of the way in Vronsky’s getting a
telegram, but he said, as though anxious to conceal something from her,
