she could make up to him for all he had given up. Vronsky appreciated
this desire not only to please, but to serve him, which had become the
sole aim of her existence, but at the same time he wearied of the loving
snares in which she tried to hold him fast. As time went on, and he saw
himself more and more often held fast in these snares, he had an ever
growing desire, not so much to escape from them, as to try whether they
hindered his freedom. Had it not been for this growing desire to be
free, not to have scenes every time he wanted to go to the town to a
meeting or a race, Vronsky would have been perfectly satisfied with his
life. The rôle he had taken up, the rôle of a wealthy landowner, one of
that class which ought to be the very heart of the Russian aristocracy,
was entirely to his taste; and now, after spending six months in that
character, he derived even greater satisfaction from it. And his
management of his estate, which occupied and absorbed him more and more,
was most successful. In spite of the immense sums cost him by the
hospital, by machinery, by cows ordered from Switzerland, and many other
things, he was convinced that he was not wasting, but increasing his
substance. In all matters affecting income, the sales of timber, wheat,
and wool, the letting of lands, Vronsky was hard as a rock, and knew
well how to keep up prices. In all operations on a large scale on this
and his other estates, he kept to the simplest methods involving no
risk, and in trifling details he was careful and exacting to an extreme
degree. In spite of all the cunning and ingenuity of the German steward,
who would try to tempt him into purchases by making his original
estimate always far larger than really required, and then representing
to Vronsky that he might get the thing cheaper, and so make a profit,
Vronsky did not give in. He listened to his steward, cross-examined him,
and only agreed to his suggestions when the implement to be ordered or
constructed was the very newest, not yet known in Russia, and likely to
excite wonder. Apart from such exceptions, he resolved upon an increased
outlay only where there was a surplus, and in making such an outlay he
went into the minutest details, and insisted on getting the very best
for his money; so that by the method on which he managed his affairs, it
was clear that he was not wasting, but increasing his substance.

In October there were the provincial elections in the Kashinsky
province, where were the estates of Vronsky, Sviazhsky, Koznishev,
Oblonsky, and a small part of Levin’s land.

These elections were attracting public attention from several
circumstances connected with them, and also from the people taking part
in them. There had been a great deal of talk about them, and great
preparations were being made for them. Persons who never attended the
elections were coming from Moscow, from Petersburg, and from abroad to
attend these. Vronsky had long before promised Sviazhsky to go to them.
Before the elections Sviazhsky, who often visited Vozdvizhenskoe, drove
over to fetch Vronsky. On the day before there had been almost a quarrel
between Vronsky and Anna over this proposed expedition. It was the very
dullest autumn weather, which is so dreary in the country, and so,
preparing himself for a struggle, Vronsky, with a hard and cold
expression, informed Anna of his departure as he had never spoken to her
before. But, to his surprise, Anna accepted the information with great
composure, and merely asked when he would be back. He looked intently at
her, at a loss to explain this composure. She smiled at his look. He
knew that way she had of withdrawing into herself, and knew that it only
happened when she had determined upon something without letting him know
her plans. He was afraid of this; but he was so anxious to avoid a scene
that he kept up appearances, and half sincerely believed in what he
longed to believe in—her reasonableness.

"I hope you won’t be dull?"

"I hope not," said Anna. "I got a box of books yesterday from Gautier’s.
No, I shan’t be dull."

"She’s trying to take that tone, and so much the better," he thought,
"or else it would be the same thing over and over again."

And he set off for the elections without appealing to her for a candid
explanation. It was the first time since the beginning of their intimacy
that he had parted from her without a full explanation. From one point
of view this troubled him, but on the other side he felt that it was
better so. "At first there will be, as this time, something undefined
kept back, and then she will get used to it. In any case I can give up
anything for her, but not my masculine independence," he thought.



Chapter 


In September Levin moved to Moscow for Kitty’s confinement. He had spent
a whole month in Moscow with nothing to do, when Sergey Ivanovitch, who
had property in the Kashinsky province, and took great interest in the
question of the approaching elections, made ready to set off to the
elections. He invited his brother, who had a vote in the Seleznevsky
district, to come with him. Levin had, moreover, to transact in Kashin
some extremely important business relating to the wardship of land and
to the receiving of certain redemption money for his sister, who was
abroad.

Levin still hesitated, but Kitty, who saw that he was bored in Moscow,
and urged him to go, on her own authority ordered him the proper
nobleman’s uniform, costing seven pounds. And that seven pounds paid for
the uniform was the chief cause that finally decided Levin to go. He
went to Kashin....

Levin had been six days in Kashin, visiting the assembly each day, and
busily engaged about his sister’s business, which still dragged on. The
district marshals of nobility were all occupied with the elections, and
it was impossible to get the simplest thing done that depended upon the
court of wardship. The other matter, the payment of the sums due, was
met too by difficulties. After long negotiations over the legal details,
the money was at last ready to be paid; but the notary, a most obliging
person, could not hand over the order, because it must have the
signature of the president, and the president, though he had not given
over his duties to a deputy, was at the elections. All these worrying
negotiations, this endless going from place to place, and talking with
pleasant and excellent people, who quite saw the unpleasantness of the
petitioner’s position, but were powerless to assist him—all these
efforts that yielded no result, led to a feeling of misery in Levin akin
to the mortifying helplessness one experiences in dreams when one tries
to use physical force. He felt this frequently as he talked to his most
good-natured solicitor. This solicitor did, it seemed, everything
possible, and strained every nerve to get him out of his difficulties.
"I tell you what you might try," he said more than once; "go to
so-and-so and so-and-so," and the solicitor drew up a regular plan for
getting round the fatal point that hindered everything. But he would add
immediately, "It’ll mean some delay, anyway, but you might try it." And
Levin did try, and did go. Everyone was kind and civil, but the point
evaded seemed to crop up again in the end, and again to bar the way.
What was particularly trying, was that Levin could not make out with
whom he was struggling, to whose interest it was that his business
should not be done. That no one seemed to know; the solicitor certainly
did not know. If Levin could have understood why, just as he saw why one
can only approach the booking office of a railway station in single
file, it would not have been so vexatious and tiresome to him. But with
the hindrances that confronted him in his business, no one could explain
why they existed.

But Levin had changed a good deal since his marriage; he was patient,
and if he could not see why it was all arranged like this, he told
himself that he could not judge without knowing all about it, and that
most likely it must be so, and he tried not to fret.

In attending the elections, too, and taking part in them, he tried now
not to judge, not to fall foul of them, but to comprehend as fully as he
could the question which was so earnestly and ardently absorbing honest
and excellent men whom he respected. Since his marriage there had been
revealed to Levin so many new and serious aspects of life that had
previously, through his frivolous attitude to them, seemed of no
importance, that in the question of the elections too he assumed and
tried to find some serious significance.

Sergey Ivanovitch explained to him the meaning and object of the
proposed revolution at the elections. The marshal of the province in
whose hands the law had placed the control of so many important public
functions—the guardianship of wards (the very department which was
giving Levin so much trouble just now), the disposal of large sums
subscribed by the nobility of the province, the high schools, female,
