nothing, and therefore the lawyer went on: "The most usual and simple,
the sensible course, I consider, is adultery by mutual consent. I should
not permit myself to express it so, speaking with a man of no
education," he said, "but I imagine that to you this is comprehensible."

Alexey Alexandrovitch was, however, so perturbed that he did not
immediately comprehend all the good sense of adultery by mutual consent,
and his eyes expressed this uncertainty; but the lawyer promptly came to
his assistance.

"People cannot go on living together—here you have a fact. And if both
are agreed about it, the details and formalities become a matter of no
importance. And at the same time this is the simplest and most certain
method."

Alexey Alexandrovitch fully understood now. But he had religious
scruples, which hindered the execution of such a plan.

"That is out of the question in the present case," he said. "Only one
alternative is possible: undesigned detection, supported by letters
which I have."

At the mention of letters the lawyer pursed up his lips, and gave
utterance to a thin little compassionate and contemptuous sound.

"Kindly consider," he began, "cases of that kind are, as you are aware,
under ecclesiastical jurisdiction; the reverend fathers are fond of
going into the minutest details in cases of that kind," he said with a
smile, which betrayed his sympathy with the reverend fathers’ taste.
"Letters may, of course, be a partial confirmation; but detection in the
fact there must be of the most direct kind, that is, by eyewitnesses. In
fact, if you do me the honor to intrust your confidence to me, you will
do well to leave me the choice of the measures to be employed. If one
wants the result, one must admit the means."

"If it is so..." Alexey Alexandrovitch began, suddenly turning white;
but at that moment the lawyer rose and again went to the door to speak
to the intruding clerk.

"Tell her we don’t haggle over fees!" he said, and returned to Alexey
Alexandrovitch.

On his way back he caught unobserved another moth. "Nice state my rep
curtains will be in by the summer!" he thought, frowning.

"And so you were saying?..." he said.

"I will communicate my decision to you by letter," said Alexey
Alexandrovitch, getting up, and he clutched at the table. After standing
a moment in silence, he said: "From your words I may consequently
conclude that a divorce may be obtained? I would ask you to let me know
what are your terms."

"It may be obtained if you give me complete liberty of action," said the
lawyer, not answering his question. "When can I reckon on receiving
information from you?" he asked, moving towards the door, his eyes and
his varnished boots shining.

"In a week’s time. Your answer as to whether you will undertake to
conduct the case, and on what terms, you will be so good as to
communicate to me."

"Very good."

The lawyer bowed respectfully, let his client out of the door, and, left
alone, gave himself up to his sense of amusement. He felt so mirthful
that, contrary to his rules, he made a reduction in his terms to the
haggling lady, and gave up catching moths, finally deciding that next
winter he must have the furniture covered with velvet, like Sigonin’s.



Chapter 


Alexey Alexandrovitch had gained a brilliant victory at the sitting of
the Commission of the th of August, but in the sequel this victory cut
the ground from under his feet. The new commission for the inquiry into
the condition of the native tribes in all its branches had been formed
and despatched to its destination with an unusual speed and energy
inspired by Alexey Alexandrovitch. Within three months a report was
presented. The condition of the native tribes was investigated in its
political, administrative, economic, ethnographic, material, and
religious aspects. To all these questions there were answers admirably
stated, and answers admitting no shade of doubt, since they were not a
product of human thought, always liable to error, but were all the
product of official activity. The answers were all based on official
data furnished by governors and heads of churches, and founded on the
reports of district magistrates and ecclesiastical superintendents,
founded in their turn on the reports of parochial overseers and parish
priests; and so all of these answers were unhesitating and certain. All
such questions as, for instance, of the cause of failure of crops, of
the adherence of certain tribes to their ancient beliefs, etc.—questions
which, but for the convenient intervention of the official machine, are
not, and cannot be solved for ages—received full, unhesitating solution.
And this solution was in favor of Alexey Alexandrovitch’s contention.
But Stremov, who had felt stung to the quick at the last sitting, had,
on the reception of the commission’s report, resorted to tactics which
Alexey Alexandrovitch had not anticipated. Stremov, carrying with him
several members, went over to Alexey Alexandrovitch’s side, and not
contenting himself with warmly defending the measure proposed by
Karenin, proposed other more extreme measures in the same direction.
These measures, still further exaggerated in opposition to what was
Alexey Alexandrovitch’s fundamental idea, were passed by the commission,
and then the aim of Stremov’s tactics became apparent. Carried to an
extreme, the measures seemed at once to be so absurd that the highest
authorities, and public opinion, and intellectual ladies, and the
newspapers, all at the same time fell foul of them, expressing their
indignation both with the measures and their nominal father, Alexey
Alexandrovitch. Stremov drew back, affecting to have blindly followed
Karenin, and to be astounded and distressed at what had been done. This
meant the defeat of Alexey Alexandrovitch. But in spite of failing
health, in spite of his domestic griefs, he did not give in. There was a
split in the commission. Some members, with Stremov at their head,
justified their mistake on the ground that they had put faith in the
commission of revision, instituted by Alexey Alexandrovitch, and
maintained that the report of the commission was rubbish, and simply so
much waste paper. Alexey Alexandrovitch, with a following of those who
saw the danger of so revolutionary an attitude to official documents,
persisted in upholding the statements obtained by the revising
commission. In consequence of this, in the higher spheres, and even in
society, all was chaos, and although everyone was interested, no one
could tell whether the native tribes really were becoming impoverished
and ruined, or whether they were in a flourishing condition. The
position of Alexey Alexandrovitch, owing to this, and partly owing to
the contempt lavished on him for his wife’s infidelity, became very
precarious. And in this position he took an important resolution. To the
astonishment of the commission, he announced that he should ask
permission to go himself to investigate the question on the spot. And
having obtained permission, Alexey Alexandrovitch prepared to set off to
these remote provinces.

Alexey Alexandrovitch’s departure made a great sensation, the more so as
just before he started he officially returned the posting-fares allowed
him for twelve horses, to drive to his destination.

"I think it very noble," Betsy said about this to the Princess Myakaya.
"Why take money for posting-horses when everyone knows that there are
railways everywhere now?"

But Princess Myakaya did not agree, and the Princess Tverskaya’s opinion
annoyed her indeed.

"It’s all very well for you to talk," said she, "when you have I don’t
know how many millions; but I am very glad when my husband goes on a
revising tour in the summer. It’s very good for him and pleasant
traveling about, and it’s a settled arrangement for me to keep a
carriage and coachman on the money."

On his way to the remote provinces Alexey Alexandrovitch stopped for
