"Papa, it’s not possible!" cried Kitty.

"That’s what wicked tongues say, my darling. And your Varenka catches it
too," he added. "Oh, these invalid ladies!"

"Oh, no, papa!" Kitty objected warmly. "Varenka worships her. And then
she does so much good! Ask anyone! Everyone knows her and Aline Stahl."

"Perhaps so," said the prince, squeezing her hand with his elbow; "but
it’s better when one does good so that you may ask everyone and no one
knows."

Kitty did not answer, not because she had nothing to say, but because
she did not care to reveal her secret thoughts even to her father. But,
strange to say, although she had so made up her mind not to be
influenced by her father’s views, not to let him into her inmost
sanctuary, she felt that the heavenly image of Madame Stahl, which she
had carried for a whole month in her heart, had vanished, never to
return, just as the fantastic figure made up of some clothes thrown down
at random vanishes when one sees that it is only some garment lying
there. All that was left was a woman with short legs, who lay down
because she had a bad figure, and worried patient Varenka for not
arranging her rug to her liking. And by no effort of the imagination
could Kitty bring back the former Madame Stahl.



Chapter 


The prince communicated his good humor to his own family and his
friends, and even to the German landlord in whose rooms the
Shtcherbatskys were staying.

On coming back with Kitty from the springs, the prince, who had asked
the colonel, and Marya Yevgenyevna, and Varenka all to come and have
coffee with them, gave orders for a table and chairs to be taken into
the garden under the chestnut tree, and lunch to be laid there. The
landlord and the servants, too, grew brisker under the influence of his
good spirits. They knew his open-handedness; and half an hour later the
invalid doctor from Hamburg, who lived on the top floor, looked
enviously out of the window at the merry party of healthy Russians
assembled under the chestnut tree. In the trembling circles of shadow
cast by the leaves, at a table, covered with a white cloth, and set with
coffeepot, bread-and-butter, cheese, and cold game, sat the princess in
a high cap with lilac ribbons, distributing cups and bread-and-butter.
At the other end sat the prince, eating heartily, and talking loudly and
merrily. The prince had spread out near him his purchases, carved boxes,
and knick-knacks, paper-knives of all sorts, of which he bought a heap
at every watering-place, and bestowed them upon everyone, including
Lieschen, the servant girl, and the landlord, with whom he jested in his
comically bad German, assuring him that it was not the water had cured
Kitty, but his splendid cookery, especially his plum soup. The princess
laughed at her husband for his Russian ways, but she was more lively and
good-humored than she had been all the while she had been at the waters.
The colonel smiled, as he always did, at the prince’s jokes, but as far
as regards Europe, of which he believed himself to be making a careful
study, he took the princess’s side. The simple-hearted Marya Yevgenyevna
simply roared with laughter at everything absurd the prince said, and
his jokes made Varenka helpless with feeble but infectious laughter,
which was something Kitty had never seen before.

Kitty was glad of all this, but she could not be light-hearted. She
could not solve the problem her father had unconsciously set her by his
goodhumored view of her friends, and of the life that had so attracted
her. To this doubt there was joined the change in her relations with the
Petrovs, which had been so conspicuously and unpleasantly marked that
morning. Everyone was good humored, but Kitty could not feel good
humored, and this increased her distress. She felt a feeling such as she
had known in childhood, when she had been shut in her room as a
punishment, and had heard her sisters’ merry laughter outside.

"Well, but what did you buy this mass of things for?" said the princess,
smiling, and handing her husband a cup of coffee.

"One goes for a walk, one looks in a shop, and they ask you to buy.
‘_Erlaucht, Durchlaucht?_’ Directly they say ‘_Durchlaucht_,’ I can’t
hold out. I lose ten thalers."

"It’s simply from boredom," said the princess.

"Of course it is. Such boredom, my dear, that one doesn’t know what to
do with oneself."

"How can you be bored, prince? There’s so much that’s interesting now in
Germany," said Marya Yevgenyevna.

"But I know everything that’s interesting: the plum soup I know, and the
pea sausages I know. I know everything."

"No, you may say what you like, prince, there’s the interest of their
institutions," said the colonel.

"But what is there interesting about it? They’re all as pleased as brass
halfpence. They’ve conquered everybody, and why am I to be pleased at
that? I haven’t conquered anyone; and I’m obliged to take off my own
boots, yes, and put them away too; in the morning, get up and dress at
once, and go to the dining room to drink bad tea! How different it is at
home! You get up in no haste, you get cross, grumble a little, and come
round again. You’ve time to think things over, and no hurry."

"But time’s money, you forget that," said the colonel.

"Time, indeed, that depends! Why, there’s time one would give a month of
for sixpence, and time you wouldn’t give half an hour of for any money.
Isn’t that so, Katinka? What is it? why are you so depressed?"

"I’m not depressed."

"Where are you off to? Stay a little longer," he said to Varenka.

"I must be going home," said Varenka, getting up, and again she went off
into a giggle. When she had recovered, she said good-bye, and went into
the house to get her hat.

Kitty followed her. Even Varenka struck her as different. She was not
worse, but different from what she had fancied her before.

"Oh, dear! it’s a long while since I’ve laughed so much!" said Varenka,
gathering up her parasol and her bag. "How nice he is, your father!"

Kitty did not speak.

"When shall I see you again?" asked Varenka.

"Mamma meant to go and see the Petrovs. Won’t you be there?" said Kitty,
to try Varenka.

"Yes," answered Varenka. "They’re getting ready to go away, so I
promised to help them pack."

"Well, I’ll come too, then."

"No, why should you?"

"Why not? why not? why not?" said Kitty, opening her eyes wide, and
clutching at Varenka’s parasol, so as not to let her go. "No, wait a
minute; why not?"

"Oh, nothing; your father has come, and besides, they will feel awkward
at your helping."

"No, tell me why you don’t want me to be often at the Petrovs’. You
don’t want me to—why not?"

"I didn’t say that," said Varenka quietly.

"No, please tell me!"

"Tell you everything?" asked Varenka.
