by the English, _small talk_. She addressed the attache, who was at a
loss now what to begin upon.

"They say that that’s a difficult task, that nothing’s amusing that
isn’t spiteful," he began with a smile. "But I’ll try. Get me a subject.
It all lies in the subject. If a subject’s given me, it’s easy to spin
something round it. I often think that the celebrated talkers of the
last century would have found it difficult to talk cleverly now.
Everything clever is so stale..."

"That has been said long ago," the ambassador’s wife interrupted him,
laughing.

The conversation began amiably, but just because it was too amiable, it
came to a stop again. They had to have recourse to the sure,
never-failing topic—gossip.

"Don’t you think there’s something Louis Quinze about Tushkevitch?" he
said, glancing towards a handsome, fair-haired young man, standing at
the table.

"Oh, yes! He’s in the same style as the drawing room and that’s why it
is he’s so often here."

This conversation was maintained, since it rested on allusions to what
could not be talked of in that room—that is to say, of the relations of
Tushkevitch with their hostess.

Round the samovar and the hostess the conversation had been meanwhile
vacillating in just the same way between three inevitable topics: the
latest piece of public news, the theater, and scandal. It, too, came
finally to rest on the last topic, that is, ill-natured gossip.

"Have you heard the Maltishtcheva woman—the mother, not the daughter—has
ordered a costume in _diable rose_ color?"

"Nonsense! No, that’s too lovely!"

"I wonder that with her sense—for she’s not a fool, you know—that she
doesn’t see how funny she is."

Everyone had something to say in censure or ridicule of the luckless
Madame Maltishtcheva, and the conversation crackled merrily, like a
burning faggot-stack.

The husband of Princess Betsy, a good-natured fat man, an ardent
collector of engravings, hearing that his wife had visitors, came into
the drawing room before going to his club. Stepping noiselessly over the
thick rugs, he went up to Princess Myakaya.

"How did you like Nilsson?" he asked.

"Oh, how can you steal upon anyone like that! How you startled me!" she
responded. "Please don’t talk to me about the opera; you know nothing
about music. I’d better meet you on your own ground, and talk about your
majolica and engravings. Come now, what treasure have you been buying
lately at the old curiosity shops?"

"Would you like me to show you? But you don’t understand such things."

"Oh, do show me! I’ve been learning about them at those—what’s their
names?... the bankers ... they’ve some splendid engravings. They showed
them to us."

"Why, have you been at the Schützburgs?" asked the hostess from the
samovar.

"Yes, _ma chère_. They asked my husband and me to dinner, and told us
the sauce at that dinner cost a hundred pounds," Princess Myakaya said,
speaking loudly, and conscious everyone was listening; "and very nasty
sauce it was, some green mess. We had to ask them, and I made them sauce
for eighteen pence, and everybody was very much pleased with it. I can’t
run to hundred-pound sauces."

"She’s unique!" said the lady of the house.

"Marvelous!" said someone.

The sensation produced by Princess Myakaya’s speeches was always unique,
and the secret of the sensation she produced lay in the fact that though
she spoke not always appropriately, as now, she said simple things with
some sense in them. In the society in which she lived such plain
statements produced the effect of the wittiest epigram. Princess Myakaya
could never see why it had that effect, but she knew it had, and took
advantage of it.

As everyone had been listening while Princess Myakaya spoke, and so the
conversation around the ambassador’s wife had dropped, Princess Betsy
tried to bring the whole party together, and turned to the ambassador’s
wife.

"Will you really not have tea? You should come over here by us."

"No, we’re very happy here," the ambassador’s wife responded with a
smile, and she went on with the conversation that had been begun.

It was a very agreeable conversation. They were criticizing the
Karenins, husband and wife.

"Anna is quite changed since her stay in Moscow. There’s something
strange about her," said her friend.

"The great change is that she brought back with her the shadow of Alexey
Vronsky," said the ambassador’s wife.

"Well, what of it? There’s a fable of Grimm’s about a man without a
shadow, a man who’s lost his shadow. And that’s his punishment for
something. I never could understand how it was a punishment. But a woman
must dislike being without a shadow."

"Yes, but women with a shadow usually come to a bad end," said Anna’s
friend.

"Bad luck to your tongue!" said Princess Myakaya suddenly. "Madame
Karenina’s a splendid woman. I don’t like her husband, but I like her
very much."

"Why don’t you like her husband? He’s such a remarkable man," said the
ambassador’s wife. "My husband says there are few statesmen like him in
Europe."

"And my husband tells me just the same, but I don’t believe it," said
Princess Myakaya. "If our husbands didn’t talk to us, we should see the
facts as they are. Alexey Alexandrovitch, to my thinking, is simply a
fool. I say it in a whisper ... but doesn’t it really make everything
clear? Before, when I was told to consider him clever, I kept looking
for his ability, and thought myself a fool for not seeing it; but
directly I said, _he’s a fool,_ though only in a whisper, everything’s
explained, isn’t it?"

"How spiteful you are today!"

"Not a bit. I’d no other way out of it. One of the two had to be a fool.
And, well, you know one can’t say that of oneself."

"‘No one is satisfied with his fortune, and everyone is satisfied with
his wit.’" The attaché repeated the French saying.

"That’s just it, just it," Princess Myakaya turned to him. "But the
point is that I won’t abandon Anna to your mercies. She’s so nice, so
charming. How can she help it if they’re all in love with her, and
follow her about like shadows?"

"Oh, I had no idea of blaming her for it," Anna’s friend said in
self-defense.

"If no one follows us about like a shadow, that’s no proof that we’ve
any right to blame her."

And having duly disposed of Anna’s friend, the Princess Myakaya got up,
