He looked with weary and melancholy eyes at the bride and bridegroom,
sighed, and putting his right hand out from his vestment, blessed the
bridegroom with it, and also with a shade of solicitous tenderness laid
the crossed fingers on the bowed head of Kitty. Then he gave them the
candles, and taking the censer, moved slowly away from them.

"Can it be true?" thought Levin, and he looked round at his bride.
Looking down at her he saw her face in profile, and from the scarcely
perceptible quiver of her lips and eyelashes he knew she was aware of
his eyes upon her. She did not look round, but the high scalloped
collar, that reached her little pink ear, trembled faintly. He saw that
a sigh was held back in her throat, and the little hand in the long
glove shook as it held the candle.

All the fuss of the shirt, of being late, all the talk of friends and
relations, their annoyance, his ludicrous position—all suddenly passed
away and he was filled with joy and dread.

The handsome, stately head-deacon wearing a silver robe and his curly
locks standing out at each side of his head, stepped smartly forward,
and lifting his stole on two fingers, stood opposite the priest.

"Blessed be the name of the Lord," the solemn syllables rang out slowly
one after another, setting the air quivering with waves of sound.

"Blessed is the name of our God, from the beginning, is now, and ever
shall be," the little old priest answered in a submissive, piping voice,
still fingering something at the lectern. And the full chorus of the
unseen choir rose up, filling the whole church, from the windows to the
vaulted roof, with broad waves of melody. It grew stronger, rested for
an instant, and slowly died away.

They prayed, as they always do, for peace from on high and for
salvation, for the Holy Synod, and for the Tsar; they prayed, too, for
the servants of God, Konstantin and Ekaterina, now plighting their
troth.

"Vouchsafe to them love made perfect, peace and help, O Lord, we beseech
Thee," the whole church seemed to breathe with the voice of the head
deacon.

Levin heard the words, and they impressed him. "How did they guess that
it is help, just help that one wants?" he thought, recalling all his
fears and doubts of late. "What do I know? what can I do in this fearful
business," he thought, "without help? Yes, it is help I want now."

When the deacon had finished the prayer for the Imperial family, the
priest turned to the bridal pair with a book: "Eternal God, that joinest
together in love them that were separate," he read in a gentle, piping
voice: "who hast ordained the union of holy wedlock that cannot be set
asunder, Thou who didst bless Isaac and Rebecca and their descendants,
according to Thy Holy Covenant; bless Thy servants, Konstantin and
Ekaterina, leading them in the path of all good works. For gracious and
merciful art Thou, our Lord, and glory be to Thee, the Father, the Son,
and the Holy Ghost, now and ever shall be."

"Amen!" the unseen choir sent rolling again upon the air.

"‘Joinest together in love them that were separate.’ What deep meaning
in those words, and how they correspond with what one feels at this
moment," thought Levin. "Is she feeling the same as I?"

And looking round, he met her eyes, and from their expression he
concluded that she was understanding it just as he was. But this was a
mistake; she almost completely missed the meaning of the words of the
service; she had not heard them, in fact. She could not listen to them
and take them in, so strong was the one feeling that filled her breast
and grew stronger and stronger. That feeling was joy at the completion
of the process that for the last month and a half had been going on in
her soul, and had during those six weeks been a joy and a torture to
her. On the day when in the drawing room of the house in Arbaty Street
she had gone up to him in her brown dress, and given herself to him
without a word—on that day, at that hour, there took place in her heart
a complete severance from all her old life, and a quite different, new,
utterly strange life had begun for her, while the old life was actually
going on as before. Those six weeks had for her been a time of the
utmost bliss and the utmost misery. All her life, all her desires and
hopes were concentrated on this one man, still uncomprehended by her, to
whom she was bound by a feeling of alternate attraction and repulsion,
even less comprehended than the man himself, and all the while she was
going on living in the outward conditions of her old life. Living the
old life, she was horrified at herself, at her utter insurmountable
callousness to all her own past, to things, to habits, to the people she
had loved, who loved her—to her mother, who was wounded by her
indifference, to her kind, tender father, till then dearer than all the
world. At one moment she was horrified at this indifference, at another
she rejoiced at what had brought her to this indifference. She could not
frame a thought, not a wish apart from life with this man; but this new
life was not yet, and she could not even picture it clearly to herself.
There was only anticipation, the dread and joy of the new and the
unknown. And now behold—anticipation and uncertainty and remorse at the
abandonment of the old life—all was ending, and the new was beginning.
This new life could not but have terrors for her inexperience; but,
terrible or not, the change had been wrought six weeks before in her
soul, and this was merely the final sanction of what had long been
completed in her heart.

Turning again to the lectern, the priest with some difficulty took
Kitty’s little ring, and asking Levin for his hand, put it on the first
joint of his finger. "The servant of God, Konstantin, plights his troth
to the servant of God, Ekaterina." And putting his big ring on Kitty’s
touchingly weak, pink little finger, the priest said the same thing.

And the bridal pair tried several times to understand what they had to
do, and each time made some mistake and were corrected by the priest in
a whisper. At last, having duly performed the ceremony, having signed
the rings with the cross, the priest handed Kitty the big ring, and
Levin the little one. Again they were puzzled, and passed the rings from
hand to hand, still without doing what was expected.

Dolly, Tchirikov, and Stepan Arkadyevitch stepped forward to set them
right. There was an interval of hesitation, whispering, and smiles; but
the expression of solemn emotion on the faces of the betrothed pair did
not change: on the contrary, in their perplexity over their hands they
looked more grave and deeply moved than before, and the smile with which
Stepan Arkadyevitch whispered to them that now they would each put on
their own ring died away on his lips. He had a feeling that any smile
would jar on them.

"Thou who didst from the beginning create male and female," the priest
read after the exchange of rings, "from Thee woman was given to man to
be a helpmeet to him, and for the procreation of children. O Lord, our
God, who hast poured down the blessings of Thy Truth according to Thy
Holy Covenant upon Thy chosen servants, our fathers, from generation to
generation, bless Thy servants Konstantin and Ekaterina, and make their
troth fast in faith, and union of hearts, and truth, and love...."

Levin felt more and more that all his ideas of marriage, all his dreams
of how he would order his life, were mere childishness, and that it was
something he had not understood hitherto, and now understood less than
ever, though it was being performed upon him. The lump in his throat
rose higher and higher, tears that would not be checked came into his
eyes.



Chapter 


In the church there was all Moscow, all the friends and relations; and
during the ceremony of plighting troth, in the brilliantly lighted
church, there was an incessant flow of discreetly subdued talk in the
circle of gaily dressed women and girls, and men in white ties,
frockcoats, and uniforms. The talk was principally kept up by the men,
while the women were absorbed in watching every detail of the ceremony,
which always means so much to them.

In the little group nearest to the bride were her two sisters: Dolly,
and the other one, the self-possessed beauty, Madame Lvova, who had just
arrived from abroad.
