consciousness of his vocation to people vast unoccupied expanses in the
East.

"One may easily be led into error in basing any conclusion on the
general vocation of a people," said Metrov, interrupting Levin. "The
condition of the laborer will always depend on his relation to the land
and to capital."

And without letting Levin finish explaining his idea, Metrov began
expounding to him the special point of his own theory.

In what the point of his theory lay, Levin did not understand, because
he did not take the trouble to understand. He saw that Metrov, like
other people, in spite of his own article, in which he had attacked the
current theory of political economy, looked at the position of the
Russian peasant simply from the point of view of capital, wages, and
rent. He would indeed have been obliged to admit that in the
eastern—much the larger—part of Russia rent was as yet nil, that for
nine-tenths of the eighty millions of the Russian peasants wages took
the form simply of food provided for themselves, and that capital does
not so far exist except in the form of the most primitive tools. Yet it
was only from that point of view that he considered every laborer,
though in many points he differed from the economists and had his own
theory of the wage-fund, which he expounded to Levin.

Levin listened reluctantly, and at first made objections. He would have
liked to interrupt Metrov, to explain his own thought, which in his
opinion would have rendered further exposition of Metrov’s theories
superfluous. But later on, feeling convinced that they looked at the
matter so differently, that they could never understand one another, he
did not even oppose his statements, but simply listened. Although what
Metrov was saying was by now utterly devoid of interest for him, he yet
experienced a certain satisfaction in listening to him. It flattered his
vanity that such a learned man should explain his ideas to him so
eagerly, with such intensity and confidence in Levin’s understanding of
the subject, sometimes with a mere hint referring him to a whole aspect
of the subject. He put this down to his own credit, unaware that Metrov,
who had already discussed his theory over and over again with all his
intimate friends, talked of it with special eagerness to every new
person, and in general was eager to talk to anyone of any subject that
interested him, even if still obscure to himself.

"We are late though," said Katavasov, looking at his watch directly
Metrov had finished his discourse.

"Yes, there’s a meeting of the Society of Amateurs today in
commemoration of the jubilee of Svintitch," said Katavasov in answer to
Levin’s inquiry. "Pyotr Ivanovitch and I were going. I’ve promised to
deliver an address on his labors in zoology. Come along with us, it’s
very interesting."

"Yes, and indeed it’s time to start," said Metrov. "Come with us, and
from there, if you care to, come to my place. I should very much like to
hear your work."

"Oh, no! It’s no good yet, it’s unfinished. But I shall be very glad to
go to the meeting."

"I say, friends, have you heard? He has handed in the separate report,"
Katavasov called from the other room, where he was putting on his frock
coat.

And a conversation sprang up upon the university question, which was a
very important event that winter in Moscow. Three old professors in the
council had not accepted the opinion of the younger professors. The
young ones had registered a separate resolution. This, in the judgment
of some people, was monstrous, in the judgment of others it was the
simplest and most just thing to do, and the professors were split up
into two parties.

One party, to which Katavasov belonged, saw in the opposite party a
scoundrelly betrayal and treachery, while the opposite party saw in them
childishness and lack of respect for the authorities. Levin, though he
did not belong to the university, had several times already during his
stay in Moscow heard and talked about this matter, and had his own
opinion on the subject. He took part in the conversation that was
continued in the street, as they all three walked to the buildings of
the old university.

The meeting had already begun. Round the cloth-covered table, at which
Katavasov and Metrov seated themselves, there were some half-dozen
persons, and one of these was bending close over a manuscript, reading
something aloud. Levin sat down in one of the empty chairs that were
standing round the table, and in a whisper asked a student sitting near
what was being read. The student, eyeing Levin with displeasure, said:

"Biography."

Though Levin was not interested in the biography, he could not help
listening, and learned some new and interesting facts about the life of
the distinguished man of science.

When the reader had finished, the chairman thanked him and read some
verses of the poet Ment sent him on the jubilee, and said a few words by
way of thanks to the poet. Then Katavasov in his loud, ringing voice
read his address on the scientific labors of the man whose jubilee was
being kept.

When Katavasov had finished, Levin looked at his watch, saw it was past
one, and thought that there would not be time before the concert to read
Metrov his book, and indeed, he did not now care to do so. During the
reading he had thought over their conversation. He saw distinctly now
that though Metrov’s ideas might perhaps have value, his own ideas had a
value too, and their ideas could only be made clear and lead to
something if each worked separately in his chosen path, and that nothing
would be gained by putting their ideas together. And having made up his
mind to refuse Metrov’s invitation, Levin went up to him at the end of
the meeting. Metrov introduced Levin to the chairman, with whom he was
talking of the political news. Metrov told the chairman what he had
already told Levin, and Levin made the same remarks on his news that he
had already made that morning, but for the sake of variety he expressed
also a new opinion which had only just struck him. After that the
conversation turned again on the university question. As Levin had
already heard it all, he made haste to tell Metrov that he was sorry he
could not take advantage of his invitation, took leave, and drove to
Lvov’s.



Chapter 


Lvov, the husband of Natalia, Kitty’s sister, had spent all his life in
foreign capitals, where he had been educated, and had been in the
diplomatic service.

During the previous year he had left the diplomatic service, not owing
to any "unpleasantness" (he never had any "unpleasantness" with anyone),
and was transferred to the department of the court of the palace in
Moscow, in order to give his two boys the best education possible.

In spite of the striking contrast in their habits and views and the fact
that Lvov was older than Levin, they had seen a great deal of one
another that winter, and had taken a great liking to each other.

Lvov was at home, and Levin went in to him unannounced.

Lvov, in a house coat with a belt and in chamois leather shoes, was
sitting in an armchair, and with a pince-nez with blue glasses he was
reading a book that stood on a reading desk, while in his beautiful hand
he held a half-burned cigarette daintily away from him.

His handsome, delicate, and still youthful-looking face, to which his
curly, glistening silvery hair gave a still more aristocratic air,
lighted up with a smile when he saw Levin.

"Capital! I was meaning to send to you. How’s Kitty? Sit here, it’s more
comfortable." He got up and pushed up a rocking chair. "Have you read
the last circular in the _Journal de St. Petersbourg?_ I think it’s
excellent," he said, with a slight French accent.
