answered, scowling.

"I’m only saying what everyone’s saying."

Vronsky made no reply, and saying a few words to Princess Sorokina, he
went away. At the door he met his brother.

"Ah, Alexey!" said his brother. "How disgusting! Idiot of a woman,
nothing else.... I wanted to go straight to her. Let’s go together."

Vronsky did not hear him. With rapid steps he went downstairs; he felt
that he must do something, but he did not know what. Anger with her for
having put herself and him in such a false position, together with pity
for her suffering, filled his heart. He went down, and made straight for
Anna’s box. At her box stood Stremov, talking to her.

"There are no more tenors. _Le moule en est brisé!_"

Vronsky bowed to her and stopped to greet Stremov.

"You came in late, I think, and have missed the best song," Anna said to
Vronsky, glancing ironically, he thought, at him.

"I am a poor judge of music," he said, looking sternly at her.

"Like Prince Yashvin," she said smiling, "who considers that Patti sings
too loud."

"Thank you," she said, her little hand in its long glove taking the
playbill Vronsky picked up, and suddenly at that instant her lovely face
quivered. She got up and went into the interior of the box.

Noticing in the next act that her box was empty, Vronsky, rousing
indignant "hushes" in the silent audience, went out in the middle of a
solo and drove home.

Anna was already at home. When Vronsky went up to her, she was in the
same dress as she had worn at the theater. She was sitting in the first
armchair against the wall, looking straight before her. She looked at
him, and at once resumed her former position.

"Anna," he said.

"You, you are to blame for everything!" she cried, with tears of despair
and hatred in her voice, getting up.

"I begged, I implored you not to go, I knew it would be unpleasant...."

"Unpleasant!" she cried—"hideous! As long as I live I shall never forget
it. She said it was a disgrace to sit beside me."

"A silly woman’s chatter," he said: "but why risk it, why provoke?..."

"I hate your calm. You ought not to have brought me to this. If you had
loved me..."

"Anna! How does the question of my love come in?"

"Oh, if you loved me, as I love, if you were tortured as I am!..." she
said, looking at him with an expression of terror.

He was sorry for her, and angry notwithstanding. He assured her of his
love because he saw that this was the only means of soothing her, and he
did not reproach her in words, but in his heart he reproached her.

And the asseverations of his love, which seemed to him so vulgar that he
was ashamed to utter them, she drank in eagerly, and gradually became
calmer. The next day, completely reconciled, they left for the country.




PART SIX



Chapter 


Darya Alexandrovna spent the summer with her children at Pokrovskoe, at
her sister Kitty Levin’s. The house on her own estate was quite in
ruins, and Levin and his wife had persuaded her to spend the summer with
them. Stepan Arkadyevitch greatly approved of the arrangement. He said
he was very sorry his official duties prevented him from spending the
summer in the country with his family, which would have been the
greatest happiness for him; and remaining in Moscow, he came down to the
country from time to time for a day or two. Besides the Oblonskys, with
all their children and their governess, the old princess too came to
stay that summer with the Levins, as she considered it her duty to watch
over her inexperienced daughter in her _interesting condition_.
Moreover, Varenka, Kitty’s friend abroad, kept her promise to come to
Kitty when she was married, and stayed with her friend. All of these
were friends or relations of Levin’s wife. And though he liked them all,
he rather regretted his own Levin world and ways, which was smothered by
this influx of the "Shtcherbatsky element," as he called it to himself.
Of his own relations there stayed with him only Sergey Ivanovitch, but
he too was a man of the Koznishev and not the Levin stamp, so that the
Levin spirit was utterly obliterated.

In the Levins’ house, so long deserted, there were now so many people
that almost all the rooms were occupied, and almost every day it
happened that the old princess, sitting down to table, counted them all
over, and put the thirteenth grandson or granddaughter at a separate
table. And Kitty, with her careful housekeeping, had no little trouble
to get all the chickens, turkeys, and geese, of which so many were
needed to satisfy the summer appetites of the visitors and children.

The whole family were sitting at dinner. Dolly’s children, with their
governess and Varenka, were making plans for going to look for
mushrooms. Sergey Ivanovitch, who was looked up to by all the party for
his intellect and learning, with a respect that almost amounted to awe,
surprised everyone by joining in the conversation about mushrooms.

"Take me with you. I am very fond of picking mushrooms," he said,
looking at Varenka; "I think it’s a very nice occupation."

"Oh, we shall be delighted," answered Varenka, coloring a little. Kitty
exchanged meaningful glances with Dolly. The proposal of the learned and
intellectual Sergey Ivanovitch to go looking for mushrooms with Varenka
confirmed certain theories of Kitty’s with which her mind had been very
busy of late. She made haste to address some remark to her mother, so
that her look should not be noticed. After dinner Sergey Ivanovitch sat
with his cup of coffee at the drawing-room window, and while he took
part in a conversation he had begun with his brother, he watched the
door through which the children would start on the mushroom-picking
expedition. Levin was sitting in the window near his brother.

Kitty stood beside her husband, evidently awaiting the end of a
conversation that had no interest for her, in order to tell him
something.

"You have changed in many respects since your marriage, and for the
better," said Sergey Ivanovitch, smiling to Kitty, and obviously little
interested in the conversation, "but you have remained true to your
passion for defending the most paradoxical theories."

"Katya, it’s not good for you to stand," her husband said to her,
putting a chair for her and looking significantly at her.

"Oh, and there’s no time either," added Sergey Ivanovitch, seeing the
children running out.

At the head of them all Tanya galloped sideways, in her tightly-drawn
stockings, and waving a basket and Sergey Ivanovitch’s hat, she ran
straight up to him.

Boldly running up to Sergey Ivanovitch with shining eyes, so like her
father’s fine eyes, she handed him his hat and made as though she would
put it on for him, softening her freedom by a shy and friendly smile.

