Kitty saw something was wrong with her husband. She tried to seize a
moment to speak to him alone, but he made haste to get away from her,
saying he was wanted at the counting-house. It was long since his own
work on the estate had seemed to him so important as at that moment.
"It’s all holiday for them," he thought; "but these are no holiday
matters, they won’t wait, and there’s no living without them."



Chapter 


Levin came back to the house only when they sent to summon him to
supper. On the stairs were standing Kitty and Agafea Mihalovna,
consulting about wines for supper.

"But why are you making all this fuss? Have what we usually do."

"No, Stiva doesn’t drink ... Kostya, stop, what’s the matter?" Kitty
began, hurrying after him, but he strode ruthlessly away to the dining
room without waiting for her, and at once joined in the lively general
conversation which was being maintained there by Vassenka Veslovsky and
Stepan Arkadyevitch.

"Well, what do you say, are we going shooting tomorrow?" said Stepan
Arkadyevitch.

"Please, do let’s go," said Veslovsky, moving to another chair, where he
sat down sideways, with one fat leg crossed under him.

"I shall be delighted, we will go. And have you had any shooting yet
this year?" said Levin to Veslovsky, looking intently at his leg, but
speaking with that forced amiability that Kitty knew so well in him, and
that was so out of keeping with him. "I can’t answer for our finding
grouse, but there are plenty of snipe. Only we ought to start early.
You’re not tired? Aren’t you tired, Stiva?"

"Me tired? I’ve never been tired yet. Suppose we stay up all night.
Let’s go for a walk!"

"Yes, really, let’s not go to bed at all! Capital!" Veslovsky chimed in.

"Oh, we all know you can do without sleep, and keep other people up
too," Dolly said to her husband, with that faint note of irony in her
voice which she almost always had now with her husband. "But to my
thinking, it’s time for bed now.... I’m going, I don’t want supper."

"No, do stay a little, Dolly," said Stepan Arkadyevitch, going round to
her side behind the table where they were having supper. "I’ve so much
still to tell you."

"Nothing really, I suppose."

"Do you know Veslovsky has been at Anna’s, and he’s going to them again?
You know they’re hardly fifty miles from you, and I too must certainly
go over there. Veslovsky, come here!"

Vassenka crossed over to the ladies, and sat down beside Kitty.

"Ah, do tell me, please; you have stayed with her? How was she?" Darya
Alexandrovna appealed to him.

Levin was left at the other end of the table, and though never pausing
in his conversation with the princess and Varenka, he saw that there was
an eager and mysterious conversation going on between Stepan
Arkadyevitch, Dolly, Kitty, and Veslovsky. And that was not all. He saw
on his wife’s face an expression of real feeling as she gazed with fixed
eyes on the handsome face of Vassenka, who was telling them something
with great animation.

"It’s exceedingly nice at their place," Veslovsky was telling them about
Vronsky and Anna. "I can’t, of course, take it upon myself to judge, but
in their house you feel the real feeling of home."

"What do they intend doing?"

"I believe they think of going to Moscow."

"How jolly it would be for us all to go over to them together! When are
you going there?" Stepan Arkadyevitch asked Vassenka.

"I’m spending July there."

"Will you go?" Stepan Arkadyevitch said to his wife.

"I’ve been wanting to a long while; I shall certainly go," said Dolly.
"I am sorry for her, and I know her. She’s a splendid woman. I will go
alone, when you go back, and then I shall be in no one’s way. And it
will be better indeed without you."

"To be sure," said Stepan Arkadyevitch. "And you, Kitty?"

"I? Why should I go?" Kitty said, flushing all over, and she glanced
round at her husband.

"Do you know Anna Arkadyevna, then?" Veslovsky asked her. "She’s a very
fascinating woman."

"Yes," she answered Veslovsky, crimsoning still more. She got up and
walked across to her husband.

"Are you going shooting, then, tomorrow?" she said.

His jealousy had in these few moments, especially at the flush that had
overspread her cheeks while she was talking to Veslovsky, gone far
indeed. Now as he heard her words, he construed them in his own fashion.
Strange as it was to him afterwards to recall it, it seemed to him at
the moment clear that in asking whether he was going shooting, all she
cared to know was whether he would give that pleasure to Vassenka
Veslovsky, with whom, as he fancied, she was in love.

"Yes, I’m going," he answered her in an unnatural voice, disagreeable to
himself.

"No, better spend the day here tomorrow, or Dolly won’t see anything of
her husband, and set off the day after," said Kitty.

The motive of Kitty’s words was interpreted by Levin thus: "Don’t
separate me from _him_. I don’t care about _your_ going, but do let me
enjoy the society of this delightful young man."

"Oh, if you wish, we’ll stay here tomorrow," Levin answered, with
peculiar amiability.

Vassenka meanwhile, utterly unsuspecting the misery his presence had
occasioned, got up from the table after Kitty, and watching her with
smiling and admiring eyes, he followed her.

Levin saw that look. He turned white, and for a minute he could hardly
breathe. "How dare he look at my wife like that!" was the feeling that
boiled within him.

"Tomorrow, then? Do, please, let us go," said Vassenka, sitting down on
a chair, and again crossing his leg as his habit was.

Levin’s jealousy went further still. Already he saw himself a deceived
husband, looked upon by his wife and her lover as simply necessary to
provide them with the conveniences and pleasures of life.... But in
spite of that he made polite and hospitable inquiries of Vassenka about
his shooting, his gun, and his boots, and agreed to go shooting next
day.

Happily for Levin, the old princess cut short his agonies by getting up
herself and advising Kitty to go to bed. But even at this point Levin
could not escape another agony. As he said good-night to his hostess,
Vassenka would again have kissed her hand, but Kitty, reddening, drew
back her hand and said with a naïve bluntness, for which the old
princess scolded her afterwards:

"We don’t like that fashion."
