sufferings of their brethren and have spoken."

"Perhaps so," said Levin evasively; "but I don’t see it. I’m one of the
people myself, and I don’t feel it."

"Here am I too," said the old prince. "I’ve been staying abroad and
reading the papers, and I must own, up to the time of the Bulgarian
atrocities, I couldn’t make out why it was all the Russians were all of
a sudden so fond of their Slavonic brethren, while I didn’t feel the
slightest affection for them. I was very much upset, thought I was a
monster, or that it was the influence of Carlsbad on me. But since I
have been here, my mind’s been set at rest. I see that there are people
besides me who’re only interested in Russia, and not in their Slavonic
brethren. Here’s Konstantin too."

"Personal opinions mean nothing in such a case," said Sergey Ivanovitch;
"it’s not a matter of personal opinions when all Russia—the whole
people—has expressed its will."

"But excuse me, I don’t see that. The people don’t know anything about
it, if you come to that," said the old prince.

"Oh, papa!... how can you say that? And last Sunday in church?" said
Dolly, listening to the conversation. "Please give me a cloth," she said
to the old man, who was looking at the children with a smile. "Why, it’s
not possible that all..."

"But what was it in church on Sunday? The priest had been told to read
that. He read it. They didn’t understand a word of it. Then they were
told that there was to be a collection for a pious object in church;
well, they pulled out their halfpence and gave them, but what for they
couldn’t say."

"The people cannot help knowing; the sense of their own destinies is
always in the people, and at such moments as the present that sense
finds utterance," said Sergey Ivanovitch with conviction, glancing at
the old bee-keeper.

The handsome old man, with black grizzled beard and thick silvery hair,
stood motionless, holding a cup of honey, looking down from the height
of his tall figure with friendly serenity at the gentlefolk, obviously
understanding nothing of their conversation and not caring to understand
it.

"That’s so, no doubt," he said, with a significant shake of his head at
Sergey Ivanovitch’s words.

"Here, then, ask him. He knows nothing about it and thinks nothing,"
said Levin. "Have you heard about the war, Mihalitch?" he said, turning
to him. "What they read in the church? What do you think about it? Ought
we to fight for the Christians?"

"What should we think? Alexander Nikolaevitch our Emperor has thought
for us; he thinks for us indeed in all things. It’s clearer for him to
see. Shall I bring a bit more bread? Give the little lad some more?" he
said addressing Darya Alexandrovna and pointing to Grisha, who had
finished his crust.

"I don’t need to ask," said Sergey Ivanovitch, "we have seen and are
seeing hundreds and hundreds of people who give up everything to serve a
just cause, come from every part of Russia, and directly and clearly
express their thought and aim. They bring their halfpence or go
themselves and say directly what for. What does it mean?"

"It means, to my thinking," said Levin, who was beginning to get warm,
"that among eighty millions of people there can always be found not
hundreds, as now, but tens of thousands of people who have lost caste,
ne’er-do-wells, who are always ready to go anywhere—to Pogatchev’s
bands, to Khiva, to Serbia..."

"I tell you that it’s not a case of hundreds or of ne’er-do-wells, but
the best representatives of the people!" said Sergey Ivanovitch, with as
much irritation as if he were defending the last penny of his fortune.
"And what of the subscriptions? In this case it is a whole people
directly expressing their will."

"That word ‘people’ is so vague," said Levin. "Parish clerks, teachers,
and one in a thousand of the peasants, maybe, know what it’s all about.
The rest of the eighty millions, like Mihalitch, far from expressing
their will, haven’t the faintest idea what there is for them to express
their will about. What right have we to say that this is the people’s
will?"



Chapter 


Sergey Ivanovitch, being practiced in argument, did not reply, but at
once turned the conversation to another aspect of the subject.

"Oh, if you want to learn the spirit of the people by arithmetical
computation, of course it’s very difficult to arrive at it. And voting
has not been introduced among us and cannot be introduced, for it does
not express the will of the people; but there are other ways of reaching
that. It is felt in the air, it is felt by the heart. I won’t speak of
those deep currents which are astir in the still ocean of the people,
and which are evident to every unprejudiced man; let us look at society
in the narrow sense. All the most diverse sections of the educated
public, hostile before, are merged in one. Every division is at an end,
all the public organs say the same thing over and over again, all feel
the mighty torrent that has overtaken them and is carrying them in one
direction."

"Yes, all the newspapers do say the same thing," said the prince.
"That’s true. But so it is the same thing that all the frogs croak
before a storm. One can hear nothing for them."

"Frogs or no frogs, I’m not the editor of a paper and I don’t want to
defend them; but I am speaking of the unanimity in the intellectual
world," said Sergey Ivanovitch, addressing his brother. Levin would have
answered, but the old prince interrupted him.

"Well, about that unanimity, that’s another thing, one may say," said
the prince. "There’s my son-in-law, Stepan Arkadyevitch, you know him.
He’s got a place now on the committee of a commission and something or
other, I don’t remember. Only there’s nothing to do in it—why, Dolly,
it’s no secret!—and a salary of eight thousand. You try asking him
whether his post is of use, he’ll prove to you that it’s most necessary.
And he’s a truthful man too, but there’s no refusing to believe in the
utility of eight thousand roubles."

"Yes, he asked me to give a message to Darya Alexandrovna about the
post," said Sergey Ivanovitch reluctantly, feeling the prince’s remark
to be ill-timed.

"So it is with the unanimity of the press. That’s been explained to me:
as soon as there’s war their incomes are doubled. How can they help
believing in the destinies of the people and the Slavonic races ... and
all that?"

"I don’t care for many of the papers, but that’s unjust," said Sergey
Ivanovitch.

"I would only make one condition," pursued the old prince. "Alphonse
Karr said a capital thing before the war with Prussia: ‘You consider war
to be inevitable? Very good. Let everyone who advocates war be enrolled
in a special regiment of advance-guards, for the front of every storm,
of every attack, to lead them all!’"

"A nice lot the editors would make!" said Katavasov, with a loud roar,
as he pictured the editors he knew in this picked legion.

"But they’d run," said Dolly, "they’d only be in the way."

"Oh, if they ran away, then we’d have grape-shot or Cossacks with whips
behind them," said the prince.

"But that’s a joke, and a poor one too, if you’ll excuse my saying so,
prince," said Sergey Ivanovitch.
