Vronsky at Princess Marya Borissovna’s. It was very hard for her to tell
him this, but still harder to go on speaking of the details of the
meeting, as he did not question her, but simply gazed at her with a
frown.

"I am very sorry you weren’t there," she said. "Not that you weren’t in
the room ... I couldn’t have been so natural in your presence ... I am
blushing now much more, much, much more," she said, blushing till the
tears came into her eyes. "But that you couldn’t see through a crack."

The truthful eyes told Levin that she was satisfied with herself, and in
spite of her blushing he was quickly reassured and began questioning
her, which was all she wanted. When he had heard everything, even to the
detail that for the first second she could not help flushing, but that
afterwards she was just as direct and as much at her ease as with any
chance acquaintance, Levin was quite happy again and said he was glad of
it, and would not now behave as stupidly as he had done at the election,
but would try the first time he met Vronsky to be as friendly as
possible.

"It’s so wretched to feel that there’s a man almost an enemy whom it’s
painful to meet," said Levin. "I’m very, very glad."



Chapter 


"Go, please, go then and call on the Bols," Kitty said to her husband,
when he came in to see her at eleven o’clock before going out. "I know
you are dining at the club; papa put down your name. But what are you
going to do in the morning?"

"I am only going to Katavasov," answered Levin.

"Why so early?"

"He promised to introduce me to Metrov. I wanted to talk to him about my
work. He’s a distinguished scientific man from Petersburg," said Levin.

"Yes; wasn’t it his article you were praising so? Well, and after that?"
said Kitty.

"I shall go to the court, perhaps, about my sister’s business."

"And the concert?" she queried.

"I shan’t go there all alone."

"No? do go; there are going to be some new things.... That interested
you so. I should certainly go."

"Well, anyway, I shall come home before dinner," he said, looking at his
watch.

"Put on your frock coat, so that you can go straight to call on Countess
Bola."

"But is it absolutely necessary?"

"Oh, absolutely! He has been to see us. Come, what is it? You go in, sit
down, talk for five minutes of the weather, get up and go away."

"Oh, you wouldn’t believe it! I’ve got so out of the way of all this
that it makes me feel positively ashamed. It’s such a horrible thing to
do! A complete outsider walks in, sits down, stays on with nothing to
do, wastes their time and worries himself, and walks away!"

Kitty laughed.

"Why, I suppose you used to pay calls before you were married, didn’t
you?"

"Yes, I did, but I always felt ashamed, and now I’m so out of the way of
it that, by Jove! I’d sooner go two days running without my dinner than
pay this call! One’s so ashamed! I feel all the while that they’re
annoyed, that they’re saying, ‘What has he come for?’"

"No, they won’t. I’ll answer for that," said Kitty, looking into his
face with a laugh. She took his hand. "Well, good-bye.... Do go,
please."

He was just going out after kissing his wife’s hand, when she stopped
him.

"Kostya, do you know I’ve only fifty roubles left?"

"Oh, all right, I’ll go to the bank and get some. How much?" he said,
with the expression of dissatisfaction she knew so well.

"No, wait a minute." She held his hand. "Let’s talk about it, it worries
me. I seem to spend nothing unnecessary, but money seems to fly away
simply. We don’t manage well, somehow."

"Oh, it’s all right," he said with a little cough, looking at her from
under his brows.

That cough she knew well. It was a sign of intense dissatisfaction, not
with her, but with himself. He certainly was displeased not at so much
money being spent, but at being reminded of what he, knowing something
was unsatisfactory, wanted to forget.

"I have told Sokolov to sell the wheat, and to borrow an advance on the
mill. We shall have money enough in any case."

"Yes, but I’m afraid that altogether..."

"Oh, it’s all right, all right," he repeated. "Well, good-bye, darling."

"No, I’m really sorry sometimes that I listened to mamma. How nice it
would have been in the country! As it is, I’m worrying you all, and
we’re wasting our money."

"Not at all, not at all. Not once since I’ve been married have I said
that things could have been better than they are...."

"Truly?" she said, looking into his eyes.

He had said it without thinking, simply to console her. But when he
glanced at her and saw those sweet truthful eyes fastened questioningly
on him, he repeated it with his whole heart. "I was positively
forgetting her," he thought. And he remembered what was before them, so
soon to come.

"Will it be soon? How do you feel?" he whispered, taking her two hands.

"I have so often thought so, that now I don’t think about it or know
anything about it."

"And you’re not frightened?"

She smiled contemptuously.

"Not the least little bit," she said.

"Well, if anything happens, I shall be at Katavasov’s."

"No, nothing will happen, and don’t think about it. I’m going for a walk
on the boulevard with papa. We’re going to see Dolly. I shall expect you
before dinner. Oh, yes! Do you know that Dolly’s position is becoming
utterly impossible? She’s in debt all round; she hasn’t a penny. We were
talking yesterday with mamma and Arseny" (this was her sister’s husband
Lvov), "and we determined to send you with him to talk to Stiva. It’s
really unbearable. One can’t speak to papa about it.... But if you and
he..."

"Why, what can we do?" said Levin.

"You’ll be at Arseny’s, anyway; talk to him, he will tell what we
decided."
