was carrying the child out into the garden, and immediately glancing
unnoticed at Vronsky. The handsome nurse, from whom Vronsky was painting
a head for his picture, was the one hidden grief in Anna’s life. He
painted with her as his model, admired her beauty and mediaevalism, and
Anna dared not confess to herself that she was afraid of becoming
jealous of this nurse, and was for that reason particularly gracious and
condescending both to her and her little son. Vronsky, too, glanced out
of the window and into Anna’s eyes, and, turning at once to
Golenishtchev, he said:

"Do you know this Mihailov?"

"I have met him. But he’s a queer fish, and quite without breeding. You
know, one of those uncouth new people one’s so often coming across
nowadays, one of those free-thinkers you know, who are reared _d’emblée_
in theories of atheism, scepticism, and materialism. In former days,"
said Golenishtchev, not observing, or not willing to observe, that both
Anna and Vronsky wanted to speak, "in former days the free-thinker was a
man who had been brought up in ideas of religion, law, and morality, and
only through conflict and struggle came to free-thought; but now there
has sprung up a new type of born free-thinkers who grow up without even
having heard of principles of morality or of religion, of the existence
of authorities, who grow up directly in ideas of negation in everything,
that is to say, savages. Well, he’s of that class. He’s the son, it
appears, of some Moscow butler, and has never had any sort of
bringing-up. When he got into the academy and made his reputation he
tried, as he’s no fool, to educate himself. And he turned to what seemed
to him the very source of culture—the magazines. In old times, you see,
a man who wanted to educate himself—a Frenchman, for instance—would have
set to work to study all the classics and theologians and tragedians and
historiaris and philosophers, and, you know, all the intellectual work
that came in his way. But in our day he goes straight for the literature
of negation, very quickly assimilates all the extracts of the science of
negation, and he’s ready. And that’s not all—twenty years ago he would
have found in that literature traces of conflict with authorities, with
the creeds of the ages; he would have perceived from this conflict that
there was something else; but now he comes at once upon a literature in
which the old creeds do not even furnish matter for discussion, but it
is stated baldly that there is nothing else—evolution, natural
selection, struggle for existence—and that’s all. In my article I’ve..."

"I tell you what," said Anna, who had for a long while been exchanging
wary glances with Vronsky, and knew that he was not in the least
interested in the education of this artist, but was simply absorbed by
the idea of assisting him, and ordering a portrait of him; "I tell you
what," she said, resolutely interrupting Golenishtchev, who was still
talking away, "let’s go and see him!"

Golenishtchev recovered his self-possession and readily agreed. But as
the artist lived in a remote suburb, it was decided to take the
carriage.

An hour later Anna, with Golenishtchev by her side and Vronsky on the
front seat of the carriage, facing them, drove up to a new ugly house in
the remote suburb. On learning from the porter’s wife, who came out to
them, that Mihailov saw visitors at his studio, but that at that moment
he was in his lodging only a couple of steps off, they sent her to him
with their cards, asking permission to see his picture.



Chapter 


The artist Mihailov was, as always, at work when the cards of Count
Vronsky and Golenishtchev were brought to him. In the morning he had
been working in his studio at his big picture. On getting home he flew
into a rage with his wife for not having managed to put off the
landlady, who had been asking for money.

"I’ve said it to you twenty times, don’t enter into details. You’re fool
enough at all times, and when you start explaining things in Italian
you’re a fool three times as foolish," he said after a long dispute.

"Don’t let it run so long; it’s not my fault. If I had the money..."

"Leave me in peace, for God’s sake!" Mihailov shrieked, with tears in
his voice, and, stopping his ears, he went off into his working room,
the other side of a partition wall, and closed the door after him.
"Idiotic woman!" he said to himself, sat down to the table, and, opening
a portfolio, he set to work at once with peculiar fervor at a sketch he
had begun.

Never did he work with such fervor and success as when things went ill
with him, and especially when he quarreled with his wife. "Oh! damn them
all!" he thought as he went on working. He was making a sketch for the
figure of a man in a violent rage. A sketch had been made before, but he
was dissatisfied with it. "No, that one was better ... where is it?" He
went back to his wife, and scowling, and not looking at her, asked his
eldest little girl, where was that piece of paper he had given them? The
paper with the discarded sketch on it was found, but it was dirty, and
spotted with candle-grease. Still, he took the sketch, laid it on his
table, and, moving a little away, screwing up his eyes, he fell to
gazing at it. All at once he smiled and gesticulated gleefully.

"That’s it! that’s it!" he said, and, at once picking up the pencil, he
began rapidly drawing. The spot of tallow had given the man a new pose.

He had sketched this new pose, when all at once he recalled the face of
a shopkeeper of whom he had bought cigars, a vigorous face with a
prominent chin, and he sketched this very face, this chin on to the
figure of the man. He laughed aloud with delight. The figure from a
lifeless imagined thing had become living, and such that it could never
be changed. That figure lived, and was clearly and unmistakably defined.
The sketch might be corrected in accordance with the requirements of the
figure, the legs, indeed, could and must be put differently, and the
position of the left hand must be quite altered; the hair too might be
thrown back. But in making these corrections he was not altering the
figure but simply getting rid of what concealed the figure. He was, as
it were, stripping off the wrappings which hindered it from being
distinctly seen. Each new feature only brought out the whole figure in
all its force and vigor, as it had suddenly come to him from the spot of
tallow. He was carefully finishing the figure when the cards were
brought him.

"Coming, coming!"

He went in to his wife.

"Come, Sasha, don’t be cross!" he said, smiling timidly and
affectionately at her. "You were to blame. I was to blame. I’ll make it
all right." And having made peace with his wife he put on an olive-green
overcoat with a velvet collar and a hat, and went towards his studio.
The successful figure he had already forgotten. Now he was delighted and
excited at the visit of these people of consequence, Russians, who had
come in their carriage.

Of his picture, the one that stood now on his easel, he had at the
bottom of his heart one conviction—that no one had ever painted a
picture like it. He did not believe that his picture was better than all
the pictures of Raphael, but he knew that what he tried to convey in
that picture, no one ever had conveyed. This he knew positively, and had
known a long while, ever since he had begun to paint it. But other
people’s criticisms, whatever they might be, had yet immense consequence
in his eyes, and they agitated him to the depths of his soul. Any
remark, the most insignificant, that showed that the critic saw even the
tiniest part of what he saw in the picture, agitated him to the depths
of his soul. He always attributed to his critics a more profound
comprehension than he had himself, and always expected from them
something he did not himself see in the picture. And often in their
criticisms he fancied that he had found this.

He walked rapidly to the door of his studio, and in spite of his
excitement he was struck by the soft light on Anna’s figure as she stood
in the shade of the entrance listening to Golenishtchev, who was eagerly
telling her something, while she evidently wanted to look round at the
artist. He was himself unconscious how, as he approached them, he seized
on this impression and absorbed it, as he had the chin of the shopkeeper
who had sold him the cigars, and put it away somewhere to be brought out
when he wanted it. The visitors, not agreeably impressed beforehand by
