"Oh, are presents wanted?" And he galloped to Foulde’s.

And at the confectioner’s, and at Fomin’s, and at Foulde’s he saw that
he was expected; that they were pleased to see him, and prided
themselves on his happiness, just as every one whom he had to do with
during those days. What was extraordinary was that everyone not only
liked him, but even people previously unsympathetic, cold, and callous,
were enthusiastic over him, gave way to him in everything, treated his
feeling with tenderness and delicacy, and shared his conviction that he
was the happiest man in the world because his betrothed was beyond
perfection. Kitty too felt the same thing. When Countess Nordston
ventured to hint that she had hoped for something better, Kitty was so
angry and proved so conclusively that nothing in the world could be
better than Levin, that Countess Nordston had to admit it, and in
Kitty’s presence never met Levin without a smile of ecstatic admiration.

The confession he had promised was the one painful incident of this
time. He consulted the old prince, and with his sanction gave Kitty his
diary, in which there was written the confession that tortured him. He
had written this diary at the time with a view to his future wife. Two
things caused him anguish: his lack of purity and his lack of faith. His
confession of unbelief passed unnoticed. She was religious, had never
doubted the truths of religion, but his external unbelief did not affect
her in the least. Through love she knew all his soul, and in his soul
she saw what she wanted, and that such a state of soul should be called
unbelieving was to her a matter of no account. The other confession set
her weeping bitterly.

Levin, not without an inner struggle, handed her his diary. He knew that
between him and her there could not be, and should not be, secrets, and
so he had decided that so it must be. But he had not realized what an
effect it would have on her, he had not put himself in her place. It was
only when the same evening he came to their house before the theater,
went into her room and saw her tear-stained, pitiful, sweet face,
miserable with suffering he had caused and nothing could undo, he felt
the abyss that separated his shameful past from her dovelike purity, and
was appalled at what he had done.

"Take them, take these dreadful books!" she said, pushing away the
notebooks lying before her on the table. "Why did you give them me? No,
it was better anyway," she added, touched by his despairing face. "But
it’s awful, awful!"

His head sank, and he was silent. He could say nothing.

"You can’t forgive me," he whispered.

"Yes, I forgive you; but it’s terrible!"

But his happiness was so immense that this confession did not shatter
it, it only added another shade to it. She forgave him; but from that
time more than ever he considered himself unworthy of her, morally bowed
down lower than ever before her, and prized more highly than ever his
undeserved happiness.



Chapter 


Unconsciously going over in his memory the conversations that had taken
place during and after dinner, Alexey Alexandrovitch returned to his
solitary room. Darya Alexandrovna’s words about forgiveness had aroused
in him nothing but annoyance. The applicability or non-applicability of
the Christian precept to his own case was too difficult a question to be
discussed lightly, and this question had long ago been answered by
Alexey Alexandrovitch in the negative. Of all that had been said, what
stuck most in his memory was the phrase of stupid, good-natured
Turovtsin—"_Acted like a man, he did! Called him out and shot him!_"
Everyone had apparently shared this feeling, though from politeness they
had not expressed it.

"But the matter is settled, it’s useless thinking about it," Alexey
Alexandrovitch told himself. And thinking of nothing but the journey
before him, and the revision work he had to do, he went into his room
and asked the porter who escorted him where his man was. The porter said
that the man had only just gone out. Alexey Alexandrovitch ordered tea
to be sent him, sat down to the table, and taking the guidebook, began
considering the route of his journey.

"Two telegrams," said his manservant, coming into the room. "I beg your
pardon, your excellency; I’d only just that minute gone out."

Alexey Alexandrovitch took the telegrams and opened them. The first
telegram was the announcement of Stremov’s appointment to the very post
Karenin had coveted. Alexey Alexandrovitch flung the telegram down, and
flushing a little, got up and began to pace up and down the room. "_Quos
vult perdere dementat_," he said, meaning by _quos_ the persons
responsible for this appointment. He was not so much annoyed that he had
not received the post, that he had been conspicuously passed over; but
it was incomprehensible, amazing to him that they did not see that the
wordy phrase-monger Stremov was the last man fit for it. How could they
fail to see how they were ruining themselves, lowering their _prestige_
by this appointment?

"Something else in the same line," he said to himself bitterly, opening
the second telegram. The telegram was from his wife. Her name, written
in blue pencil, "Anna," was the first thing that caught his eye. "I am
dying; I beg, I implore you to come. I shall die easier with your
forgiveness," he read. He smiled contemptuously, and flung down the
telegram. That this was a trick and a fraud, of that, he thought for the
first minute, there could be no doubt.

"There is no deceit she would stick at. She was near her confinement.
Perhaps it is the confinement. But what can be their aim? To legitimize
the child, to compromise me, and prevent a divorce," he thought. "But
something was said in it: I am dying...." He read the telegram again,
and suddenly the plain meaning of what was said in it struck him.

"And if it is true?" he said to himself. "If it is true that in the
moment of agony and nearness to death she is genuinely penitent, and I,
taking it for a trick, refuse to go? That would not only be cruel, and
everyone would blame me, but it would be stupid on my part."

"Piotr, call a coach; I am going to Petersburg," he said to his servant.

Alexey Alexandrovitch decided that he would go to Petersburg and see his
wife. If her illness was a trick, he would say nothing and go away
again. If she was really in danger, and wished to see him before her
death, he would forgive her if he found her alive, and pay her the last
duties if he came too late.

All the way he thought no more of what he ought to do.

With a sense of weariness and uncleanness from the night spent in the
train, in the early fog of Petersburg Alexey Alexandrovitch drove
through the deserted Nevsky and stared straight before him, not thinking
of what was awaiting him. He could not think about it, because in
picturing what would happen, he could not drive away the reflection that
her death would at once remove all the difficulty of his position.
Bakers, closed shops, night-cabmen, porters sweeping the pavements
flashed past his eyes, and he watched it all, trying to smother the
thought of what was awaiting him, and what he dared not hope for, and
yet was hoping for. He drove up to the steps. A sledge and a carriage
with the coachman asleep stood at the entrance. As he went into the
entry, Alexey Alexandrovitch, as it were, got out his resolution from
the remotest corner of his brain, and mastered it thoroughly. Its
meaning ran: "If it’s a trick, then calm contempt and departure. If
truth, do what is proper."

The porter opened the door before Alexey Alexandrovitch rang. The
porter, Kapitonitch, looked queer in an old coat, without a tie, and in
slippers.

"How is your mistress?"

"A successful confinement yesterday."

Alexey Alexandrovitch stopped short and turned white. He felt distinctly
now how intensely he had longed for her death.
