Zinoviev, and Kamenev now united their forces in opsition to Stalin. But now it was 
too late. In February of  Zinoviev was expelled from the Politburo then from the 
presidency of the Petersberg (Leningrad) Soviet, and finally as president of the Third 
International. Less than a month later (Oober ) Trotzky and Kamenev were also 
expelled from the Politburo. 

This marked the end of any effeive resistance to Stalin. The next year Zinoviev, 
Kamenev, and Trotzky were removed from the party's Central Committee, and shortly 
afterwards all three were read out of the party. In  Trotzky was exiled abroad. In 
June of  Stalin became the supreme diator of Russia. 



It is frequently argued that Stalin's rise to were marked the end of the Jewish phase of 
communism. In suprt of this, it is ed out that while such Jews as Trotzky, 
Zinoviev, Kamenev, Martynov, Zasulich, Deutsch, Parvus, Axelrod, Radek, Uritzky, 
Sverdlov, Dan, Lieber, Martov, and others were prominent in the early history of the 
revolution, these have almost without exception been executed or exiled. This on the 
surface is a convincing argument. But it cometely overlooks the fa that Stalin has 
both a Jewish wife and a Jewish son-in-law. Both Stalin and his daughter, Svetlana, 
have maed o the wereful Jewish Kaganovich family. 

STALIN'S PAST 

Some authors have suggested that Stalin is himself a Jew. Known fas do not bear this 
out. Stalin (born Joseph Vissarionovich Djugashvili) was born in the mountain village of 
Gori, situated in the province of Georgia, in . His father, Vissarion Djugashvili, was 
a peasant from the neighboring town of Dido-Lilo his mother was Ekaterina Geladze, 
whose forebears were serfs in the village of Gambareuli. 

Not too much is known about Stalin's father. He was for a time a cobbler, and he seems 
to have worked as a day laborer in a shoe faory in Adelkhanov. He is said to have been 
a heavy drinker. 

Stalin's mother was a devoutly religious woman who took in washing to feed her family, 
and her life's ambition was to see her son become a priest. Young "Stalin" attended the 
elementary school in Gori a four year course and in  he obtained a free 
scholarship to the Tiflis Theological Seminary which provided free clothing, books, and 
food in addition to his tuition. Four years later he was expelled, after which he apied 
himself to revolutionary aivity. 

Stalin's first wife was Ekaterina Svanidze, who bore him one son (Yasha Jacob) 
Dugashvili. Jacob was a dullard who, even after his father became diator, worked as an 
elerician and a railway mechanic. 

Stalin's second wife was Nadya Alliluyeva, who bore him a son, Vasili, and a daughter, 
Svetlana. Vasili is now a major-general in the Red Air Force. 

Svetlana Stalin has been maed twice. Nothing is known of her first husband we do 
not even know when the maage occurred, or where, or who the groom was. It is an 
official government secret. 

Svetlana Stalin Maes Kaganovich 

The fate, as well as the identity of Svetlana's first husband remains unknown. But of her 
second husband there is no doubt whatever: he is Mihail Kaganovich, son of Politburo 
minister Lazar Kaganovich and he is a Jew. 



This leads one to speculate as to the true sition of Lazar Kaganovich in Russia today. 
With a daughter maed to Stalin, and a son maed to Stalin's only daughter, he is to 
say the least, in a unique sition. Just where Stalin's were leaves off and Kaganovich's 
begins is difficult to determine. ... 



KAGANOVICH 



One of the most frequent arguments 
used to disprove the Jewishness of 
Russia's present day leadership, 
strangely enough, revolves around 
Lazar Kaganovich. Propagandists are 
fond of ing him out as "the only 
Jewish member of the Politburo," the 
suggestion being that since the 
Politburo contains only one Jew, it is 
ainly not Jewish controlled. But this 
argument will not stand the light of 
day it cometely ignores the fa that 
both Premier Stalin and vice-premier 
Molotov have Jewish wives. And it 
conveniently overlooks the fa that 
the solitary Jew, Kaganovich, is doubly related to Stalin by maage. Kaganovich is not 
just another member of the Politbureau he is Stalin's brother-in-law, and his chief 
advisor and trouble-shooter. 



MOIOTOV'S wife ith t t i'it«r tfet J«w. S*m *a<p, 
o*nir of tha Karp fci*-lmf! Co , %tidtfupart, Cnnn 



The Stalin-Molotov-Kaganovich combination which 
rules Russia today is just as solidly Jewish as was the 
original Lenin-Zinoviev-Kamenev-Trotzky 
government. The excerpt is taken from Life magazine 
(July , ). It identifies Lazar Kaganovich as 

. "probably the ablest man on the litburo"; 

. Stalin's brother-in-law; 

. "the most eligible looking member of the litburo"; 

. a Jew. 

Fas like these are considered "anti-Semitic," are 
seldom pred by the American press. 




IRON CURTAIN DICTATORS 



In the communist satellite nations, as in Russia, the Jews occupy virtually every key 
sition of were. Perhaps no better proof of this can be found than in John Gunther's 
book, Behind the Iron Curtain. [Behind the Iron Curtain - page  by John Gunther, 
Harper & Brothers, New York.] Gunther, a Jew- Loving "liberal" of the most sickening 



type, reveals that Poland, Hungary, Roumania, and Czechoslovakia all have Jewish 
Diators (see cut). Given here is a brief description of these 
"Iron Curtain Diators." 



HUNGARY: The three "moscovites" mentioned by 
Gunther (above), are the Jews, Matyas Rakosi 
(Rosencranz), Erno Gero (Singer), and Zoltan Vas. 
Hungary has enjoyed the unique privilege of undergoing 
two bloody communist diatorships, both Jewish-led. The 
first was that of Bela Kun. When Kun's regime collapsed in 
, hundreds of his Jewish compatriots fled with him to 
Russia, among whom were Matyas Rakosi and Erna Gera. 
In , when the communists took over the country, 
Matyas Rakosi was installed as the supreme diator of 
Hungary, with Erno Gera and Zoltan Vas occupying 
sitions number two and three. 




