governing every phase of life: business, synagogue attendance, social morals, licing, 
prescriptions for dress, and a detailed regimentation of amusements ... The 
charaeristic common to the medieval Jewish community were: self imsed 
disciine, the considering of all religious, philanthropic, educational, and self defense 
problems as common concerns, and a strong sense of solidarity fortified by a uniform 
way of life." 

For ten centuries preceding the great eviions, in virtually every Christian nation of 
Europe (and in Mohammedan Spain, Africa, and Asia Minor) these Jews settled o 
these parasitic ghetto-communities and here they nurtured and maained a culture 
which was quite a thing apart from the culture of the European. When finally they were 
driven from Western Europe in the centuries preceding the Renaissance, we find them 
settling and establishing ghetto-communities in Poland and Russia which have lasted 
down to the present day. The Medieval ghetto did not disappear with the ending of the 
Dark Ages it was transferred, unimpaired, to Eastern Europe, where the majority of the 
world's Jews settled. 



The institution of the ghetto has enabled two basically different cultures and peoples to 
remain side by side one Asiatic and Judaic, the other European and Christian without 
becoming egrated. It is primarily for this reason that the Jew has remained an alien 
in spite of centuries of exsure to Christian civilization. And that is why the Spanish 
Jew remained a Jew first and a Spaniard second, and why the Polish Jew, the Russian 
Jew, and the German Jew, have given their first allegiance to Judah and rendered a sort 
of second-hand loyalty to the country of their abode. 

The Chazars 




The modern Jew is descended from a mixture of Asiatic peoples, largely Semitic in origin, but 
not Hebraic. This map is based on Britton's reproduion from Funk & Wagnall, itself based 
on Atlas de Geographie Historique by Schrader. Shading showed Roman Catholics, Greek 
Catholics, Mohammedans, Jews, and Pagans. I've indicated the boundaries, on the same map, 
of the Khazars, the Pale, and Russia; and emphasized where Ukraine is. The reangle 
corresnds to the maps of Poland, below. 

The modern Jew with his Yiddish culture and rapacious financial traditions should not 
be confused with the biblical Hebrews, who were mainly a pastoral people. The 
ernational Jew of modern times is indeed the bastardized produ of a bastardized 
past. He does not truly worship the Bible, but the Talmud; he does not speak Hebrew, 
but Yiddish; he is not descended from Israel, but from the scum of the eastern 
Mediterranean. This is vividly illustrated by H. G. Wells in his great Outline of History: 

"The Jewish idea was and is a curious combination of theological breadth and an 
ense racial patriotism. The Jews looked for a special saviour, a Messiah, who was to 



redeem mankind by the agreeable process of restoring the fabulous glories of David 
and Solomon, and bringing the whole world it last under the benevolent but firm 
Jewish heel. As the litical were of the peoples declined as Carthage followed Tyre 
o the darkness and Spain became a Roman province, this dream grew and spread. 
There can be little doubt that the scattered Phoenicians in Spain and Africa and 
throughout the Mediterranean, speaking as they did a language closely akin to 
Hebrew and being deprived of their authentic litical rights, became proselytes to 
Judaism. For phases of vigorous proselytism alternated with phases of exclusive 
jealousy in Jewish history. On one occasion the Idumeans, being conquered, were all 
forcibly made Jews. (Josephus). There were Arab tribes who were Jews in the time of 
Muhammad, and a Turkish people who were mainly Jews in South Russia in the nh 
century. Judaism is indeed the reconstrued litical ideal of many shattered 
peoples mainly Semitic. It is to the Phoenician contingent and to Aramean accessions 
in Babylon that the financial and commercial tradition of the Jews is to be ascribed. 
But as a result of these coalescences and assimilations, almost everywhere in the towns 
throughout the Roman Empire, and far beyond it in the east, Jewish communities 
traded and flourished, and were kept in touch through the Bible, and through a 
religious and educational organization. The main part of Jewry never was in Judea 
and had never come out of Judea. " 

[Outline of History page -, third edition, by H. G. Wells. Seion 'Christianity 
and Islam', with a footnote recommending the Cambridge Medieval History.] 

The "Turkish" people whom Wells mentions were the Chazars [Chazar=Khazar], who 
built an empire in south Russia in the th century A. D. This Chazar empire was 
infiltrated by large numbers of Byzantine Jews. By process of ermaage and 
conversion these Chazars became identified as Jews and in all Jewish histories and 
encyclopedias the words "Chazar" and "Jew" are used erchangeably. In the tenth 
century a succession of invasions destroyed the Chazar empire and large numbers of 
these Chazar-Jews settled in the area of what is now Poland. Others found their way to 
western Europe and Spain, where they mingled with the already bastardized 
conglomeration of European Jewry. 



Poland's Fate 




These Jews we find settling in Poland in the early th century came there at the 
invitation of Casimir I, who seems to have been under strong Jewish influence. As early 
as the th century the Jews (chiefly of Khazar origin) were influential in Poland, and by 
the th century they were well enough entrenched to monolize the coinage of 
Poland's money. Says the Jewish Encyclopedia: [Funk & Wagnall's Jewish 
Encyclopedia, page , vol. ] 

"Coins unearthed in  in the Great Polish village ofGlenbok show conclusively that 
in the reigns of Mieczyslauw III (-), Casimir, andLeshek (-), the 
Jews were, as stated above, in charge of the coinage of Great and Little Poland. " 

It is eresting to note that these coins bore Jewish as well as Polish inscriptions. 

The history of Poland for the next  centuries revolves around the struggle for 
supremacy between the native Polish people and the Jews. During the greater part of 
that time Poland was more or less dominated by the Jews a situation most beneficial to 
all, according to Jewish history books. But when, as occasionally happened, there was a 
lapse in Jewish fortunes, these same histories are reete with accounts of gentile cruelty 
and bestiality to the chosen race. And because these laments have been repeated often 
enough and loudly enough there is a widely held belief that Poland has been a land of 
oppression for Jewry ... 



It has been the unhappy fate of Poland to be saddled for the greater part of its history 
with a large prortion of the world's Jewish pulation. This, more than anything else, 
accounts for the tragic disunity which has kept Poland from taking its ace among the 
great nations of the earth. 

In  (third partition) Poland was divided between Prussia and Russia and thus 
ceased to exist as a nation. Russia thus fell heir to a full fledged Jewish problem. 

Russia 

The third partition of Poland was an event of paramount significance in Russian history 
because as a by-produ of the partition she acquired the world's largest Jewish 
pulation. From this moment on Russia's history became hopelessly ertwined with 
the Jewish problem, and eventually, as we shall relate, the Jews brought about the 
downfall of Imperial Russia. 

No one can ssibly understand the nature of present day communism, nor of Zionism, 
without some knowledge of the situation existing in Russia in the century preceding the 
Oober revolution of . We have already noted the presence of Khazar Jews in 
Poland in the th century, and these same Khazar Jews are to be found in Russia from 
that time on. But whereas Poland had invited the evied Jews of western Europe to 
settle in vast numbers within its boundaries in the th, th, and th centuries, the 
Imperial Russian government had permitted no such immigrations, and had in fa 
sealed its borders to them. As would be expeed, therefore, the Imperial government 
was something less than enthusiastic over this sudden acquisition of Poland's teeming 
masses of Jews. 



Pale of Settlement 




The Pale of Settlement extended from the Crimea to the Baltic Sea, encompassing an area half 
