Settlement. By March, , a breakdown in the Russian transrtation system resulted 
in a severe food shortage in the city. At the same time, many of the city's faories began 
shutting down due to material shortages. Both of these faors were extremely 
imrtant in the days immediately ahead. 

The desperate food shortage affeed virtually every family in the city. Furthermore, the 
enforced idleness of the working pulation due to faory shutdowns threw vast 
numbers of workmen onto the streets. Given here is a day by day account of the events 
which resulted in the overthrow of the Tsar and the establishment of the Provisional 
Government: 

March th: It was evident by this time even to foreign visitors that trouble was 
brewing. Bread lines were growing day by day, and faory workmen began to appear on 
the streets in large numbers. During the day the lice began mounting machine guns in 
strategic aces throughout the city. 

March th: The government brought a large number of Cossack troops o the city in 
anticipation of trouble. Revolution was now freely predied, and many of the shops in 
expeation of this began boarding up windows. The few remaining faories were closed 
by strikes and the lice mounted more machine guns. The Tsar, who was visiting the 
troops at the front, still had not returned to the city. The Duma remained in session. 

March th: Crowds of women began a series of street demonstrations in protest over 
the bread shortage. Agitators, many of whom were veterans of the  revolution, 
began to take charge and organize diversionary demonstrations. Here and there the 



crowds sang the "Marseillaise" regarded in Russia as a revolutionary song. A number 
of red flags appeared. At the corner of Nevsky Prospekt and the Catherine Canal 
mounted lice, aided by Cossack cavalry, dispersed the crowds. There were no 
casualties. Significantly, however, the crowds had raised the red flag of revolution 
without being fired on. 

March th: The Nevsky from Catherine Canal to Nicolai Station was jammed from 
early morning with crowds, which were larger and bolder than on the preceding day. 
Streetcars were no longer running. The Cossack cavalry, under orders to keep the 
Nevsky clear of demonstrators, repeatedly charged the mobs, and a few people were 
tramed. But it was observed that the cavalrymen used only the flats of their sabers, 
and at no time used fire arms. This encouraged the mob, which held the Cossacks in 
dread. Meanwhile, agitators were constantly at work. 

March th: During the afternoon huge crowds colleed around Nicholai [sic] 
Station. An American photographer, Donald Thompson, has described in vivid fashion 
the scene there [Donald Thompson in Russia, page , by Donald Thompson, Century 
Co.. New York, ]: 

"About two o'clock a man richly dressed in furs came up to the square in a sleigh and 
ordered his driver to go through the crowd, which by this time was in a very ugly 
mood, although it seemed to be inclined to make way for him. He was impatient and 
probably cold and started an argument. All Russians must have their argument. Well, 
he misjudged this crowd, and also misjudged the condition in Petrograd. I was within 
 feet of this scene. He was dragged out of his sleigh and beaten. He took refuge in a 
stalled street car where he was followed by the workingmen. One of them took a small 
iron bar and beat his head to a pulp. This seemed to give the mob a taste for blood. 
Immediately I was pushed along in front of the crowd which surged down the Nevsky 
and began smashing windows and creating general disorder. Many of the men caed 
red flags on sticks. The shops along the Nevsky, or most of them, are proteed by 
heavy iron shutters. Those that were not had their windows smashed. I noticed about 
this time that ambulances were coming and going on the side streets. There were 
usually three or four people lying in each one." 

The disorder now became general. The mobs turned their fury on the lice, who 
bacaded themselves for a desperate last stand in the lice stations. There they were 
slaughtered almost to the last man, and the prisons were emptied of their entire 
pulations, including desperate criminals of every category. 

March th: Widespread rioting continued on the th. Added to the terror of 
revolution were the degradations of the recently liberated criminal pulation. During 
the day the Duma sent the following urgent message to the Tsar, now entrained for 
Petersberg: 

"The situation is serious. There is anarchy in the capital. The government is paralyzed. 
The situation as regards transrtation, and supies, and fuel has reached a state of 
comete disorganization. Police dissatisfaion is growing. Disorderly shooting is 



taking ace in the streets. Different seions of the troops are shooting at each other. It 
is necessary immediately to entrust a person who has the confidence of the country 
with the creation of a new government." 

The Tsar's reaion was tragically out of keeping with the reality of the situation. It is 
doubtful that he even had an inkling of what was really transpiring. His reaion was to 
command the dissolution of the Duma. The overwhelming majority of the Duma's 
membership, loyal to the Tsar obeyed his command, with the result that the last 
vestige of governmental authority ceased to exist in the capital. 

March th: The president of the dissolved Duma sent this last despairing message to 
the Tsar: "The situation is becoming worse. Immediate means must be taken, for 
tomorrow it will be too late. The last hour has struck and the fate of the fatherland and 
the dynasty is being decided." Tsar Nicholas II may never have received the message: in 
any event he did not rey. And indeed, the hour was late. . . 

At : A.M. on the morning of the th one of the regiments (the Volynski) revolted, 
killing its officers. By  A.M. six regiments had revolted. At : A.M. the gason of 
the Peter and Paul fortress surrendered and joined the revolution. The only seion of 
the city which now remained under governmental control was the War Office, the 
Admiralty Building, and St. Isaac's Cathedral. The revolution was now an accomished 
fa. Four days later, on the th, the Tsar, whose train never reached Petersberg, 
abdicated. The closing words of his written abdication announcement were: "May God 
have mercy on Russia". And before a year had passed, these words had been echoed 
many, many times ... 

The th of March marked the formation of two governing bodies which were to joly 
rule Russia for the next  months. The first of these was the Provisional Committee of 
the Duma, consisting of  members headed by Prince Lvow. This group served as the 
Provisional Government until overthrown in Oober by the Bolsheviks. At all times, 
however, it governed by the sufferance of the Petersberg Soviet, which was the second 
body organized on the th. 

This Petersberg Soviet was in reality dominated by the Menshevik and Bolshevik 
faions of the Russian Social Democratic Labor Party, of whom the Mensheviks were by 
far the most wereful. A second party, the Social Revolutionary Party, was a minority 
party. 

Eventually, as we shall see, the Bolshevik faion gained control over the Petersberg 
Soviet, and having done so, at once precipitated the Oober Revolution and established 
the regime which is still in were. To better understand these events, it is necessary that 
we trace the history of these Mensheviks and Bolsheviks and their Russian Social 
Democratic Labor Party. 



HISTORY OF BOLSHEVISM 



We must for the moment turn our attention to a group of revolutionary exiles who are 
imrtant to this story because they and their discies eventually became the rulers of 
Communist Russia. Head of this group, and the man who is generally recognized as 
Lenin's teacher, was George Plekhanov, a gentile. 

Plekhanov had fled Russia in the s and settled in Switzerland. There with the aid of 
Vera Zasulich, Leo Deutch, and P. Axelrod all Jews he had formed the Marxist 
"Group for the Emancipation of Labor", and until  was recognized as the leader of 
the group. 

Although Plekanov was himself a gentile, those around him were, with a few exceptions, 
Jewish. One of the exceptions was Lenin, who first became a discie of Plekanov, and 
later a competitor. 

Lenin 

Lenin (real name Vladimir Ilyich Ulyanov) was born on the banks of the Volga in the 
provincial city of Simbirsk, in . He was born to a station of comparative privilege, 
being the son of a government official whose title of "Aual State Counselor" caed 
with it the privilege of hereditary nobility. Lenin's father did not himself inherit the title, 
but acquired it as a reward of service as a school supervisor. 

