as great as western Europe. By , seven million Jews resided there, comprising perhaps 
half the world's total Jewish pulation. It was within the Pale of Settlement that the twin 
philosophies of Communism and Zionism flourished. Both movements grew out of Jewish 
hatred of Christian civilization (persecutor of the "chosen race"), and both movements have 
spread wherever Jews have emigrated. The Pale of Settlement has been the reservoir from 
which the world-wide forces of communism have flowed. It is worth noting that half of the 
world's Jewish pulation now resides in the U.S., and that all but a handful of these are from 
the Pale, or are descendants of emigrants from the Pale. 

From the very beginning the Tsarist government imsed a set of restriions designed 
to prote Russia's economy and culture from the inroads of the Jew. It was decreed (in 
) that Jews could settle in Greater Russia, but only in certain areas. Within this 
"Pale of Settlement" Jews were more or less free to condu their affairs as they eased. 
But travel or residence beyond the Pale was rigidly restried, so that in  (date of 
Russia's st census) .% of Russia's Jewish pulation lived within its boundaries, 
and only % of the total resided in other parts of the Empire. To prevent smuggling, no 
Jew was permitted to reside within  versts of the border. 

From the stand of Jewish history, the Pale of Settlement ranks as one of the most 
significant faors of modern times. Here within, a single and contiguous area the 
greater part of Jewry had gathered, and was to remain, for something like  years. For 
the first time Jewry was subjeed to a common environment and a common ground of 
experience. Out of this common experience and environment there evolved the Yiddish 
speaking Jew of the th century. Here too were born the great movements of Zionism 
and Communism. 



The Kahal 



We have already remarked un the habit of Jewry from ancient times of establishing 
and maaining their own tribal community (kahal) within the framework of Christian 
society. We have noted also that as the Jew was driven from Western Europe, he 
brought with him to Poland this ancient custom. The Kahal was an established 
institution in Poland, and as the Jews settled within the Pale they set up these 
autonomous communities here too. 

At first the Imperial government recognized the autonomous Kahal organization 
permitting them to raise taxes and set up courts of law, where only Jewish litigants were 
concerned. In addition to the individual communities, there were distri Kahal 
organizations which at first were permitted to assess local Jewish communities with 
taxes. In  these privileges were drastically curtailed and Jews were there after 
obliged to appear before ordinary courts of law and the Kahal organization was 
restried to matters of religious and social nature. Although Jewish propagandists have 
comained long and loudly of being oppressed by the Imperial government, it is a fa 
that up until  they prospered beyond all expeation. Jewry settled in the Russian 
economy like a swarm of locusts in a field of new corn. Very quickly they achieved a 
monoly over Russia's liquor, tobacco, and retail industries. Later they dominated the 
professions as well. Under the reign of Alexander I many of the restriions against 
residence beyond the Pale of Settlement were relaxed, especially for the artisan and 
professional classes. A determined effort was made to establish Jews in agriculture and 
the government encouraged at every oprtunity the assimilation of Jews o Russian 
national life. 

Nicholas I 

Alexander's successor, Nicholas I, was less inclined to favor Jewry, and in fa viewed 
their inroads o the Russian economy with alarm. He was much hated by the Jews. 
Prior to his reign, Alexander I had allowed any male Jew the privilege of escaping 
compulsory military duty by paying a special draft-exemption tax. In  Nicholas 
abolished the custom, with the result that Jews were for the first time taken o the 
Imperial armies ... 

In  Nicholas I further antagonized Jewry by abolishing the institution of the Kahal, 
and in that same year he prohibited by law the traditional Jewish garb, specifying that 
all Jews should, except on ceremonial occasions, dress in conformity with Russian 
standards. These measures, and many others like them, were aimed at facilitating the 
assimilation of Jewry o Russian life. The Tsarist government was much concerned by 
the Jew's failure to become Russianized, and viewed with extreme hostility the ancient 
Jewish custom of maaining a separate culture, language, mode of dress, etc. all of 
which contributed to keep the Jew an alien in the land of his residence. It is to this 
determination to "Russianize" and "civilize" the Jew that we can ascribe the unusual 
efforts made by the Imperial government to provide free education to its Jews. In  
all schools were thrown open to Jews and attendance for Jewish children was made 
compulsory. Compulsory education was not only a novelty in Russia, but in any country 



in the early th century. In Russia education was generally reserved for a privileged 
few, and even as late as  only % of her gentile pulation had been inside a 
school. The net result of the Imperial government's assimilation program was that 
Russian Jewry became the best educated segment in Russia. This eventually worked to 
the destruion of the Tsarist government ... 

The reign of Alexander II marked the apex of Jewish fortunes in Tsarist Russia. By  
they were becoming dominant in the professions, in many trades and industries, and 
were beginning to filter o government in increasing numbers. As early as  
Alexander II had permitted Jewish university graduates to settle and hold governmental 
sitions in greater Russia, and by  athecaries, nurses, midwives dentists, 
distillers, and skilled craftsmen were permitted to work and reside throughout the 
empire. 

Nevertheless Russia's Jews were increasingly rebellious over the remaining restras 
which still bound the greater part of Russian Jewry to the Pale of Settlement, and which, 
to some extent at least, restried their commercial aivities. Herein lay the dilemma; 
the Imperial government could retain certain of the restriions against the Jews, and by 
doing so incur their undying hostility, or it could remove all restras and thus pave the 
way for Jewish domination over every phase of Russian life. Certainly Alexander viewed 
this problem with increasing concern as time went on. Aually it was a problem capable 
of being solved, [sic] 

Alexander II lost a considerable amount of his enthusiasm for liberal causes after an 
attempt was made to assassinate him in . He dismissed his "liberal" advisors and 
from that time on disayed an inclination toward conservatism. This is not to say he 
became anti-Jewish, but he did show more firmness in dealing with them. In  there 
was another attempt on his life, and another in the following year when his wer 
palace was blown up. In  a ot hatched in the home of the Jewess, Hesia Helfman, 
was successful. Alexander II was blown up and so ended an era. 

The New Policy 

The reaion to the assassination of Alexander II was instantaneous and far reaching. 
There was a widespread belief in and out of the government, that if the Jews were 
dissatisfied with the rule of Alexander II whom the crypto-Jew, D'Israeli, had 
described as "the most benevolent prince that ever ruled Russia" then they would be 
satisfied with nothing less than outright domination of Russia. 

Up to  Russian licy had consistently been direed in an attempt to "Russianize" 
the Jew, preparatory to accepting him o full citizenship. In line with this licy, free 
and compulsory education for Jews had been roduced, repeated attempts had been 
made to encourage them to settle on farms, and special efforts had been made to 
encourage them to engage in the crafts. Now Russian licy was reversed. Hereafter it 
became the licy of the Imperial government to prevent the further exoitation of the 
Russian people by the Jews. Thus began the death struggle between Tsar and Jew. 



All through  there was widespread anti-Jewish rioting all over the empire. Large 
numbers of Jews who had been permitted to settle beyond the Pale of Settlement were 
evied. In May of  the May Laws (Provisional Rules of May , ) were imsed, 
thus imementing the new governmental licy. 

The May Laws shook the empire to its foundations. The following passage is taken from 
Encyclopedia Britannica [page , volume , ]: 

"The Russian May Laws were the most conspicuous legislative monument achieved by 
modern anti-Semitism ... Their immediate results was a ruinous commercial 
depression which was felt all over the empire and which profoundly affeed the 
national credit. The Russian minister was at his wit's end for money. Negotiations for 
a large loan were entered un with the house of Rothschild and a preliminary 
contra was signed, when ... the finance minister was informed that unless the 
persecutions of the Jews were stopped the great banking house would be compelled to 
withdraw from the operation ... In this way anti-Semitism, which had already so 
profoundly influenced the domestic licies of Europe, set its mark on the ernational 
relations of the weres, for it was the urgent need of the Russian treasury quite as 
much as the termination of Prince Bismarck's secret treaty of mutual neutrality which 
brought about the Franco-Russian alliance. " 

