eviions: 



ENGLAND: 
FRANCE: 



SAXONY: 
HUNGARY: 

BELGIUM: 

SLOVAKIA: 

AUSTRIA: 
NETHERLANDS: 
SPAIN: 
LITHUANIA: 
PORTUGAL: 
PRUSSIA: 
ITALY: 
BAVARIA: 



Jews expelled in  by Edward I. Not permitted to re-enter till . 

Expelled in  by Philip the Fair. A few were permitted to return but were 
again evied in . Jewish settlements remained in Bordeaux, Avignon, 
Marseilles, (from where they were evied in ) and in the northern 
province of Alsace. 

Expelled in . 

By  the Jews were in control of Hungary's tax colleions. In  they 
were expelled but later returned. In  they were again expelled from the 
Christian part of Hungary. 

Expelled in . A few settled there again in , but no large numbers 
came till . 

Ousted from Prague in . Many settled there again after . In  
Marie Theresa expelled them again. 

Expelled in  by Albrecht V. 

Expelled from Utrecht in . 

Expelled in . 

Expelled in  by Grand Duke Alexander. They later returned. 
Expelled in . 
Expelled in . 

Expelled from Kingdom of Naes and Sardinia in . 
Banned permanently in . 





Jews were not permitted to enter Sweden until . None were permitted to enter 
Denmark before the th century and they were not allowed in Norway after . Today 
only a handful reside in all Scandinavia. 



Back to Poland 



By  all of Western Europe except northern Italy, parts of Germany, and the Papal 
ssessions around Avignon, had been rid of the Jewish invasion. For a while, at least, 
Europe was free of the Jews; not until  did they return in any numbers. Says 
Encyclopedia Britannica: [page -, vol.  - .] 

"The great mass of the Jewish people were thus to be found once more in the East, in 
the Polish and Turkish empires . . The few communities suffered to remain in western 
Europe were meanwhile subjeed at last to all the restriions which earlier ages had 
usually allowed to remain as an ideal; so that in a sense, the Jewish dark ages may be 
said to begin with the Renaissance. " 

THE RENAISSANCE 

As the Jew Departed ... 

The period marked by the eviions  to  also marks the period of the 
Renaissance which broke over Europe as the Jews departed. Starting at first in the 
trading cities of northern Italy in about , there began a great rebirth of culture and 
learning which at first was based almost entirely on the writings of the ancient Greeks 
and Romans. Very quickly this renascent culture spread over Europe and when the age 
had ended, in about , Europe was by comparison with her former status, 
enlightened and civilized. Quite obviously all this could not have taken ace had it not 
been for a great upsurge of commercial aivity which occurred simultaneously with, 
and as an adjun of, the Renaissance. Not until the nations of Europe had wrested 
commercial control from the ghetto did this rebirth of western civilization occur. 

The Ghettos 

"Wherever Jews have settled, since the beginning of the Diasra, they have proceeded 
to create their own communal organizations. Various faors of an ernal 
charaer religious, cultural, social, and economic as well as external faors, have 
contributed to this faor" 

(Page , The Jewish Peoe, Past and Present, by the Central Yiddish Culture 
Organization (CYCO), New York). 

It is virtually imssible to comprehend the charaer of Judaism without some 
knowledge of the nature of the Medieval Jewish community. (Kahal; Ghetto). Probably 
one of the commonest fallacies extant today concerns the true origin of the ghetto. Most 
history books defer to Jewish sensibilities by giving the Jewish version, namely that the 
Jewish people were for centuries forced to reside in a special quarter of the city as a 
result of the bigotry and olerance of the Christian majority. This is not true, and no 
scholar of Judaism believes it to be. 



Valentine's Jewish Encyclopedia describes the origin of the ghetto as follows: 

"At any rate the word became general for a Jew's quarter. Already in antiquity the 
Jews voluntarily occupied special quarters; In the Middle Ages, Jew's streets or 
Jewries were to be found from the end of the nth century, but the motive of their 
concentration was no longer religious or social: trade caused them to settle near the 
market, or danger made them seek the proteion of the reigning prince, the proteor 
also wishing to have them together for the easier colleion of taxes. It was not until the 
th century that the Jew's quarter was turned o a compulsory Ghetto. ... The 
concentration of Jews in Ghettos, although unended, had its good result. It 
preserved the communal feeling and the traditional Jewish culture. " 

As a  of fa these ghetto-communities existed only because the Jews wanted them 
to exist they represented a desire on the part of Jewry to remain aloof and exclusive of 
Christian Society. Says Valentine's Jewish Encyclopedia [p ]: 

"There were as a rule officially recognized authorities in the Jewish communities in 
Europe during the Middle Ages to regulate their own affairs and to treat as a body 
with the civil government. Even with no other incentive but that of living up to the 
requirements of Judaism the Jews of a locality were compelled to organize themselves 
o a community (Kahal; Kehilla), in order to regulate ritual, educational and 
charitable institutions. Courts of law were also a necessity, since Jewish litigants were 
expeed to obey the civil code of the Talmud." 

The ghetto was not merely a ace of residence; it was in the fullest sense a community 
within a community. Here the Jews maained their culture, their religion, and their 
tradition of solidarity. Here they nursed their age-long hatred for Christian civilization. 
Says Encyclopedia Britannica [p , vol.  - .]: 

"All these aivities necessitated a great deal of legislation and in this the autonomous 
Jewish community was granted the widest latitude. Ordinances were enaed by Jews 
