has since renounced communism and has joined the Catholic Church. Like Elizabeth 
Bentley, he has given invaluable aid to the FBI and the un-American aivities 
committee in their efforts to track down key members of the communist party. 
Chambers is maed to a Jewess. 

Elizabeth Bentley 

Elizabeth Bentley, a produ of Vassar, is another former communist who has done 
much to exse the communist underground. For several years she served as a courier 
for a communist espionage network. She was the mistress of the Jew, Jacob Golos, a 
trusted Soviet agent and her immediate superior. He died of a heart attack on 
Thanksgiving day, . It was after his death that Elizabeth Bentley turned against the 
party. Since then she has co-operated with the FBI and the un-American Aivities 
Committee. 

COMMUNISM IN HOLLYWOOD 

No discussion of communism would be comete without giving some attention to the 
Hollywood scene. Within the past few years a number of investigations by the House 
Committee on Un-American Aivities, and by California's "Tenney Committee," have 
unearthed a veritable hotbed of Communism in the movie colony. We have already 
made some mention of the convied "Hollywood Ten" who received sentences for 
contempt of congress. There are literally hundreds of other high aced Jews with pro- 
communist records in the film colony, including millionaire aors, direors, producers, 
writers, and executives. 

The question immediately arises as to why so many of these wealthy and privileged Jews 
embrace Communism. The answere is, of course, that communism is not an economic 
movement, but a racial movement. Communism cannot be understood, or dealt with, on 
any other basis. 

An Easy Target 

There is a question in the minds of many as to how and why the Communists took over 
Hollywood. To begin with, the Hollywood motion piure industry is the most imrtant 
vehicle of propaganda in the English speaking world today. In the long run Hollywood 
exerts a greater influence over the English speaking peoples than all other propaganda 
mediums combined. It has therefore become a prime target for communist infiltration. 
And since the film industry is overwhelmingly Jewish, communist agents encountered a 
minimum of difficulty in setting up shop. To give the reader some idea as to the extent of 



the Jewish control over Hollywood, we have prepared the following survey of the motion 
piure industry 

Jews Own the Film Industry 

The Hollywood film industry is almost exclusively a Jewish enterprise. In the entire 
industry there are two, and only two, major Hollywood film producers operated by 
gentiles. All the rest are Jew-owned. 

The two gentile firms are Twentieth-Century Fox, and RKO Piures. Both companies, it 
should be noted, were originally formed by Jews, and were Jew owned and operated 
until recently. In  Howard Hughes bought an eight million dollar bloc of RKO stock 
(assets of the firm are $,,.) and since then has been prominent in direing 
its affairs. The other gentile firm is th Century Fox, whose president is Spyros 
Skouras, a Greek. 

The Big Three 

The three largest motion piure firms in Hollywood are cometely Jewish, and in a 
very real sense they dominate the industry. The "Big Three" are: 

 LOEWS, INC., the giant of the industry, with assets listed at $,,.. Its 
founder was Marcus Loew, a Jew, and its current president is Nicholas Schenck, a 
Russian-Jew from the Pale of Settlement. Loews, Inc. owns Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer 
(MGM), whose president was Louis B. Mayer for many years. Dore Senary, a Jew with 
four communist fronts to his credit, now heads MGM. 

 PARAMOUNT PICTURES, INC., with assets listed at $,,., is the second 
largest film producer in Hollywood. Its president is the Jew, Barney Balaban. Paramount 
also owns the American Broadcasting Company (ABC). 

 WARNER BROTHERS PICTURES, INC., is the third largest piure company in 
Hollywood, with assets of $,,.. Its president is Harry Warner, a Polish Jew. 
There were originally four Warner brothers: Samuel, Harry, Albert, and Jack. In addition 
to their Hollywood holdings, the brothers at one time owned  theatres in the U.S., 
and  film exchanges throughout the world. Positions number four and five go to th 
Century Fox and RKO Piures, described above. 

 UNRfERSAL PICTURES, INC., with assets of $,,. is the sixth largest 
film company in Hollywood. Its president is the Jew, Nate J. Blumberg. 

 COLUMBIA PICTURES, INC., with assets of $,,., is number seven in 
Hollywood. Its president is the New York Jew, Harry Cohn. 

This cometes the roster of Hollywood piure producers with assets of twenty million 
dollars or more. Of the seven firms listed above, five are totally Jewish owned and 
operated, and the other two were formerly Jewish owned, and may still be in part. There 
are several smaller firms which we have not listed, and they too are overwhelmingly 
Jewish. (Note: Above names and figures apy to the year ) 



"Kosher Valley" 



Hollywood has become a Jew town. The Fairfax area, which is the heart of the 
Hollywood residential distri, is slightly more than % Jewish, according to Jewish 
statistics (published in the California Jewish Voice). Virtually every shop and store in 
Hollywood is Jew-owned. The Jews operate the theatres, restaurants, drug stores, 
clothing stores even the cigarette machines. A visit to the neighborhood theatres and 
eating aces will indicate even to the skeptic that Hollywood is predominately inhabited 
by east-European Jews. In nearby Los Angeles, Hollywood is sometimes referred to as 
"Kosher Valley" ... 

Because the Hollywood stars are the industry's stock-in-trade its merchandise, so to 
speak they are mostly gentile. A given piure may have a Jew producer, a Jew direor, 
and Jew writer, but generally all the public sees is the prettied-up gentile aor. But even 
this generalization is breaking down to an surprising degree. An amazing number of 
aors (and almost all the bit ayers and extras) are either Jewish, or maed to Jews. 
In Hollywood many a blond Christian girl has found her way to stardom by marrying (or 
going to bed with) a hook-nosed Khazar Jew. Here is a partial list of Hollywood stars 
who are, or have been, maed to Jews: 

Doris Day (Melcher), Lili Palmer (Peiser), Janet Leigh (Curtis-Schwartz), Claudette Colbert 
(Pressman), Anita Louise (Adler), Madge Evans (Kingsley), Jennifer Jones (Selznick), Joan 
Bennett (Wanger), Alan Ladd (Carol-Lederer), Merle Oberon (Korda), Joyce Matthews (Berle), 
Eleanor Parker (Friedlob), Norma Shearer (Thalberg), Ruth Roman (Hall-Schiff), Nancy Olson 
(Lerner), Eleanor Holms (Rose), Gig Young (Rosenstein), Miriam Hopkins (Litvak), Myrna Dell 
(Buchtel), Wendy Bae (Meyer), Jean Howard (Feldman), Joan Blair (Coin), Dick Powell 
(Blondell), Gary Mell (Jolson), John Loder (Lamar), Gale Sondergaard (Biberman), Norma 
Talmadge (Schenck). There are many, many others. 

Hollywood is in more ways than one the land of make-believe. The film industry can take a 
ck-marked, flat-chested little Jewess out of the ghettoes of Poland and make her o a 
glamour girl, envied and aped by millions. They straighten her nose, pull her teeth, bleach her 
hair, give her a new comexion with make-up putty, pa on new lips, pad her bust and hips, 
and adjust the microphones to give her a easing voice. A million dollar publicity campaign 
does the rest. Frequently that is the formula by which a Jew-star is born.Here is a partial list of 
Hollywood's Jew-stars Vindicates communist front affiliation.): 

Eddie Cantor*, Binnie Barnes (Gittel), Joan Blondell, Charlie Chain* (Thonstein), 
Tony Curtis (Schwartz), Bette Davis*, Marlene Dietrich, Melvyn Douglas* (Hesselberg), 
Deanna Durbin, John Garfield* (Garfinkle), Frankie Laine, Hedy Lamarr (Keisler), 
Paulette Goddard*, Douglas Fairbanks* (Ullman), Judy Garland (Gumm), Judy 
Holiday* (Tuvim), Paul Muni (Weisenfreund), Danny Kaye* (Kaminsky), Larry Parks*, 
Groucho Marx*, Martha Raye, Edward G. Robinson* (Goldenberg), Kennan Wynn* 
(Leold), Ed Wynn, Farley Granger, Sylvia Sidney* (Koskow), Robert Mell, The Ritz 
Brothers, The Andrews Sisters, Henry Morgan*, Bobby Breen, Benny Baker* (Zifkin), 
Jack Benny (Kubelsky), Mary Livingston (Marks), George Burns (Birnbaum), Gracie 



Allen, Theda Bari (Goodman), J Edward Bromberg* (Bromberger), Kitty Carlisle, Sue 
Carol (Lederer), Ricardo Cortez, Milton Berle, Sally Eilers, Mary Ellis, Al Jolson, Bert 
Lahr, Francis Lederer, Lew Lehr, Jerry Lewis, Peter Lorre, Alice McMahon, Pola Negri, 
Parkyakarkas (Harry Einstein), Luise Ranier, Gregory Ratoff, Vior Borge, Pinkey Lee, 
