MATYAS SAKOSl 



Rakosi is an imate of Stalin, knew Lenin personally, and was Commissar of Social 
Produion under Bela Kun. He is a typical member of the Jewish bureaucracy which 
controls communism. 



Although every foreign corresndent and every news service knows the identity of 
these "Iron Curtain" diators, they are seldom in the press, and never are they 
identified as Jews. Any newspaperman daring to identify the communist leadership as 
Jewish would instantly be threatened with loss of advertising, and would be accused of 
"bigotry" and "anti-Semitism." 



►POLAND: Poland has 
shared the tragic fate of 
Hungary. "The men who 
dominate Poland" (See 
Gunther's cut, preceding page) 
are the Jews, Mine, 
Skryeszewski, Modzelewski, 
and Berman. The first three are 
of cabinet rank, while Jacob 
Berman's official sition is 
that of Under-Secretary of 
State a minor office. Yet it is 
this Jacob Berman who is the 
undisputed boss of Poland. 



rnuniii-v .<i:<l take pare in their administrations. 

to. Jews ay a very prominent role in several government*. 
H«t(,' we tread delicate ground. The Uircc "Muscovites" who 
run Hungary air Jew*, the men who dominate Poland arc Jews, 
the secretary jjcncral of the Communist party in Czechoslovakia 
is a Jew, Ana Pauker of Rumania is a Jewess. This brings up 
the grave  that Jews, as a race and a nation, may be un- 
justly assessed blame  by the ignorant  for the nature of these 



The above excerpt is taken from page  of John Gunther's Behind 
the Iron Curtain. Later in the book Gunther identifies "the three 
moscovites who run Hungary," as the Jews, Rakosi, Vas, and Gero. 
He also identifies the Jew who runs Poland as Jacob Berman, and 
reveals that the Jewish general secretary of the party in 
Czechoslovakia is Rudolph Slansky. In spite of all this, Gunther 
vigorously denies Communism and Jewish. 

Berman, a produ of the 

Warsaw ghetto, has lived in Russia, and was installed as diator over Poland when the 
Russian armies took over the country. He prefers to work behind the scenes as much as 
ssible a device frequently used to hide the Jewishness of communism. Poland's 



Jewish bureaucracy is perhaps the largest of my Iron Curtain country outside of Russia 
proper. Although Jews comprise less than % of the total pulation behind the Iron 
Curtain, they occupy virtually every sition of authority. These fas should convince 
even the most doubtful that communism is Jewish that behind ernational 
communism stands the ernational Jew. Jews and communists will never bother to 
deny this, but they will viciously attack those who exse the truth. 

%^ROUMANIA [Romania]: Anna Pauker, well known as the boss of Roumania, is so 
obviously Jewish, and so well recognized as such, that documentation is unnecessary. 

Anna was born in Bucharest of orthodox Jewish parents. Her father (who was a Kosher 
butcher) and a brother now live in Israel. Anna earned a living for a time teaching 
Hebrew, and for a while she lived in the U.S. Her husband became identified as a 
"Trotskyite," and was executed in one of Stalin's purges. Today Anna Pauker is one of 
the most wereful figures in the communist world. 

^*YUGOSLAVTA: The only non-Jewish diator behind the Iron Curtain is Tito of 
Yugoslavia, which fa probably exains his revolt against the Kremlin. But Tito was 
tutored by the Jew, Mosa Pijade. Says John Gunther of Pijade: "He is Tito's mentor ... 
Whatever ideological struure Tito may have, he got from this shrewd old man." 
[Behind the Iron Curtain, by John Gunther, Harper Brothers, New York.] 



'CZECHOSLOVAKIA: The secretary-general of the communist party in 
Czechoslovakia, whom John Gunther identifies as a Jew diator, is Rudolph Slansky. 
Like the other satellite diators, he was aced in command of things when the 
communists took over. Slansky, incidentally, has been purged by the party, and is at this 
writing under arrest. 

The excerpt to the left [about  words, under headline A Czech Purge] is taken from 
page  of the Dec. th QUICK magazine. Notice that although Slansky is identified as 
the "former Red Boss" of Czechoslovakia, he is not identified is a Jew. 

JEWS IN AMERICA 

Jewish historians divide Jewish immigration o the U. S. o three phases: the 
Sephardic or Spanish Period, the German Period and the Russian-Polish Period. 

Sephardic Period 

Since colonial America was still a pioneer country, there were almost no Jews here 
before the American Revolution. In  there were certainly no more than a few score 
of Sephardic Jews in the entire country. Modern Jewish historians have tried to prove 
the existence of two Jewish privates in Washington's armies, but the question is of no 
consequence either way. By  years after the Declaration of Independence, and 



 years after the founding of Jamestown there were an estimated , Jews in the 
U.S., comprising perhaps i/th of % of the total pulation. 

German Period 

During this period a fairly steady trickle of German Jews came to the U.S. mainly from 
Germany, so that by  they numbered about ,, out of a total pulation of  
million about / of %. 

Russian-Polish Period 

Following the assassination of Tsar Alexander II in , vast numbers of Russian Jews 
inundated our rt cities; between  and  our Jewish pulation increased by 
% to more than three millions! 

World War I and the Russian Revolution added to this influx. Many Jews left Poland 
when as a result of the Versailles Treaty, it was made independent of Soviet Russia; 
others fled Russia during the counter-revolution and civil war which raged in -- 
. The White Russian Armies, regarding Bolshevism as a Jewish movement, showed 
little mercy to those Jewish communities falling o their hands. Many Jews, fleeing 
these anti-communist armies, eventually made their way to the U.S. 

This flood of immigration continued until , when the Johnson-Lodge bill 
temrarily brought it to a halt. However, when the Roosevelt administration came to 
were in , the baers were once again lowered, so that in the calendar years of 
!) .% of all immigrants admitted to the U.S. were Jewish. Since World War II this 
influx has continued under so-called DP legislation, with the result that approximately 
half of the world's Jewish pulation has now congregated here. Today, official Jewish 
sources estimate America's Jewish pulation to be () ,,. The aual figure 
is almost certainly higher, and may exceed  million ... 

NEW YORK: Jew Capital of the World 

"The newly aved Jews settled in the metrolitan centers, New York alone 
absorbing approximately half of the total Jewish immigration. But the "ghettoization" 
of the East-European Jews in the United States was the result not of objeive forces 
only: it was as much the result of the immigrant's desire to retain all they could of their 
old way of life" 
