To understand the total problem of 
Communism it is necessary that we trace the 
course of the movement from it's beginning 
down to the present. We must understand 
who it's originators were, and what they 
were, and we must gain some idea as to the 
forces which influenced and shaped their 
philosophy. 

Unfortunately, any deep-down discussion of 
Communism and Marxism involves the 
Jewish question. We cannot honestly discuss 
the subje without revealing and 
commenting on the fa that the founders 
of Russian Communism were Jewish. 
Neither can we ignore the fa that all but a 
few of the top leadership of the American 
Communism party including the recently 
convied spies are of the same race. These 
are fas of history over which we have no 
control. But we are faced with the very 
serious problem of how to reveal these fas 
without being labeled and treated as "anti- 
Semites." 



Contents 

. THE PERSECUTION MYTH 

. THE JEW IN EUROPE 

. RETURN TO THE EAST 

. THE RENAISSANCE 

. THE TERROR SECTION 

. BLOODY SUNDAY 

. PETERSBERG SOVIET 

. REVOLUTION 

. HISTORY OF BOLSHEVISM 

. MORE PETERSBERG SOVIET 

. SIXTH PARTY CONGRESS 

. TROTZKY TO POWER 

. CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY 

. THE RED TERROR 

. BELAKUN 

. STALINS PAST 

. KAGANOVICH 

. IRON CURTAIN DICTATORS 

. JEWS IN AMERICA 

. NEW YORK: Jewish World Capital 

. THE TREASON TRIALS 

. COMMUNISM IN HOLLYWOOD 



The main reason why so little is known concerning the true nature of Communism 
stems from this problem. Historical writers have been understandably reluant to hold 
forth on the subje for fear of marking themselves as "race haters" and "bigots." For this 
reason the entire subje has been aced beyond the pale of discussion. One simy 
does not use the word "Jew" and "Communism" together. 

The result is, of course, censorship. In this work we have decided to breach the wall of 
silence at whatever the cost, and to treat the subje as fairly and as honestly as we know 
how. No attempt is made to single out individuals because they happened to be born to a 
certain race: neither have we exempted anyone from criticism for that reason. It was 
decided that since Communism and Judaism are so irretrievably bound one to the other, 
a history of the Jewish people would contribute substantially to an understanding of the 
present communist menace. 



NOTE [BY FRANK BRITTON]: 



Encyclopedia Britannica is used as a reference source because of its ready availability to 
the average reader. It is not an "anti-Semitic" publication. In fa, the Encyclopedia 
Britannica Corration was purchased by the (Jewish) Julius Rosenwald erests in 
, and since then all material pertaining to the Jewish question his been re-written 
to conform to the Jewish outlook. 



The Funk & Wagnall's Jewish Encyclopedia is uniformly referred to throughout this 
work as the "Jewish Encyclopedia. " Consisting of  volumes, it is available in all major 
libraries. It should not be confused with the  volume "Universal Jewish 
Encyclopedia," published by Universal Jewish Encyclopedia, Inc., New York, . 
Both, however, are authoritative Jewish publications, compiled by and for Jews. 

Valentine's Jewish Encyclopedia, Shapiro Valentine Co., London - . England. 

Outline of History, third edition, by H. G. Wells. 

THE PERSECUTION MYTH 

With Shrill Insistence 

We cannot undertake even this brief history of the modern Jew without taking note of a 
phenomenon which has confounded gentile societies for twenty centuries. This is the 
ability of the Jewish people to colleively retain their identity despite centuries of 
exsure to Christian civilization. To any student of Judaism, or to the Jews themselves, 
this phenomenon is partly exained by the fa that Judaism is neither mainly a 
religion nor mainly a racial matter, nor yet is it simy a matter of nationality. Rather it 
is all three; it is a kind of trinity. Judaism is best described as a nationality built on the 
twin pillars of race and religion. 

All this is closely related to another aspe of Judaism, namely, the persecution myth. 
Since first appearing in history we find the Jews propagating the idea that they are an 
abused and persecuted people, and this idea is, and has always been, central in Jewish 
thinking. The myth of persecution is the adhesive and cement of Judaism; without it 
Jews would have long since ceased to exist, their racial-religious nationality 
notwithstanding. 

Jews do not always agree among themselves, and it is only in the presence of their 
enemies real or imagined that Jewish thinking crystallizes o unanimity. In this 
respe they differ not at all from other peoples: Adolph Hitler solidified German 
opinion around the idea that Germany was wronged at Versailles, that the German 
people were abused and viimized by the Allies, and that only by holding together could 
they prevail against the overwhelming might of their enemies ... 

For twenty-five centuries the Jewish mind has been conditioned by the same appeal. 
Through all Jewish thinking and all Jewish history the refrain of persecution has 
sounded with shrill insistence. Thus we find every accident of fortune being chronicled, 
enhanced, and passed on to succeeding generations as another exame of gentile 
cruelty to the chosen race. And almost inevitably we find opsition to Jewish 
aspirations and ambitions being translated o these same terms of persecution, and all 
Jewish shortcomings being excused on the same basis. 

Now it is a fa that the Jewish people have suffered numerous hardships in the course 
of their history, but this is true of other peoples too. The chief difference is that the Jews 
