
Page , The Jewish Peoe, Past and Present, Central Yiddish Culture Organization 
(CYCO) New York. 

New York City, with its more than two million Jews, has been the staging ground for the 
Jewish invasion of the U.S. Here the Jewish immigrant has found a ghetto-like 
environment similar to the one he left in east-Europe. Here he learns the language and 
customs of the country. Here he gathers know-how and capital before faring forth o 



the herland of America Soon he will be buying up a business on the Main Street of 
Los Angeles, or Dallas, or Chicago. 

Many lowere class Jews, being unable to learn the language or raise the capital, or being 
otherwise unequipped to go o business or the professions, have settled in New York 
to become workers and craftsmen. Thus we find Ben Gold's communistic fur workers 
union, and David Dubinsky's "socialistic" garment workers union, consisting almost 
entirely of Jews. As would be expeed therefore New York City has been the seed-bed 
for communism in the United States. 

U.S. Communist Party 

The American Communist Party has never been very large in  it had an estimated 
, members; it has perhaps half that many now. On first appearances this would 
seem to rule it out as a significant force in American litics. But appearances can be 
deceptive. Unlike the mass-recruited communist parties of France and Italy, the 
American communist party is small, carefully chosen, well disciined, and fanatical. 
Few perhaps no one of its membership has been recruited from the sweaty-shirt 
strata, its members are college professors and union leaders, physicists and government 
workers, rerters, aywrights and business executives, aors and newspaper 
rerters. Some of its members are wealthy; almost all are well educated. Its chief asset 
is its ability to mobilize the combined forces of American Jewry to its use. 

THE TREASON TRIALS 

Since early  the communist party has been involved, in a series of highly publicized 
treason and conspiracy trials utterly without precedent in American history These 
included 

 the "Amerasia Case," 

 the "Gerhart Eisler Case," 

 the "Judith Coin Case," 

 the "Alger Hiss Case," 

 the "Hollywood Ten Case," 

 the "Fuchs-Gold Atom Spy Case," 

 the "Rosenberg-Sobell Case," 

 and the case of "Eugene Dennis and the Convied Eleven." 

It was imssible, of course, to conceal altogether the Jewishness of the overwhelming 
majority of the defendants. But Jewish propagandists exhausted every trick in trying. 
One Jewish publication Look magazine ran a piure story on the spy trials in which 
the defendants were variously described as "typical Americans" ... "American born" . . 
and "as American as ape pie." So there will be no further doubt regarding the racial 
identity of the American communist party, we have accumulated photographs and data 
on virtually every communist indied or tried for communistic aivity since . The 
reader may judge for himself. 



AMERASIA CASE 



In early  the FBI arrested six individuals, three of whom are known Jews, for 
stealing  highly confidential documents from State Department files. This was the 
Amerasia Case. Those arrested were: 

 PHILIP JAFFE, a Russian Jew who came to the U.S. in . He was editor of the 
magazine, "Amerasia," and was the former editor of the communist paper, "Labor 
Defense." He was convied and fined. 

 ANDREW ROTH, a Brooklyn born Jew with a lieutenant's commission in Naval 
Intelligence. 

 MARK GAYN, a writer, born in Manchuria of Russian-Jewish parents. His Jew name is 
Julius Ginsberg. 

 JOHN STEWART SERVICE, a high State Department official who gave Jaffe much of 
the stolen material He is believed to be a gentile. 

ALSO ARRESTED were Emmanuel Larsen and Kate Mitchel, nationality unknown. 

Only two of those arrested were anually brought to trial, although the Justice 
Department's case was considered airtight. The trial of the ringleader, Philip Jaffe, was 
one of the strangest on record. Late one Friday afternoon he was rushed o court 
without any previous notice or publicity, and before anyone knew what was going on he 
eaded guilty, and was sentenced and fined. By paying the comparatively insignificant 
sum of $,. he was relieved from the danger of any future prosecution. Roth paid 
a $. fine. 

John Stewart Service was not prosecuted, nor was he discharged from his high State 
Department sition. The State Department, despite the constant prodding of Senator 
McCarthy of Wisconsin, refused to accept the evidence against him. Four times he was 
called before the State Department's "loyalty board," and four times he was cleared. 

This in spite of an FBI wire recording of his transaions with Jaffe! Not until the fifth 
loyalty hearing was it decided that there were "reasonable" grounds for suspeing his 
loyalty. This came six years after the original arrests. Somewhere, hidden hands were 
pulling wires ... 

ALGER HISS CASE 

The second treason case also involved the State Department. This was the trial of Alger 
Hiss, protege of Supreme Court Justice Felix Frankfurter. Hiss, like Acheson, was a 
student under Frankfurter at Harvard. 

Hiss was one of the most influential men in the State Department. At Yalta he had been 
a Roosevelt advisor; at San Francisco he helped draw up the United Nations charter. 
And he was an imate friend of the secretary-of-state. 



Hiss, although a communist, was not convied for being one. He perjured himself by 
denying his communist aivities, however, and it was on this charge that he was tried 
and convied. 

The Alger Hiss trial was also a unique one. Dean Acheson's wife campaigned to raise 
funds for his defense. Acheson himself declared: "I'll not turn my back on Alger Hiss." 
Felix Frankfurter anually took the witness stand to testify as a charaer witness for his 
protege. In spite of all this, Hiss was convied and sent to the penitentiary. 

Frankfurter's role in this treasonable drama is worth commenting on. An immigrant 
Jew from Austria, he has a life-long affinity for pro-Marxist causes. He first attained 
prominence as one of the defenders of Sacco and Vanzetti. 

Frankfurter, along with Lehman and Henry Morgenthau, is one of the most influential 
Jews in America today. In addition to Acheson and Hiss, he has been resnsible for the 
acing of an estimated  of his "proteges" in high aces. These include: 

. Nathan Witt, former general secretary of the National Labor Relations Board; 

. Lee Pressman, chief legal counsel for the CIO; 

. John Abt, key attorney for the SEC, AAA, and WPA. 

All are Marxist Jews; Pressman has admitted being a card carrying party member. 

Frankfurter may or may not be a communist, but an amazing number of his proteges, 
including Alger Hiss, have turned out to be. That was the background of the Alger Hiss 
Case. 

Judith Coin 
