
 David Greenglass, the son of a Russian-Jewish father and a Polish-Jewish mother, 
was one of those who passed atomic information to Gold. Between  and  he was 
emoyed at the vital atomic installation at Los Alamos, New Mexico. He also gave Julius 
Rosenberg vital information concerning the "fuse" used to detonate the A-bomb. 
Significantly, the chief of the Los Alamos proje at this time was the Jew, Robt. 
Oppenheimer. Klaus Fuchs was also passing A-bomb information to Harry Gold from 
Los Alamos during this period. 

 Abraham Brothman was another member of the ring. He headed the engineering firm 
of A. Brothman and Associates, Long Island, N. Y. He supied Gold with secret data on 
aviation gasoline, turbo aircraft engines, and synthetic rubber. So valuable was his 
contribution that a Russian official allegedly told him his efforts were worth two brigades 
to Soviet Russia. He was arrested on July th, , for conspiracy against the U.S. and 
was convied. 

 Miriam Moskowitz was also caught in the spy net. A graduate of the City College of 
NYC, she was arrested August ,  as part of the same apparatus. She was emoyed 
by the War Manwere Commission between -, and was later associated with the 
Brothman firm. Miriam is Yiddish. She was convied. 

 Sidney Weinbaum, a produ of Russia's "Charkoff ' Institute of Technology, came to 
the U.S. in . His real name is Israel Weinbaum. He was conneed with the radiation 
laboratory at CalTech for four years, during which time he furnished the Soviet 
government with atomic secrets. He was convied on a perjury charge. 

 Alfred Dean Slack, was the only gentile besides Fuchs to be apprehended. While 
emoyed at the Oak Ridge establishment he gave atomic information to Harry Gold. He 
is also believed to have given Gold elligence about a new secret exosive while 
emoyed at the Holtson Ordnance Works at Kingsrt, Tenn. His alma mater is 
Syracuse University. 

The Rosenbergs 

Three other members of the Fuchs-Gold ring were also arrested. However, unlike the 
first seven who eaded guilty they chose to ead "not guilty." As a result two of 
them Julius and Ethel Rosenberg received the death penalty and the third, Morton 
Sobell, received  years in prison. 

 Julius Rosenberg was born of Russian-Jewish parents. An elerical engineer and a 
graduate of the City College of New York City, he was instrumental in recruiting 
Greenglass o the spy ring. While emoyed at the Emerson Eleric Company he stole 
the ans for the highly secret proximity fuse which is now being used against American 
anes in Korea. He also aided in the theft of atomic secrets: His job was to digest 
information from Greenglass, and then pass it on to Soviet agents. He was sentenced to 
death. 



 Ethel Rosenberg, wife of Julius, was convied of the same charges at the same time. 
She is a sister of David Greenglass. David Greenglass's wife aed as a courier between 
Greenglass and the Rosenbergs, but for some reason was not put on trial. 

 Morton Sobell was also a graduate of the City College of New York City. He and 
Rosenberg were classmates together. Sobell passed eleronic data to Rosenberg, 
including radar secrets. He fled to Mexico to escape arrest, was returned by Mexican 
authorities. He was convied for conspiracy to commit espionage and was sentenced to 
 years in prison. 



Behind the Atom Treason 
The question which instantly 
comes to mind is: how were 
communist agents able to ferret 
out our valuable atom secrets 
when so much secrecy surrounded 
the entire proje? Why was it that 
Russia had the full secret of atom- 
bomb manufaure before the 
American people even knew of the 
existence of atomic weans? 
These questions are especially 
puzzling when we consider the 
fantastic security measures taken 
to safeguard the secret. Bob 
Considine once described a fire 
which burned down a large 
building housing an atomic 
installation. Although firemen 
could have easily saved the building, ant guards would not permit them to enter the 
restried area because they didn't have authorized passes! Not even members of the 
U.S. Congress were let in on the secret. Yet the Soviet agents were able to penetrate this 
security wall as though it weren't there. How did they do it? 

First it should be remembered that a central figure in the atomic program was Albert 
Einstein, a foreign-born Jew with a record of  red fronts to his credit. It has never 
been proven that Einstein is an aual party member, but there can be absolutely no 
doubt as to where his sympathies lie. Nor can there be any doubt regarding the red t 
of his friends. A list of those around Einstein reads like a Who's Who of Communism. It 
was Einstein who was instrumental in having Fuchs brought to the United States. 
Furthermore, it should be remembered that the chief of the Los Alamos installation 
between -, when most of the secrets were stolen, was the Jew, Robert 
Oppenheimer. Robert Oppenheimer has a brother, Frank, who is also an atomic 
scientist and who is, or was, a card carrying communist. Frank Oppenheimer belonged 
to "Professional Unit No.  of the Communist Party," while on the staff at Cal-Tech. 

Finally, it should be noted that shortly after V-J day Harry Truman turned America's 
atomic energy program over to a board consisting of five men, three of whom were Jews. 




Left to right: W. W. Waymack, L. L. Straus*, David Lilienthal*, 
R. F. Bacher*, Sumner Pike. In  Harry Truman removed 
atomic energy from military authority and aced it under this 
Jew-dominated board, headed by David Lilienthal. Lilienthal 
had a pro-communist record. 



Not only that, but the Jewish chairman, David Lilienthal, had belonged to at least two 
communist fronts previous to his apment. This was the background to the atom 
treason. 

Scientist X 

There have been other instances of Jewish treason in our atomic energy program. 
Witness the case of the much publicized "Scientist X" who from  on passed vital 
atomic information to Steve Nelson. 

"Scientist X" proved to be a Jew by the name of Joseph W. Weinberg of the University of 
Minnesota. 

Steve Nelson? His real name is Mesarosh and his birthace is Belgrade. "Nelson" 
studied at the Lenin Institute in Moscow and resided in Russia from September of  
to July . Recently cited for contempt of Congress, he was originally arrested for 
dertation in  when it was found that he had fraudulently entered this country by 
using the passrt of one Joseph Fleishinger, a cousin ... 

Canadian Spy Ring 

Canada has also had spy trouble. There as in the U.S. the Soviet Embassy served as 
headquarters for espionage aivity. There, as in the U.S. the principal charaers in the 
ot were Jews. 

In early  an emoyee of the Russian embassy in Ottawa packed hundreds of secret 
Russian documents o a suitcase and turned himself over to Canadian authorities. As a 
result, a spy ring was uncovered which included among others a member of the 
Canadian Parliament and a professor at McGill university. Leader of the ring, and by far 
its most imrtant member, was Fred Rose (Rosenberg) the only communist in the 
Canadian Parliament. Rose, a Polish-Jew. was the ringleader, the recruiter, and the 
courier for the ring. 

On June , , he was sentenced to prison for his aivities. The following year (Dec. 
. ) Dr. Raymond Boyer, a professor at McGill university was sentenced to two 
years in prison for having given Rose information concerning the secret exosive, RDX. 
Boyer was maed to the Jewess, Anita Cohen. Arraigned with Rose were Samuel 
Gerson (of Russian-Jewish parentage), and David Shugar, believed to be Jewish. 
Other Jews imicated in the Fred Rose spy ring included: J. Isidor Gottheil, Israel 
