Halperin, and Sam Carr (Cohen). (NOTE: This is not a comete listing of the Fred 
Rose spy ring.) 

Second-String Politburo 

Soon after the conviion of the Eugene Dennis crew, a second-string litburo was 
scheduled to assume control of the party apparatus. This new litburo consisted of  
members,  of whom are Jewish. On June , , the Justice Department indied the 



entire group for conspiracy against the United States government. At the present writing 
they are free on bail pending trial. Here is the roll-call: 

. Israel Amter, , a long-time party stalwart. He organized the "Friends of the Soviet 
Union in the U.S.", a front organization which numbers Albert Einstein among its 
prominent members. 

. Marian Maxwell Abt, , public relations direor and secretary of the party's 
"Defense Commission." She is a Chicago Jewess. 

. Isidore Begun, , a Russian-Jew who formerly taught in New York City's public 
schools. He is a party writer and leurer. 

. Alexander Bittelman, , a Russian-Jew, and reputed to be "one of the foremost 
theoreticians and dialeicians of the party." 

. George B. Charney, , a Russian-Jew. He is the trade union secretary of the N. Y. 
state communist party. 

. Elizabeth Gurley Flynn, , chairman of the party's "Women's Commission." A 
gentile, she was born in Concord, N. H. 

. Betty Gannett, , national education direor for the party. She is a Polish -Jewess, 
and still an alien. 

. Simon W. Gerson, , chairman of the party's "N. Y. State Legislative Bureau." He is 
believed to be Jewish. 

. Viory [sic] Jeremy Jerome, , chairman of the party's cultural commission. He is a 
Polish-Jew. 

. Arnold Samuel Johnson, temrary chairman of Distri  Western Pennsylvania. 
Born in Seattle, he is a gentile. 

. Claudia Jones, , secretary of the party's "National Women's Commission." 

. Albert Francis Lannon, , party's "National Maritime Coordinator" and president of 
the "Communist Political Association of Maryland and Washington, D. C." Nationality 
unknown. 

. Jacob Mindel, , an old-time party wheel horse. He is a Russian Jew. 

. Petty Perres, , national secretary of the party's Negro Commission. 

. Alexander Trachtenberg, head of International Publishers, inc. 

. Louis Weinstock, , member of the party's "National Review Commission." He is a 
Hungarian Jew. 

. Wm. Wold Weinstone, , a charter member of the party and a former secretary of its 
Michigan branch. A Russian-Jew. 

. Fred Fine, , secretary of the party's "Public Affairs Commission." He is a Chicago 
Jew. 

. James Edward Jackson, , the party's "Southern Regional Direor." 

. Wm. Norman Marron, , executive secretary of the N. Y. State Communist Party. He 
is a Russian-Jew. 

. Sidney Steinberg, the party's "Assistant National Labor Secretary." He is a Lithuanian 
Jew. 

THE ROUNDUP 

On July th, , the FBI arrested the  leading communist party officials on the 
West Coast (see preceding page). They were all identified by the FBI as second-string 
leaders, the top leadership being already under detention. A few days later, on August 
th, five second-string leaders were also arrested in the east. All were charged with 
conspiracy to overthrow the U.S. government. 



Of the  arrested on the West Coast, six have been identified as Jews. They are 



. Henry Steinberg, a Polish-Jew; 

. Rose Chernin (Kusnitz), a Russian-Jewess; 

. Frank Carlson, a Russian Jew; 

. Ben Dobbs, a New York Jew; 

. Frank Speor, a Russian-Jew; 

. Al Richmond, a Russian Jew. 

Of the remaining nine, Dorothy Healey, Philip Connelly, and Otto Fox are gentile; Carl 
Rude Lambert is believed to be Jewish, and the identity of the others has not been 
determined. 

Of the five arrested in the east, four are Jewish. They are: 

. Roy Wood, , a gentile and chairman of the Washington D.C., Communist Party; 

. Regina Frankfeld, , a party organizer in Cleveland; 

. George Meyers, , a party organizer; 

. Philip Frankfield, , an organizer; 

. Rose Blumberg, of Brooklyn. 

All except Wood are Yiddish. 
THREE GENTILES 

Perhaps some attention should be devoted to three gentiles who have figured 
prominently in several of the treason trials, and whose names have constantly appeared 
in the press for several years. The three are: Whittaker Chambers, Elizabeth Bentley, 
and Vanderbilt Field. 

None of the three has been indied nor convied of a crime, and none at the present 
time are party members. In fa, two have become enemies of Communism. 
Nevertheless they deserve a ace in any description of the American communist party. 

Vanderbilt Field 

Because he is a gentile and because he has a famous name, Vanderbilt Field is perhaps 
better known to the American public than any other member of the communist 
conspiracy. This prominence is not accidental. Jewish propagandists, whether 
communist or not, invariably seek to conceal the Jewish nature of Communism by 
giving lavish publicity to gentiles such as Field. As a  of fa, Field does not belong 
to party, nor was he among those arrested when the top leadership was being rounded 
up. 

Field is secretary of the "Civil Rights Congress Bail Fund," which is entrusted with 
raising bail for party members in trouble. He is maed to the Jewess, Anita Cohen, 
former wife of the convied spy, Raymond Boyer. 



Whittaker Chambers 

One of the principal witnesses against Alger Hiss at his trial was Whittaker Chambers, 
who like Hiss is a gentile. Chambers of pumpkin letter fame was formerly an editor of 
the Daily Worker and later an associate editor of Time magazine. A produ of 
Columbia university Chambers began his underground work for the party in . He 
