
One of the most publicized treason trials was that of Jewish Judith Coin in June of 
. She was caught red-handed passing classified documents from Justice 
Department files to a Russian agent, who happened to be emoyed by the United 
Nations. She was convied of espionage and sentenced to  years in prison. Later the 
conviion was set aside by the Supreme Court on the grounds that the FBI had arrested 
her improperly and with out a warrant. It pays to have a friend on the Supreme Court, or 
so it would seem ... 

Gerhart Eisler 

The highest ranking communist ever brought to trial in the U.S. was Gerhart Eisler. 
Between  and February of  he was the secret boss of the Communist Party in 
the U.S. In those years he commuted regularly between the U.S. and Russia, using the 
aliases Berger, Brown, Edwards, and others. His right hand man, and the second 
ranking cominform (Communist Information Bureau) agent in the U.S. was J. Peters, 
author of the "Peters' Manual." His real name was Goldberger, and like Eisler he is 
Jewish. 



Several of Eisler's family have also been prominent in the Party. A brother, Hans, has 
built an outstanding reputation as a writer of revolutionary songs. He is presently 
emoyed as a songwriter in Hollywood. A sister, Ruth Fischer, was a communist agent 
for a number of years. 

In May of , while free on bail, Eisler fled the U.S. on the Polish ship Batory and is 
now propaganda chief of Russian-occupied Eastern Germany. 



The Hollywood Ten 
In  the ten leading film 
writers of the Hollywood 
Film Colony, nine of whom 
are known Jews, were 
convied for contempt of 
Congress and sentenced to 
prison. All had appeared 
before the House Committee 
on Un-American Aivities in 
, and all had refused to 
testify. 

The Film Colony went all-out 
in its suprt. A group of 
film notables, including 
Lauren Bacall and 
Humphrey Bogart, chartered 
a special ane to 

Washington. Jewish publications everywhere raised the cry that the Un-American 
Aivities Committee was viimizing a group of artists who, at the worst, were liberally 
inclined. 

As events proved, the committee knew exaly what it was doing. Six of the "Hollywood 
Ten" were communist party members. The other four had flagrantly pro-communist 
records. Furthermore, as screen writers they were in a particularly advantageous 
sition to insert subtle bits of red propaganda o piures. Given here is a roll-call of 
the Hollywood Ten: 

. Alvah Bessie, a screen-writer. A communist party member, he wrote for the party 
publication, New Masses. 

. Herbert Biberman, received a six month sentence and a $,. fine. A party 
member, he is the Yiddish husband of academy award winning aress Gale 
Sondergaard. 

. Lester Cole, also a party member. 

. Edward Dmytryk, who belongs to  fronts. Fined and sentenced. 

. Ring Lardner, Jr., a script writer and party member. 

. John Howard Lawson, a Broadway aywright and screen writer. Wrote 
"Professional," "Success Story." A party member. 




Shown above are the convied "Hollywood Ten." All wear $. 
suits, all are in the one-to-five thousand dollar a week bracket. All of 
them are Yiddish except one. 



. Albert Maltz, wrote "Merry-go-Round," "Snake Pit." A party member. 

. Sam Ornitz, a screen writer. 

. Adrian Scott, nationality not verified. 

. Dalton Trumbo, a party member. 

The American Politburo 

One of the top news stories of  was the trial of Eugene Dennis and the Convied 
Eleven. Colleively, this group comprised the National Secretariat of the American 
Communist Party; in other words, the American Politburo. 

The much publicized trial was held in the court of Judge Harold Medina. Perhaps no 
other single event has served better to demonstrate the Jewishness of the American 
communist party. Here were the top party executives driven out o the open for 
everybody to see. How many were Jewish? At least six. They are: 

. Jacob Stachel, a Russian-born Jew and still an alien. 

. John Gates (Jew name Israel Regenstreif), editor-in-chief of the Daily Worker and a 
former officer in the Communist Brigade in Spain. 

. Gilbert Green (Greenberg). 

. Gus Hall (Jew name, Arvo Mike Haeberg), son of Lithuanian-Jewish parents. 

. Irving Potash, a Russian-born Jew. 

. Carl Wer (Jew name Philip Carl Weissberg). 

The racial identity of Eugene Dennis (Waldron), Robert Thompson, and John 
Williamson has not been determined. 

Ten of the eleven were sentenced to  years in federal prison and fined $,, each. 
Thompson received a three year sentence. 

The Fuchs-Gold Spy Ring 

On February rd, , British elligence agents arrested a diminutive German-born 
atomic scientist by the name of Klaus Fuchs. He was accused, and subsequently 
convied, of passing atomic secrets to the Russians. At the beginning of World War II 
Fuchs had been erned by the British as an enemy alien. He was subsequently released 
from British custody and admitted to the U.S. at the personal instigation of Albert 
Einstein. As a scientist for the Manhattan Proje, he had access to our innermost 
atomic secrets between  and , and he is said to be one of the few men familiar 
with the overall construion of the A-bomb. He is now serving a penitentiary term in 
England for espionage. 

Aing on information obtained from Fuchs, the FBI began a series of investigations 
which resulted in the eventual arrest of nine other members of the ring. Of these nine, 
all of whom were later convied, eight were Jewish. Here is a brief description of the 
entire ring: 



 Harry Gold (Jew name Goldodnitsky). A chemist, he was born in Switzerland of 
Russian-Jewish parents. He studied at Drexel University, University of Pennsylvania, 
and Xavier University He was a courier for the Soviet espionage chief, S. M. Semenov, 
who used the Amtorg Trading Corration as a base of operations. Gold traveled all over 
the country colleing information from ring members strategically aced in defense and 
atomic energy installations. Arrested in May of , he eaded guilty of espionage and 
received  years in prison. 
