outside of Russia was Germany. The German government, 
which had abetted the Bolshevik coup in  by 
facilitating Lenin's return to Russia via the sealed railway 
car, was in  faced with a revolution of its own. 

In many respes the German Revolution paralleled the 
one in Russia. As World War I reached the climatic year of 
, and as German manwere losses mounted, the Jew- 
dominated German Social Democratic Party spread the 
seeds of defeatism among the German pulation much as 
the Bolsheviks had done in Russia. On November rd a 
mutiny broke out in the navy at Kiel, followed by rioting by 
the Social Democrats. On November th the Kaiser 




renounced his throne and the Social Democrats proclaimed a Socialist Republic. Two 
days later, on Nov. nth, they agreed to an Armistice with the Allies. 

There now occurred an event which was to embitter the German people against the Jews 
for all time, and which eventually resulted in the rise of Adolph Hitler. This was the 
demobilization of the German armies. It should be exained that Germany did not 
surrender by the terms of the November nth Armistice; the agreement was that all 
German armies were to withdraw to the pre-war boundaries of Germany as a 
preliminary to a negotiated peace. But as the German armies retreated to German soil, 
the Revolutionary government, fearful lest the Revolution be upset, ordered them 
demobilized. On November nth Germany still ssessed the mightiest military machine 
on earth; thirty days later it had nothing. Instead of being able to negotiate peace on the 
terms of Wilson's Fourteen Pos, a heless and prostrate Germany got the Versailles 
Treaty. ... 

No sooner had the German armies been demobilized than the more extreme elements of 
the Social Democratic Party, led by Rosa Luxemburg, laid ans to seize control of the 
revolution as the Bolsheviks had done in Russia. Aided by funds provided by the Soviet 
ambassador Joffe, Rosa Luxemburg's "Spartacus Bund" in January of  attempted to 
overthrow the revolutionary government. The revolt, following bloody street fighting, 
was quelled and its leaders, Rosa Luxemburg and Karl Liebknecht, were imprisoned and 
later executed by German army officers. Following the execution of Rosa Luxemburg, 
the Third International dispatched the Jew, Karl Radek, to lead the party. Later the 
Jewess, Ruth Fischer, assumed control of the German communist party, and remained 
at its head till . 

BELA KUN 

Following World War I, Hungary also had a communist Revolution, in this case the 
instigator was the Jew, Bela Kun (Cohen), who imsed a communist regime on the 
country in the spring of . Bela Kun had participated in the Bolshevik Revolution in 
Russia, and following the Armistice, he and a group of Jewish revolutionaries, using 
forged passrts, moved o Hungary and established the communist newspaper, 
Voros Ursay (Red News). Well supied with finances by the Soviet government, and 
aided by the pro-communist resident Jewish pulation, Kun quickly became the 
diator of all Hungary. 

Bela Kun proceeded to follow the pattern of the Bolshevik revolution. Says Encyclopedia 
Britannica: 

"Kun's programme was to 'arm at once, and forcibly transfer every industry and all 
landed property without conservation o the hands of the proletariat. 'At first he 
collaborated with the Social Democrats [Encyclopedia Britannica, page , vol. - 
] but soon shouldered them aside, nationalized all banks, all concerns with over 
 emoyees, all landed property over  ac, every building other than 
workmen's dwellings. All jewelry , all private property above the minimum (e.g. two 
suits,  shirts,  pair of boots and  socks) was seized; servants abolished, bathrooms 



made public on Saturday nights; priests, with the insane, criminals and shopkeepers, 
emoying paid assistants were declared incapable of the aive or passive suffrage." 

The result of this program was, as in Russia, economic and social chaos. The 
nationalization of every private bathroom in a country cannot be accomished without 
profoundly affeing the social and moral tone of its society. Neither can the land, 
buildings, and industries of a nation be nationalized without creating havoc. As in 
Russia, such a program could only be enforced by resorting to the Red Terror. During 
Bela Kun's three month reign of terror, tens of thousands of people priests, army 
officers, merchants, landowners, professional people were butchered. 

The communizing of the country's industrial and agricultural resources produced a 
famine in the cities, and this, combined with the peasantry's antipathy for the Jews, 
resulted in Kun's eventual overthrow. In an amazingly frank rert, the New 
International Year Book of  (Dodd, Mead, Co., page ) has summarized the 
situation: 

"One of the chief weaknesses in the new regime was antipathy to the Jews. In the 
country distris the feeling was widespread that the revolution had been a movement 
on the part of the Jews to seize the were for themselves, and the remark was 
frequently heard that if the Jews of Budapest died of starvation, so much the better for 
the rest of the country. The government of Bela Kun was comsed almost exclusively 
of Jews who held also the administrative offices. The communist had united at first 
with the socialists who were not of the extremely radical party, but resembled 
somewhat the Labor parties or trade unionists groups in other countries. Bela Kun did 
not, however sele his personnel from among them, but turned to the Jews and 
constituted virtually a Jewish bureaucracy. " 

After three months of blood, murder, and pillage, Bela Kun Was desed and erned 
in a lunatic asylum. Later he was released and returned to Russia, where he assumed 
control of the Red Terror organization the Cheka, in South Russia. 

The Triumvirate 

Lenin died of a brain hemorrhage in January of . By this time the communists had 
become firmly entrenched. The civil wars were over and every vestige of organized 
resistance to Jewish-Bolshevism had been destroyed. On Lenin's death the party 
leadership fell to fighting among itself. 

Lenin had, as early as May of  suffered a paralytic stroke which affeed his speech 
and motor reflexes. In December he suffered a second stroke, and his ace was taken by 
a triumvirate comsed of Zinoviev, Kamenev, and Joseph Stalin. Shortly afterwards 
Lenin suffered another stroke, and in  he died. 



Trotzky in Decline 



In the early days of the new regime Trotzky had enjoyed near equality with Lenin in 
prestige and were. Outside of Russia, Lenin -Trotzky were regarded as a duality, and in 
current literature of that period their names were often hyphenated. The outside world 
had therefore fully expeed Trotzky to assume Lenin's mantle as party leader. But after 
 Trotzky's prestige in the Politburo had declined rapidly, as we shall see. 

In the year the triumvirate began to funion the Politburo was comsed of Lenin, 
Zinoviev, Kamenev, Trotzky, Bukharin, Tomsky, and Stalin. The Lenin-Zinoviev- 
Kamenev "troika" had, of course, been dominant so long as Lenin was aive, but now 
Zinoviev and Kamenev, as the surviving members of the "troika," regarded themselves 
as Lenin's rightful successors, and they looked on Trotzky as a competitor. Into this 
piure Stalin insinuated himself. He allied himself with Kamenev and Zinoviev, and the 
three were able to turn the Politburo against Trotsky. Stalin thus became the junior 
member of the triumvirate. Trotzky describes the situation this way [Stalin (ibid page 
) page ] 

"Used as a counterweight against me, he was bolstered and encouraged by Zinoviev 
and Kamenev, and to a lesser extent by Rykov, Bukharin and Tomsky. No one thought 
at the time that Stalin would some day loom away above their heads. In the first 
triumvirate Zinoviev treated Stalin in a circumspely patronizing manner; Kamenev 
with a touch of irony." 

Zinoviev was considered to be the senior triumvir, and he gave the opening address at 
the th Party Congress, a funion heretofore reserved to Lenin. Zinoviev was not well 
received in this capacity, and before the Congress had adjourned, Stalin's control over 
the party machine gave him a dominant sition! in the triumvirate. This was the 
situation shortly after Lenin's death. 

Stalin to Powere 

Stalin now moved to consolidate his sition. In April of  he engineered Trotzky's 
removal as War Commissar. In the same month he broke with Zinoviev and Kamenev 
and allied himself with litburo members Bukharin, Rykov, and Tomsky, Trotzky, 
