Thus, within a period of  years (from the rd partition to ) the Jews, although 
constituting only .% of the pulation, had been able to entrench themselves so well 
in the Russian economy that the nation was almost bankrupted in the attempt to 
dislodge them. And, as we have seen, the nation's ernational credit was also affeed. 

After  events served increasingly to sharpen the enmity of Jewry toward Tsarism. 
The May Laws had not only restried Jewish economic aivity, but had attempted 
unsuccessfully, as we shall see to preserve Russia's cultural egrity. Hereafter Jews 
were permitted to attend state-suprted schools and universities, but only in ratio to 
their pulation. This was not unreasonable since Russia's schools were flooded with 
Jewish students while large numbers of her gentile pulation were illiterate, but to the 
Jews this represented another bitter "persecution," and all the world was acquaed 
with the enormity of this new crime against Jewry ... 

On May rd a delegation of Jews headed by Baron Gunzberg called on the new Tsar 
(Alexander III) to protest the May Laws and the alleged discrimination against Jewry. 
As a result of the investigation which followed, Tsar Alexander issued an edi the 
following Sept. rd, a part of which is given here: 

"For some time the government has given its attention to the Jews and to their 
relations to the rest of the inhabitants of the empire, with a view of ascertaining the 
sad condition of the Christian inhabitants brought about by the condu of the Jews in 
business matters ... 

During the last twenty years the Jews have gradually ssessed themselves of not only 
every trade and business in all its branches, but also of a great part of the land by 
buying or farming it. With few exceptions, they have as a body devoted their attention, 



not to enriching or benefiting the country, but to defrauding by their wiles its 
inhabitants, and particularly its or inhabitants. This condu of theirs has called 
forth protests on the part of the people, as manifested in as of violence and robbery. 
The government, while on the one hand doing its best to put down the disturbances, 
and to deliver the Jews from oppression and slaughter, have also, on the other hand, 
thought it a matter of urgency and justice to adopt stringent measures in order to put 
an end to the oppression praised by the Jews on the inhabitants, and to free the 
country from their malpraices, which were, as is known, the cause of the agitations." 

[Russia and Turkey in the th Century by E. W. Latimer, page . A. C. McClury & 
Co., J 

It was in this atmosphere that the twin movements of Marxism and Zionism began to 
take hold and dominate the mass of Russian Jewry. Ironically, both Zionism and 
Marxism were first promulgated by westernized German Jews. Zionism, whose chief 
advocate was Theodore Herzl, took root in Russia in the s in competition with 
Marxism, whose high priest was Karl Marx, grandson of a rabbi ... Eventually every 
Russian Jew came to identify himself with either one or the other of these movements. 

THE TERROR SECTION 

Six Assassinated 

As an outgrowth of this litical fermentation, there appeared at the beginning of the 
century one of the most remarkable terroristic organizations ever recorded in the annals 
of history. This was the Jewish dominated Social Revolutionary Party, which 
between  and  was resnsible for the assassination of no less than six first 
ranking leaders of the Imperial government, including Minister of Education Bogolev 
(); Minister of Interior Sipyagin (); Governor of Ufa, Bogdanovich (); 
Premier Viachelav von Plehve (); Grand Duke Sergei, uncle of the Tsar (); and 
General Dubrassov, who had suppressed the Moscow insurreion (). 

Chief archite of these terroristic aivities was the Jew, Gershuni, who headed the 
"terror seion" of the Social Revolutionary Party. In charge of the "fighting seion" was 
Yevno Azev, son of a Jewish tailor, and one of the principal founders of the party. 

Azev later otted, but was unable to carry out, the assassination of Tsar Nicholas II. He 
was executed in  and Gershuni was sentenced to life imprisonment. This marked 
the end of the terroristic aivities of the party, but the effe of these litical murders 
was far reaching. Never again was the royal family, or its ministers free from the fear of 
assassination. Soon another prime minister would be shot down this time in the very 
presence of the Tsar. This was the backdrop for the revolution of . 

BLOODY SUNDAY 

The revolution of , like that of , occurred in an atmosphere of war. On Jan. nd, 
, the Japanese captured Port Arthur, and thereby won the decisive viory of the 



[Russo-Japanese - RW] war. Later in January there occurred a tragic incident which was 
the immediate cause of the  revolution, and which was to affe the attitude of 
Russia's industrial pulation toward the Tsar for all time. This was the "Bloody 
Sunday" affair. 

The Imperial government, in its attempts to gain the favor of the industrial pulation, 
and in its search for a way to combat Jewish revolutionary aivity, had adopted the 
taic of encouraging the formation of legal trade unions, to which professional agitators 
were denied membership. These trade unions received official recognition and were 
proteed by law. 

Father Gan 

One of the most outstanding trade union leaders and certainly the most unusual was 
Father Gan, a priest in the Russian Orthodox Church. On the day Port Arthur fell a 
number of clashes occurred in Petersberg's giant Putilov works between members of 
Father Gan's labor organization and company officials. A few days later the Putilov 
workers went on strike. 

Father Gan resolved to take the matter direly to the Tsar. On the following Sunday 
thousands of Petersberg's workmen and their families turned out to participate in this 
appeal to the "little father". The procession was entirely orderly and peaceful and the 
petitioners caed patriotic banners expressing loyalty to the crown. At the palace gate 
the procession was met by a flaming volley of rifle fire. Hundreds of workmen and 
members of their families were slaughtered. This was "Bloody Sunday", certainly one of 
the blackest days in Tsarist history. 

Was Tsar Nicholas II resnsible for Bloody Sunday, as Marxist propagandists have 
claimed? He couldn't have been because he was out of the city at the time. Father Gan 
had marched on an empty palace. But the harm had been done. ... 

Revolution of  

Bloody Sunday marked the beginning of the  revolution. For the first time the 
Jewish-Marxists were joined by large numbers of the working class. Bloody Sunday 
delivered Russia's industrial pulation o the hands of the Jew-dominated 
revolutionary movement. 

A strike broke out in Lodz in late January, and by June nd this developed o an 
armed insurreion in which  were killed. The Tsar aed at once to recover the 
situation. In early February he ordered an investigation (by the Shidlovsky Commission) 
o the causes of unrest among the Petersberg workers, and later in the year (August) 
he announced provisions for establishing a legislature which later came to be the Duma. 
Not only that but he offered amnesty to litical offenders, under which, incidentally, 
Lenin returned to Russia. But these attempts failed. 



On Oober th the Jewish Menshevik-led All-Russian Railway union went on strike. 
On the st a general strike was called in Petersberg, and on the th there were general 
strikes in Moscow, Smolensk, Kursk, and other cities. 

PETERSBERG SOVIET 

Trotzky in Powere 

On Oober th the revolutionary Petersberg Soviet was founded. This Petersberg 
Soviet assumed the funions of a national government. It issued decrees, proclaimed an 
eight hour day, freedom of the press, and otherwise exercised the prerogatives of a 
government. 

From the very beginning the Soviet was dominated by the Menshevik faion of the 
Russian Social-Democratic Labor Party, although the Social Revolutionary 
Party was also represented. Its first president was the Menshevik, Zborovski, who was 
succeeded by Georgii Nosar. He in turn was succeeded by Lev Trotzky, who chiefly as a 
result of the prestige gained in , became one of the guiding spirits of the Oober 
revolution in . 

Trotzky became president of the Petersberg Soviet on Dec. th, and a week later some 
 members of the Soviet, including Trotzky, were arrested. The revolution was 
