almost, but not quite over. 

Parvus 

On Dec. th the Jew, Parvus, assumed control of a new executive committee of the 
Soviet and organized a general strike in Petersberg which involved , workers. The 
next day , workers went on strike in Moscow, and there were insurreions in 
Chita, Kansk, and Rostov. But within a week the government had gained the upper hand 
and by the th of December the revolution was over. 

After  

As an outcome of the  revolution, Tsar Nicholas II set about remedying the 
shortcomings of his regime in a most commendable manner. At his decree, Russia was 
given representative government and a constitution. An eleive legislative the Duma- 
was established, and free eleions were held. By these measures and others which 
followed, Russia seemed well on the way to becoming a constitutional monarchy 
patterned after the western European model, and as a  of fa it was only the 
outbreak of World War I which prevented this from becoming a reality. 

As would be expeed, the Jewish revolutionary parties bitterly opsed these reforms, 
looking on them as merely a device by which the forces of revolution would be 
dissipated. Aually these measures did succeed in pacifying the Russian masses, and 
the years between  and  were ones of comparative quiet and progress. No man 
deserves more credit for this state of affairs than Premier Peter Arkadyevich Stolypin, 



who in the year following the  revolt emerged as the most impressive figure in 
Imperial Russia. 

From  to  it is no exaggeration to say that he dominated Russian litics. It was 
he who gave Russia the famed "Stolypin Constitution," which among other things 
undertook to guarantee the civil rights of the peasantry, which constituted % of 
Russia's pulation. His land reforms, for which he is most famous, not only gave the 
peasant the right to own land, but anually financed the purchase with government 
loans. Stolypin was determined to give the peasant a stake in capitalism, believing that 
"the natural counterweight of the communal principal is individual ownership." 

Were the Stolypin land reforms effeive? Bertram Wolfe, who is on all s anti- 
Tsarist and pro-revolutionary, has this to say [Three Who Made a Revolution, page , 
by Bertram Wolfe, Dial Press, New York, ] 

"Between  and , under the Stolypin land reform laws, ,, peasant 
families seceded from the village mir and became individual proprietors. All through 
the war the movement continued, so that by Jan. , , ,, peasant families, 
out of approximately ,, eligible, had made apication for separation. Lenin 
saw the matter as a race with time between Stolypin's reforms and the next upheaval. 
Should an upheaval be stned for a coue of decades, the new land measures 
would so transform the countryside that it would no longer be a revolutionary force. 
How near Lenin came to losing the race is proved by the fa that in , when he 
called on the peasants to "take the land," they already owned more than three-fourths 
of it." 

Russian Jewry wanted revolution, not reform. As early as  an attempt had been 
made to assassinate Premier Stolypin when his country house was destroyed by a bomb. 
Finally in Sept. of  the best premier Russia ever had was shot down in cold blood 
while attending a gala affair at the Kiev theatre. The assassin was a Jewish lawyer 
named Mordecai Bogrov. Thus it was that Russia had since  lost two premiers to 
Jewish assassins. 

Many of Stolypin's reforms were caed out after his death. In  an industrial 
insurance law was inaugurated which gave all industrial workmen sickness and accident 
compensation to the extent of two-thirds and three-fourths of their regular pay. For the 
first time the newspapers of the revolutionary parties were given legal status. Public 
schools were expanded and the eleion laws were revised. In  a general amnesty for 
all litical prisoners was given. Not even the severest critic of Tsarism can deny that 
these measures represented a sincere attempt on the part of the Imperial government to 
bring about reform. Why in spite of all this, was the Tsar overthrown? 

World War I 

One of the chief faors contributing to the destruion of the Imperial government was 
the onset of World War I. Before the war the Imperial military establishment had 
contained perhaps ,, professional troops, well trained and loyal to the crown, ... 



"but by  the regular army was gone. Its losses for the first ten months of the war 
were reckoned as ,,, or, to take the reckoning of the Quartermaster-General, 
Danilov, , a month and the officers, who went o aion standing, while 
commanding their men to crawl, were falling at twice the rate of the men." 

[Russia, page , by Bernard Pares, New American Library, New York, revised .] 

Altogether  million men were called to the colors, most of whom were conscripted 
from the peasantry. Although courageous in battle they proved litically unreliable and 
were easily incited by agitators. 

Large numbers of the industrial pulation were also drafted o the armies, and their 
aces were taken by peasants, fresh out of the country. As a result, Russia's principal 
cities came to be pulated by a working class which was peasant in origin and habit of 
thinking, but which lacked the conservatism and stability which seems to go with tenure 
of the land. This new proletariat was in reality an uprooted and landless peasantry, 
orly adjusted to city life, and easily stirred up by propagandists. 

Now It should be remembered that the Russian revolution was caed out by a handful 
of revolutionaries operating mainly in the larger cities. While something like % of 
Russia's gentile pulation was rural, these country people took virtually no part in the 
revolt. Conversely only .% of the Jewish pulation was anually situated on the 
farms; the great majority of the Jews were congregated in the cities. Says the Universal 
Jewish Encyclopedia: [page , vol. , Universal Jewish Encyclopedia, Inc., New York, 
] 

"... it must be noted that the Jews lived almost exclusively in the cities and towns; in 
Russia's urban pulation the Jews constituted %. Two additional faors are taken 
o consideration. On the one hand the rural pulation took praically no part in 
litical aivities, and on the other there was virtually no illiteracy among the 
Russian Jews. " 

As a matter of fa, the Jews represented a substantial rtion of Russia's educated 
class. Not only that, but the overwhelming majority of Russia's professional class were 
Jews. So comete was the Jewish domination of the professions that only one out of 
eight of Russia's professional people were gentile. In other words, the Jews, who 
constituted .% of Russia's pre-war pulation comprised something like % of its 
professional class. 

The Evacuations 

Also significant was the fa that the theatre of war was situated in those areas most 
heavily pulated by Jews. By , it should be remembered, Russia's Jewish 
pulation was nearing the seven million mark. (The exa figure given in the Universal 
Jewish Encyclopedia is ,,). A substantial number of these resided in Russian- 
Poland, which was a war zone. The majority of these Jews, out of hatred for the Tsarist 
regime, were inclined to favor a German viory. As a result, the Imperial high command 



was compelled to remove all Jews from the war area in the early part of . In May of 
, for exame, the supreme command expelled all Jewish residents from the 
provinces of Courland and Grodno. Altogether, nearly a half million Jews were forced to 
leave their homes in the military zone. These expellees were at first required to remain 
within the Pale of Settlement, but in August of  they were permitted to settle in all 
cities in the empire. Thus it was that as the war progressed a flood of Tsar-hating Jews 
began infiltrating the cities beyond the Pale ... 

REVOLUTION 

The revolution occurred in March of , in St. Petersberg, capital city of the 
Romanovs. From beginning to end the revolt involved an amazingly small number of 
people when we consider that the fate of  million Russians was at stake. The revolt 
came, as we have tried to indicate, because of Jewish unrest, because of Jewry's 
dissatisfaion, and above all, because of Jewry's determination to destroy Tsarism. By 
the Spring of  Russia's unstable urban pulation had been thoroughly isoned by 
this dissatisfaion. A food shortage in Petersberg fanned this dissatisfaion o the 
flame of revolution. 

St. Petersberg in the third year of World War I was Russia's chief armaments produion 
center, and by reason of this ssessed the largest industrial pulation of any city in 
Russia. It also had the largest Jewish pulation of any city outside the Pale of 
