a real majority in the party. Lenin had temrarily been able to dominate the 
Unification Congress when the Jewish Bund's delegation had walked out in a huff over 
party licy. Because Lenin had been temrarily able to martial [sic] a majority of the 
remaining delegates to his suprt, his faion had been identified as the Bolshevik, or 
majority faion, and always thereafter Lenin and his followeres were known as 
Bolsheviks. It is imrtant to note that this Bolshevik-Menshevik sit was among the 



Iskrists only. The two other major faions of the party Rosa Luxemburg's Polish Social 
Democrats and the Jewish Bund were neither Bolshevik nor Menshevik, although both 
faions usually teamed up with the Mensheviks on party licy. (In , however, both 
the Polish party and the Bund merged o the Bolshevik faion.) 

Revolution of  

The  revolution came unexpeedly. Jewish agitators, seizing un the discontent 
engendered by Russia's defeat by the Japanese, and capitalizing on the "Bloody Sunday" 
incident which we have already described fanned the flames of insurreion o 
being in what was to be a dress rehearsal of the  revolution. 

The revolt, coming so quickly on the heels of the Bloody Sunday incident, caught the 
party leadership by surprise. Lenin was in Geneva and he did not return to Petersberg 
until Oober shortly before the Petersburg Soviet was organized. Martov the 
Menshevik leader, returned at the same time. Rosa Luxemburg aved in December, by 
which time the insurreion had ended. Axelrod got only as far as Finland, and 
Plekhanov never returned at all. The  revolution was principally led by second- 
string leaders, virtually all of whom were identified with the Mensheviks. 

Trotzky alone of the top leadership had sensed the significance of "Bloody Sunday," and 
at the first word of revolution he and a Jewish compatriot, Parvus, had struck out for 
Petersberg. 

Using the pseudonym Yanovsky, he very quickly became a leading member of the Soviet, 
and by the end of Oober was generally recognized as the most influential member of 
the Executive Committee. In addition, he edited (with Parvus) the Menshevik organ, 
Nachato. Later, under the pseudonym, "Peter Petrovich" he edited the "Russkyaya 
Gazeta." On Dec. , as we have previously related, he was eleed president of the 
Petersberg Soviet, and following his arrest Parvus assumed leadership of the revolt. 

Although Lenin had been in St. Petersberg throughout the life of the Petersberg Soviet, 
neither he nor any member of his faion ayed a prominent part in its aivities. When 
the  members of the Soviet were finally arrested, not a single prominent Bolshevik 
was among them. The revolution of  was strily a Menshevik affair. 

The London Congress 

In  (May  - June ) a fifth Congress of the Russian Social Democratic Labor Party 
was held, this time in London. This was by all accounts the most impressive one of all, 
and it was the last one held before the  revolution. Represented at the Congress 
were: 

 The Bolsheviks, led by Lenin  delegates. 

 The Mensheviks, led by Martov and Dan  delegates. 

 The Polish Social Democrats, led by Rosa Luxemburg  delegates. 

 The Jewish Bund, led by Rafael Abramovitch and M. I. Lieber  delegates. 



 The Lettish Social Democrats, led by "Comrade Herman" (Danishevsky). 

Altogether there were  delegates to the Congress, of whom  were, or had been, 
workers. Dominating the Congress were the great names of the party: there were the 
founders of the movement, Plekhanov, Axelrod, Deutch, and Zasulich who after  
ayed roles of diminishing imrtance in party affairs and their discies, Lenin, 
Martov, Dan (Gurvich), and Trotzky. There were Abramovich and Lieber (Goldman) of 
the Bund, and Rosa Luxemburg, the latter one day being destined to lead a revolution of 
her own in Germany. Present also were Zinoviev, Kamenev, and Stalin, none of whom 
were imrtant in , but who are listed here because one day they would be the three 
most wereful men in Russia. Significantly all of those named were Jewish, excepting 
Lenin, Plekhanov, and Stalin. 

Perhaps one of the most imrtant matters taken up by the London Congress was the 
bitterly controversial question of "expropriations." It should be exained that Lenin's 
Bolshevik faion had to an increasing degree resorted to outlawry to reenish its 
finances. Robbery, kidnapping, and theft became regular party aivities. And on one 
occasion a loyal Bolshevik maed a rich widow to secure funds for the party treasury. 
These aivities were referred to in party circles as "expropriations." The most famous 
expropriation was the Tiflis bank robbery, engineered by young Josef Stalin shortly after 
the London Congress. 

The Mensheviks bitterly criticized 
these taics, while Lenin stoutly 
defended them as a necessary 
means of raising capital. The 
"expropriation" question broke out 
again and again as a  of 
contention between the two 
faions. Aually a great deal of 
Lenin's strength came from this 
source. With money thus raised he 
was able to pay the traveling 
expenses of delegates to these 
various congresses, and this gave 
him a voting were which was 
probably out of prortion to his 
following. Lenin's opsition on 
the expropriation question came 
not only from Martov's Menshevik 
faion, but also from the Jewish 

Bund and Rosa Luxemburg's Polish Social Democrats. The Jewish Bund and Rosa 
Luxemburg's faion usually sided with the Mensheviks in these ra-party squabbles, 
and it was not until , when they were anually incorrated o the Bolshevik 
faion, that Lenin was able to anually control the entire party. 




In communist Russia the penalty for revolutionary aivity is 
always death. Under the more tolerant rule of the Tsars the 
penalty was exile in Siberia. Stalin was exiled no less than  
times. The photo above shows him with a friend (Suren 
Spandaryan) during exile in Monastyrskoye, Turukhansk, 
Siberia. 



The Tiflis bank robbery has now become a part of the legend which surrounds Stalin, 
and it is perhaps worth while to give it some attention. Although the robbery was 
engineered by Stalin, then a minor party worker, the aual hold-up was caed out by 
an Armenian by the name of Petroyan, who is known in Russian history as "Kamo." 
Kamo's method was crude but effeive: he tossed a dynamite bomb at a bank stage 
which was transrting , rubles in currency. In the resulting exosion some  
people were killed and Kamo escaped with the loot, which consisted mainly of  ruble 
notes. 

The Bolsheviks encountered considerable difficulty in converting these  ruble notes 
o usable form. It was decided that agents in various countries would simultaneously 
cash as many as ssible in a single day. The operation was not a comete success. The 
Jewess, Olga Ravich, who was one day to marry Zinoviev was apprehended by lice 
authorities, as was one Meyer Wallach, whose real name was Finklestein, and who is 
better known as Maxim Litvinov. Litvinov later became Commissar of Foreign Affairs 
(-). 

The Year  

In the autumn of  the Bolsheviks began publishing the Proletariie, with Lenin, 
Dubrovinsky, Zinoviev, and Kamenev (the latter two Jewish) as editors. In the same 
year the Menshevik organ, Golos Sotsial-Demokrata began publication, edited by 
Plekhanov, Axelrod, Martov, Dan, and Martynov (Pikel), all of whom were Jewish with 
the exception of Plekhanov. In O. of  the Vienna Pravda was launched, with 
Trotzky as editor. 

The Troika 

In  the Lenin-Zinoviev-Kamenev "troika" was formed. It was to endure until 
