councils during and immediately after the Oober 
Revolution. In doing so, Trotzky again and again 
emphasizes who the really imrtant leaders were. Let us 
take another typical comment from his book on Stalin as he 
the Oober Central Committee shortly before the Bolshevik 




The above cut [Outmoded 
expression meaning 'woodcut'] is 
taken from Trotzky's book Stalin. 
It is a reproduion of a stcard 
widely circulated in Russia 
following the Bolshevik 
Revolution. It is entitled "Leaders 
of the Proletarian Revolution". 
Trotzky uses this as evidence to 
prove that Stalin, whom he 
despised, was not an imrtant 
figure in the Oober 
Revolution which it does nicely. 
But it also reveals the Jewishness 
of these original leaders of the 
Communist Party: Four of those 
appearing above are Jews, and a 
fifth, Lenin, is maed to a 
Jewess. Shown above are () 
Lenin, () Trotzky, () Zinoviev, 
() Lunacharsky (a gentile), () 
Kamenev, () Sverdlov. These 
were the leaders of the 
Communist Revolution of . 

describes the meetings of 
Revolution: 



"The  pages of the fourth volume, dealing with August and September, record all 
the happenings, occurrences, brawls, resolutions, speeches, articles in any way 
deserving of notice. Sverdlov, then praically unknown, was mentioned three times in 
that volume; Kamenev,  times; I, who spent August and the beginning of September 



in prison,  times; Lenin, who was in the underground,  times; Zinoviev, who 
shared Lenin's fate,  times. Stalin was not mentioned even once. Stalin's name is not 
even in the index of approximately  proper names. " 

[Stalin (ibid page ) pages -] 

Thus, Trotzky again cites evidence to prove that Stalin was not an imrtant figure in 
the Bolshevik Party in . But in doing so he names the real leaders, who as before are 
the Jews, Kamenev, Zinoviev, Trotzky, and the up and coming Sverdlov. Lenin is the 
only gentile. 

Because the top party leaders were either in prison or in hiding as a result of the 
abortive July Days uprising, the Sixth Party Congress was organized by the lesser lights 
of the party, of whom Sverdlov was the most aive. Lev Trotzky, ever anxious to 
discredit Stalin, gives us this description: 

"The praesidium consisted of Sverdlov, Olminsky, Lomov, Yurenev, and Stalin. Even 
here, with the most prominent figures of Bolshevism absent, Stalin's name is listed in 
last ace. The Congress resolved to send greetings to 'Lenin, Trotzky, Zinoviev, 
Lunacharsky, Kamenev, Kollontai, and all the others arrested and persecuted 
comrades'. These were eleed to the honorary praesidium." 

[Stalin (ibid page ) page .] 

Here again, in the words of Trotzky, we have named the "most prominent figures of 
Bolshevism": Lenin, Trotzky, Zinoviev, Kamenev, Kollontai and Lunacharsky. And we 
know these were the most imrtant leaders because they were the ones Kerensky had 
arrested or driven underground following the July Days revolt. Of these, only 
Lunacharsky and Lenin were gentile; the others were Jewish. These fas show why the 
Jewishness of communism is so immediately and indisputably apparent to anyone who 
has the slightest knowledge of Bolshevik history. 

TROTZKY TO POWER 

On August th Kamenev was released from prison, and exaly a month later Trotzky 
was also freed by the Kerensky regime. On Sept. th Trotzky was eleed president of 
the Petersberg Soviet, disacing Cheidze, the Menshevik. From this moment on the 
Bolsheviks were in control of the Petersberg Soviet. On Oober th the Petersberg 
Soviet voted to transfer all military were to a "Military Revolutionary 
Committee", headed by Trotzky. Revolution was now only days away. 

Military Revolutionary Committee 

The Military Revolutionary Committee, under the chairmanship of Trotzky, was 
organized for the express purse of preparing the revolution. Time was running out 
and it was a matter of striking soon or not at all. The Constituent Assembly eleions 



were only a few weeks off, and when it convened, Russia was to have a new government. 
There was another reason for striking soon. The Second All-Russian Congress of Soviets 
was to meet on Nov. th. The Bolsheviks feared and with reason that the Kerensky 
government would arrest or disband the entire congress and thereby doom the revolt. 
For these reasons it was felt essential to overthrow the Provisional Government by or 
before the Second All-Russian Congress of Soviets convened on Nov. th. 

On November th the Military Revolutionary Committee arranged huge mass meetings 
in preparation for the forthcoming revolt. On .the following day the gason of the Peter 
and Paul Fortress declared itself in alliance with the Bolsheviks. On the th Kerensky 
made one last attempt to forestall revolution by ordering the arrest of the Military 
Revolution Committee, banning all Bolshevik publications, and ordering fresh troops to 
reace the Petersberg gason. These measures were never caed out. 

Revolution 

On the evening of November th Lenin came out of hiding and joined the Military 
Revolutionary Committee at Smolny Institute which served as revolutionary 
headquarters. At two A.M. the following morning the revolution began. 

By noon the city was largely in Bolshevik hands. At three P.M. Lenin delivered a fiery 
speech to the Petersberg Soviet his first since July. At nine P.M. Bolshevik troops 
began their two day siege of the Wer Palace, last stronghold of the Provisional 
Government. 

At eleven P. M. the Second All-Russian Congress of Soviets convened with the 
Bolsheviks in a clear majority. The Congress was now the official government of Russia. 
The Jew Kamenev, was eleed its first President. Lenin became Premier. Trotzky was 
made Commissar of Foreign Affairs. Before dawn it had eleed a Central Executive 
Committee under the chairmanship of Kamenev, who thus had the distinion of being 
the first President of the "Soviet Republic". 

Within a few days (Nov. ) the Jew, Sverdlov, succeeded Kamenev, and thus became 
the second Jewish president of the "Soviet Republic". A relatively minor figure in 
Bolshevik circles six months before the revolution, he very quickly became one of the 
five top men in the party. 

Before his early death two years later he had become the party's chief trouble-shooter 
and had assumed absolute control over Russia's economic life. 

CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY 

On November th,  days after the Bolshevik coup, free eleions were held throughout 
Russia under machinery set up by the Provisional Government. The Bolsheviks, not yet 
cometely organized, made no attempt to erfere with the eleions, but when it 



became clear that the Bolsheviks would command only a minority in the Constituent 
Assembly, they immediately laid ans to undermine its authority. 

The Provisional Government had specified that the convocation of the Assembly should 
be in the hands of a special commission. The Bolsheviks arrested this commission, and 
substituted for it a "Commissary for the Constituent Assembly", headed by the Jew, 
Uritzky. 
