Lenin's death in . Zinoviev and Kamenev were Lenin's inseparable companions. 
Later, when the Bolsheviks were in were, Trotzky would become co-equal with Lenin, 
and even something of a competitor, but Kamenev and Zinoviev were never Lenin's 
equals nor his competitors they were his right and left hand. They would argue with 
him, and fight with him, and opse him in party councils, but the "troika" was broken 
only when Lenin died. 

January Plenum 

In January of  the  top leaders of the Party met in what historians refer to as the 
"January Plenum of the Central Committee." Its purse was, as always, to 
promote party unity. One outcome was that Lenin was compelled to burn the remainder 
of the  ruble notes from the Tiflis expropriation, which he had been unable to cash 
anyway. Another outcome of the January Plenum was the recognition of the newspaper, 
Sotsial Demokrata, as the general party newspaper. Its editors were the Bolsheviks, 
Lenin and Zinoviev, and the Mensheviks, Martov and Dan. Lenin was the only gentile. 
Trotzky's semi-independent "Vienna Pravda" was declared to be an official party organ, 
and Kamenev was aped to help edit it. Who could have foretold in the year  



that within seven short years this Yiddish crew would be the lords and masters of all 
Russia? 

The  Revolution 

The  revolution, like that of . caught the top leaders of the party unprepared. 
Lenin and Martov were in Switzerland, and Trotzky was eking out an existence in New 
York's East Side. 

Shortly after the March revolution the German government did a peculiar thing. It 
arranged to ship Lenin, Martov, Radek, and  members of the party across Germany to 
Russia. The German strategy seemed to be based on the assumption which later 
proved corre that the communists would work to sabotage the Russian war effort, 
now being prosecuted by the Provisional Government. Perhaps the Lenin group had 
some such agreement with the Germans, no one knows. But one thing is certain:  
hours after the Bolsheviks came to were, Trotzky began negotiations for an armistice. 
But that story comes later. 

On April rd, just  days after the provisional government had been formed, Lenin and 
his party aved in Petersberg. Within  months he and his faion would be the 
supreme diators of all Russia. 

MORE PETERSBERG SOVIET 
It Controlled the Mob 

We have already given a description of the March Revolution which overthrew the Tsar, 
and we have told of the establishment of the two governing bodies which came o 
existence on March th, namely the Provisional Government and the Petersberg 
Soviet. 

The Petersberg Soviet, although it controlled the mob, was reluant to assume the 
resnsibility of governing at least in the beginning. The Soviet was originally 
organized by second-string leaders who were quite capable of sting up trouble, but 
who had little capacity for leading a revolutionary government. Furthermore, it was not 
clear in the early days of the revolution as to what the final outcome would be. 
Petersberg was, after all, only one city in the empire, and the attitude of the country as a 
whole, and of the soldiers at the front, was unknown. For this reason the Soviet 
preferred that the Provisional Government which had some semblance of legitimacy- 
should temrarily rule. 

The Provisional Government 

The Provisional Government was not a revolutionary body. Of its  members, only one, 
Kerensky, was a "Socialist." The others were typical upper-middle class members of the 
Duma, with ssibly mild leanings to the left. Head of the Provisional Government was 
Prince Lvov, whose reputation as a liberal may have qualified him for that sition more 



than some of the others. This  man government had sprung o being simy because 
no other semblance of a government existed in Petersberg on March lth it did not in 
any way participate in the revolution. In the months following the overthrow of the Tsar, 
however, its were grew considerably, so that by July when an abortive Bolshevik 
uprising occurred, the Provisional Government was able to quell the affair and arrest or 
force o hiding the Bolshevik leaders. 

The Provisional Government undertook to continue the war against Germany. The great 
mass of people were, of course, patriotic Russians, and Germany was looked on as a 
dangerous threat to Russian sovereignty. The Provisional Government, during its entire 
tenure, was primarily occupied with the prosecution of the war. 

The Provisional Government took two steps, however, which were to profoundly affe 
the revolution. The first, and most fateful, was the decision to permit the return of all 
exiled litical prisoners from Siberia and abroad. By doing so it sealed the fate of 
Russia. Here is the way one American writer, Edward Alsworth Ross, has described it 
[Russian Bolshevik Revolution, page , by Edward Alsworth Ross, Century Company. 
New York. ]: 

"One of the first as of the Provisional government, however, is to bring back to 
Russia the litical viims of the autocracy. From Siberia about eighty thousand are 
brought out. From Switzerland, France, Scandinavia, the United States, even from 
Argentina and other remote countries, come perhaps ten thousand who have been 
refugees from the tsar's vengeance. In all ninety thousand at least, virtually all of them 
of socialist sympathies, stream o European Russia in late April, May, June, and 
July. Honored by a grateful people for their voluntary sacrifices and sufferings they 
quickly rise to a commanding influence in the local Soviets and carry them irresistibly 
toward the litical left." 

These ninety thousand exiles constituted the heart of the approaching Bolshevik 
revolution. They were almost to the last man professional revolutionaries, and with few 
exceptions they were Jewish. Stalin, Sverdlov, and Zinoviev were among the exiles who 
returned from Siberia. Lenin, Martov, Radek, and Kamenev as we have seen returned 
from Switzerland. Trotzky returned, with hundreds of his Yiddish brethren, from New 
York's East Side. These were the inheritors of the revolution. Until their return the 
revolution had been without leadership largely it had been condued by second string 
leaders who happened to be on the st. Now the elite were returning. Let us take 
another quotation from the starry-eyed Edward Alworth Ross, whose prose is almost as 
or as his judgment: 

"The bewildered leaderless Russian masses are thrilled and captivated by these ready, 
self-confident men who tell them just what they must do in order to garner for 
themselves the fruits of the revolution. This is why refugees, obscure to us although not 
to Russians, who in exile had been obliged to work in our steel mills and tailor shops 
for a living, former residents of New York's "Eastside", who lived precariously from 
some Russian newspapers we Americans never heard of, will rise to be the heads of 



Soviets and, later, cabinet ministers of a government ruling a tenth of the human race. 
In all modern history there is no romance like it. " 

[Russian Bolshevik Revolution (ibid p. ), 
page ] 

Soon these hordes of returning Jews would 
exercise the were of life and death over  
million Christian Russians. Soon every 
faory, every government bureau every 
school distri, and every army unit would 
funion under the gimlet eye of a Jewish 
Commissar. Soon the blood of human beings 
would be oozing from under the doors of 
communist execution chambers as tens of 
thousands of Christian men and women 
were butchered like cattle in a 
slaughterhouse. Soon five million 
landowners would be deliberately starved to 
death as part of a premeditated an. Soon a 
move would be under way to exterminate 
the gentile leader class of the entire nation 
by murdering every Christian faory owner, 
and lawyer, and government leader, and 
army officer, and every other person who had been, or might be, a tential leader. Soon 
the standing pulation of the slave labor camps would exceed  million. Soon every 
church and cathedral would be gutted and every priest and preacher would become a 
criminal in his own community. Soon Russia would have a zombie-proletariat docile, 
willing to work, easily controlled, incapable of revolt ... Such was the "romance" of the 
Bolshevik revolution. 

