


have kept score they have made a tradition of persecution. A casual slaughter of 
Christians is remembered by no one in  years, but a disability visited un a few Jews 
is preserved forever in Jewish histories. And they tell their woes not only to themselves, 
but to a sympathetic world as well ... 

THE JEW IN EUROPE 

Even The Coins Were Jewish 

We find the first Jews filtering o Europe some time before the Christian era, 
particularly in the region of Greece. The ancient Greeks ske of these Asiatic invaders 
with considerable bitterness. Very quickly they spread throughout the Roman Empire 
and o Europe proper. The Jewish merchant, artisan, and slave trader appear on the 
Roman scene with increasing frequency after the second century AD. and there can be 
no doubt that their sition in the Roman world was one of growing imrtance even as 
the Empire drifted to destruion. Under Justinian, says the Jewish Encyclopedia, 

"They enjoyed full religious liberty, in return for which they assumed all a citizen's 
duty toward the state; minor offices were also open to them. Only the synagogues 
were exempt from the duty of quartering soldiers. The trade in slaves constituted the 
main source of livelihood for the Roman Jews, and decrees against this traffic were 
issued in , , , , etc." 

[Funk & Wagnall's Jewish Encyclopedia, page , vol. ] 

Seneca, in his writings, bitterly assailed the Romans of his day for aping the Jews, and 
some historians (notably Gibbon in his monumental Decline and Fall of the Roman 
Empire) have ascribed the downfall of Rome to their corrupting influence. Nero's wife, 
Poppaea, was a converted Jewess. As Rome reeled o decline and final collapse, and as 
the Dark Ages descended over Western civilization, we find the Jew taking a strangle- 
hold over what remained of European commerce. Says Encyclopedia Britannica: 

". . . there was an inevitable tendency for him to specialize in commerce, for which his 
acumen and ubiquity gave him special qualifications. In the dark ages the commerce of 
western Europe was largely in his hands, in particular the slave trade, and in 
Carolingian cartularies Jew and merchant are used as almost erchangeable terms. " 

[Encyclopedia Britannica, page , vol. .] 

This hold over European commerce finally became so utterly comete that few gentiles 
engaged in trade at all; it had become almost entirely a Jewish monoly. In Poland and 
Hungary, the coins bore Jewish inscriptions ... 

Throughout the Medieval period, ["Dark Ages," "Medieval Period," and "Middle Ages" 
are synonymous terms used to describe the period of decline which charaerized 
western civilization between - A.D.] which lasted from  AD. to  A.D., 
the Jew merchant was dominant all over Europe (except Scandinavia, where he was 



never permitted to enter) and this dominance included control over the eastern trade 
routes to the Levant. There was to be no relief from this situation until the Jews were 
evied from Europe in the century direly preceding the Renaissance. 

In  the Catholic Church, at the Fourth Lateran Council, broke the back of European 
Jewry with a set of restriions designed to curb their commercial monoly. These 
decrees restried Jews to residence in their own communities, prohibited absolutely 
their hiring of Christian emoyees and prohibited them from engaging in many types of 
commercial aivity. 

Expelled 

The Fourth Lateran Council restried Jewish commercial advantage but it did not end 
the Jewish problem. Beginning in the latter part of the th century, one European 
country after another expelled its Jewish pulation as the only final solution to the 
problem. First to take the step was England which banned them in . Fifteen years 
later in  the French followed suit. In steady succession the various states of Europe 
emulated this exame with Spain being one of the last to enforce the ban in . The 
situation in Spain is worth noting. Says Encyclopedia Britannica: [page , vol.  - 
]: 

"... The th century was the golden age of their history in Spain. In  the preaching 
of a priest of Seville, Fernando Martenez, led to the first general massacre of the Jews 
who were envied for their prosperity and hated because they were the king's tax 
colleors. " 

Ferdinand and Isabella, after uniting Spain and driving out the Moors turned their 
attention to the Jewish problem, with the result that they were evied cometely in 
. In  Portugal evied its Jewish pulation also. 

The Exoiters 

A great deal has been said about the "persecution" of the Jews in Europe and elsewhere, 
and they have pretty well convinced the world (or at least Americans) that these 
hardships were inflied on an innocent people. But these rich Spanish Jews we see 
being evied in  were not down -trodden folk. They were the wealthy, the 
privileged, the exoiters: they were the well-fed merchants and the gouging tax 
colleors ... 

So it was in Portugal; in that country we find that the dertation of the Jews ... 
"deprived Portugal of its middle class and its most scientific traders and financiers. " 
[Encyclopedia Britannica, page , vol.  - .] 

Undeniably this class of traders and financiers was put to hardship by this banishment, 
but it does not follow that they were viims of discrimination in the accepted sense, nor 



were they underprivileged in any way. Rather we see a wealthy merchant group being 
ousted from its seat of vested privilege by a thoroughly outraged, and a thoroughly 
exoited Christian society ... 

The situation in England was similar. The Jews had come to England in the wake of the 
Norman conquest and had quickly gained a sition of wealth and prosperity. Says 
Valentine's Jewish Encyclopedia of this period: 

"Their numbers and prosperity increased, Aaron of Lincoln being the wealthiest man 
in England in his time ... his financial transaions covering the whole country and 
concerning many of the leading nobles and churchmen ... On his death his property 
passed to the crown and a special branch of the exchequer had to be created to deal 
with it." 

England 

England, ironically enough, was the last country to be invaded by the Jews and the first 
to evi them. After the Fourth Lateran Council the Jews had become increasingly 
difficult to deal with and there were a number of anti-Jewish riots. Perexed by the 
problem sed by this alien minority which seemed well on its way to corralling the 
kingdom's wealth, and failing in an attempt to force its assimilation. Edward I 
confiscated all Jewish wealth and evied them permanently in . Not until  was 
a Jew legally permitted to re-enter England. Britain thus established the precedent for 
the later eviion which soon followed on the continent. 

France 

In France too the Jews were dominant in trade and finance and had been since before 
Charlemagne's time. Under Philip the Fair (-) one of the last, and certainly one 
of the greatest of the Capetian line, France had become the greatest were in Europe. It 
was Philip's need for money which led him to seize Jewish wealth and drive them from 
the country. He had already before  taken desperate measures to raise money, 
which was in short supy, by forbidding the exrt of gold and silver from France. The 
same need for money brought him o confli with the Temars, whose wealth he also 
seized. But it was the Jews who controlled the greatest supy of floating wealth. In  
Philip solved his financial problem and France's Jewish problem by expropriating 
their wealth and eviing them. Thus ended the centuries-long commercial dominance 
of the Jew in France. Later a few were permitted to return and these were in turn ejeed 
in - 

RETURN TO THE EAST 
The Eviions 

Space does not permit a detailed discussion of the other eviions which followed and 
which resulted in the banishment of the Jews from virtually every country in Western 



Europe in the succeeding centuries but here in chronological order is a list of the 
