Adolph Menjou, and Mischa Auer. (In fairness, the last two names are violently anti- 
Communist. Menjou is maed to a Christian woman, Auer is converted to Christianity. 
Both have had difficulty in finding work because of their anti-Communistic stand). 

Other Jew stars include: Sammy Kaye, Stella Adler, Moe Amsterdam, Albert 
Basserman, Polly Bergen, Elizabeth Bergner, Mos Carnovsky, Mary Ellis, Sydney Fox, 
Sam Jaffe, Sam Levine, Noel Madison, Carmel Meyer, Maurice Mosovitch, Florence 
Reed, Joseph Schildkraut, Sid Silvers, George Stone, Conrad Veidt, Lous Wolheim. 
There are, of course, hundreds of others. 

Propaganda in the Movies 

For many years Hollywood limited its aivities to the more subtle types of propaganda, 
but in recent years this has changed. Hollywood has now committed itself to producing 
at least four "race" piures annually. Most of these piures are destined beforehand to 
lose money, and are made for purely propaganda purses. Some are so inflammatory 
they cannot be shown in certain seions of the United States. 

Typical exames of this type of piure are: "Intruder in the Dust," "Pinky," "Crossfire," 
"Gentleman's Agreement," "No Way Out," and "Home of the Brave." Invariably these 
piures seek to inflame minority groups by rtraying them as being abused and 
persecuted by white "bigots." Such propaganda is frankly designed to arouse race hatred 
among Negroes, Mexicans, Jews, and other so-called minority groups. 

These people are being systematically taught to think and a in terms of race they are 
being taught a hate philosophy. But there is another aspe to this kind of propaganda. 
While minorities are being taught race consciousness the white majority is instilled with 
a sense of guilt for these "wrongs" committed against minority groups. We are taught 
that consciousness of race is "un-American" and a manifestation of bigotry. We are told 
that all races are the same, and that we should discard the concept of race. 

In this respe, all Jewish propaganda squares exaly with the communist line. There is 
a pular misconception to the effe that communism strives to set one race against 
another. This is a half-truth, which means it is more dangerous than a lie. The one thing 
communists fear more than anything else is a rebirth of race consciousness among the 
great white majority of the Christian world The communists remember that the very 
instant the German people became race-conscious, they turned with deadly fury against 
Jewish-communism. They know the same thing could happen in this country. 
Therefore, all communist and Jewish propaganda is direed in an effort to destroy 
every vestige of race consciousness among the white people. That is what red 
propagandists seek to achieve with their propaganda movies and their "tolerance 
campaigns." 



Communism vs. Zionism 



One other question must be discussed briefly. This concerns whether or not all Jews are 
communists. The answere is no. The reader will remember the earlier description of 
Communism and Zionism taking hold among the Jews of the Pale of Settlement as 
competitive movements after . When the Bolsheviks took over Russia in , they 
sought to imse their way of thinking on the entire Jewish pulation. As Jews, the 
Bolsheviks adhered to the belief that Jewish nationalism should be preserved, but they 
believed it should be orientated toward communism. The Communists regarded 
Zionism as an impraical scheme, wedded to British imperialism, and imssible of 
achievement. The Zionists, consisting of the more religious and orthodox Jews, 
stubbornly resisted this concept. As a result, the Communist Party established a special 
Jewish seion to deal with the Zionists. They attempted, with only partial success to win 
over the children of the Zionists by prohibiting the teaching of Zionism to children 
under twenty. Now before labeling this as "anti-Semitism," it should be remembered 
that these were measures imsed by one seion of Jewry un other Jews, and it 
should be remembered that Christians received no such preferential treatment. 

This fight between Communists and Zionists has lasted right down to the present day. 
When the state of Israel was formed, tens of thousands of Zionists were permitted to 
emigrate from Russia and satellite tetory to Palestine, in a move which still continues 
at this writing. (We should note that non-Jews are NEVER permitted to emigrate from 
Communist Russia). But communist authorities have been exceedingly reluant to 
permit young Jews to emigrate, and in many cases permission has been denied. Thus 
the fight continues. But the reader should remember that this is a fight between Jews. 
Whether Communists or Zionists, they still retain their Jewishness, and they stand 
united against all non-Jews. And although they travel different paths, both Communism 
and Zionism have the same common goal domination of the world. Both work and an 
for the day when the "chosen race" shall "inherit the earth."