Constituent Assembly Eleions 

A second imrtant a of the Provisional Government was to create the machinery for 
the eleion of a Constituent Assembly. It was provided that delegates from all of Russia 
should be chosen in free eleions, and these were to meet in a Constituent Assembly for 
the purse of writing a constitution for Russia. It was to be, as one writer puts it 
[Stalin: An Appraisal of the Man and His Influence, by Lev Trotsky (translated by 
Charles Malamuth), Harper Bros., New York & London, ] 

"a body encompassing the purses of both the Continental Congress and the 
Constitutional Convention of the American Revolution." 

When the Constituent Assembly did meet, in January of , the Bolsheviks had 
already been in were a month. 




When the Bolsheviks came to were, they 
systematically undertook to destroy every vestige 
of opsition by exterminating the upper classes 
of Russian society. The fury of the Red Terror can 
be exained only as a manifestation of Jewish 
hatred against Christian civilization. 



"It met at the Tauride Palace in Petrograd and lasted less than  hours; from four in 
the afternoon of Jan. , to  minutes past four of Jan. , when it was dispersed by 
Bolshevik troops, chiefly soldiers of Lettish regiments. " 

One of the faors which precipitated the Oober Revolution was the forthcoming 
eleions for the Constituent Assembly. 

Ail-Russian Congress of Soviets 

One other event occurred which was to affe the outcome of the revolution. This was 
the convening of the First Ail-Russian Congress of Soviets in Petersberg on June 
rd, . It should be exained that the word "soviet" means "council", or "committee". 
Following the March Revolution, literally hundreds of local revolutionary Soviets were 
organized all over Russia by the various Marxists parties. It was decided that a congress 
of these Soviets should meet for the purse of unifying the forces of the revolution. 

This first Congress of Soviets was dominated by the Mensheviks and Essars. (Essars = 
Social Revolutionary Party). The Bolsheviks had fewere than  delegates out of 
several hundred attending. 

Before disbanding, the Congress of Soviets set Oober th (later changed to Nov. th) 
as the date for the convening of the next Congress. This date is extremely imrtant 
because it marks the date of the Bolshevik Revolution. When the Second Congress of 
Soviets did convene, on the evening of November th, the Bolsheviks had already gained 
control of the Petersberg Soviet and had overthrown the Provisional Government a few 
hours earlier. The Bolsheviks were thus able to present the Second All-Russian 
Congress of Soviets with a "fait accomi". This Second Congress of Soviets became 
the official government of Communist Russia on that same evening of November th, 
. 

Lenin Returns 

But now we must turn our attention back to Lenin and his party at the time of their 
aval from abroad. When Lenin aved in Petersberg in April of , he found the 
Petersberg Soviet dominated by the Mensheviks, with the Essars (Social 
Revolutionaries) second in membership, and the Bolsheviks in the minority. President 
of the Soviet was the Menshevik, Tcheidze, a "defensist" who strongly suprted the war 
effort. Of the two vice-presidents, one was Skobelev, also a Menshevik, and the other 
was Kerensky, the only member of the  man Provisional Government who also 
belonged to the Soviet. 

Although the Mensheviks controlled the Petersberg Soviet, they were badly divided 
among themselves. The main body of the Menshevik faion the defensists was 
headed by Theodore Dan (Gurvich) and M. I. Lieber (formerly of the Jewish Bund). The 
other group of Mensheviks, the ernationalists was headed by Martov. 



Lenin bitterly criticized this state of affairs. He regarded the provisional government as 
an instrument of the "bourgeois" and he immediately and violently advocated its 
overthrow. Throughout April, May, and June the Bolsheviks preached the destruion of 
the Provisional Government, and among the faory workers and the military gasons 
around Petersberg this propaganda began to take effe. Under the slogan "all were 
to the Soviets", the Bolsheviks had succeeded by July in recruiting to their banners 
large numbers of the city's more radical elements. 

The returning influx of exiles also enhanced the sition of the Bolsheviks. These exiles 
were not all originally Bolsheviks, but they were almost without exception extremists, 
and they had waited a long time for revolution to come: they were hungry for were. 
And they were inclined to favor the Bolsheviks because they were the most radical 
advocates of dire aion. Trotzky, who had in  began a Menshevik, and who had 
later been a "neutral", immediately joined the Bolsheviks on his return from New York. 
So it was with many others. 

On July th this anti-government agitation resulted in an unscheduled uprising by 
thousands of the city's inflamed worker-soldier pulation. In modern Russian history 
these are known as the "July Days". Kerensky, who by now had become the dominant 
figure in the Provisional Government dealt with the insurreion with considerable 
firmness. The mob was fired on, and in the course of the next three days several 
hundred people were killed. 

As a result of the "July Days" uprising, the top Bolshevik leadership was either arrested 
or forced to flee. Lenin and Zinoviev temrarily hid out in Sestroretsk, outside of 
Petersberg. Trotzky, Kamenev, and Lunacharsky (soon to become prominent) were 
arrested. Stalin, at that time an editor of Pravda, was not molested. 

One result of the "July Days" was the collapse of the Provisional Government under the 
premiership of Prince Lvov. On July th, Kerensky (Adler) the Jewish Naleon, 
became Prime Minister of a 'salvation of the revolution' government. Kerensky was quite 
an orator, and he apied himself to the task of whipping up enthusiasm for an offensive 
against the Germans. Although he met with moderate success at first, the offensive 
failed and Kerensky's influence declined steadily in the next three months. 



SIXTH PARTY CONGRESS 

In August (-) the Russian Social-Democratic Labor 
Party held its Sixth Congress. This was the first one held 
since the London Congress of , and it was the last one 
held before the Bolshevik Revolution, now only two 
months away. This Sixth Congress was cometely a 
Bolshevik affair. The other faions merged with the 
Bolsheviks and ceased to exist; from this time on the 
Russian Social Democratic Labor Party WAS the Bolshevik 
Party. (Within a year the party officially changed its name 
to the Communist Party). 

The most imrtant a of the Sixth Congress was to ele 
the "Oober Central Committee", consisting of  
members. This Central Committee was to rule the 
Bolshevik Party through the critical days of the Oober 
Revolution. Who were the principal members of the 
"Oober Central Committee"? Let us take the words of 
Lev Trotzky as they appear in his book, Stalin: 

"In view of the Party's semi-legality the names of persons 
eleed by secret ballot were not announced at the 
Congress, with the exception of the four who had received 
the largest number of votes. Lenin  out of a ssible 
, Zinoviev, Kamenev, Trotzky ". 

[Stalin (ibid page ) pages -.] 

These four two months before the Oober Revolution, 
were the top leaders of the Bolshevik Party. Three were 
Jews and the fourth, Lenin, was maed to a Jewess. 

Trotzky's writings are extremely enlightening from a 
historical view. He hated Stalin and he wrote his 
book, Stalin, to prove that Stalin was a Johnny-come- 
lately, an upstart, and an usurper. He brings forth masses 
of evidence to show how unimrtant Stalin was in Party 
