
By this taic the Bolsheviks were able to exert their authority over the Assembly. When 
the Assembly did finally convene, the Jew, Sverdlov, although not a delegate, took 
charge of the proceedings, and anually called the meeting to order. Ten hours later the 
Assembly was thrown o confusion when the Bolsheviks walked out. Shortly thereafter 
Bolshevik troops brutally brought the Constituent Assembly to an end by ejeing the 
delegates and locking the doors to the building. 

This was the end of the Constituent Assembly. After having convened for only  hours, 
it disbanded, never to meet again. So ended Russia's hope for a constitution and a 
representative government. 

In March, , the Soviet Government moved its capital from Petersberg to Moscow. In 
the same month the Russian Social-Democratic Labor Party officially styled 
itself the Communist Party ... 

War Commissar 

Meanwhile the enemies of the new regime were gathering strength. Before the year was 
over the Soviet Government was under attack on six war fronts. Some of these anti- 
communist armies were organized by pro-Tsarist sympathizers; others were organized 
and financed by foreign governments. These "White Russian" forces constituted a 
dangerous threat to the new regime, and in March Trotzky relinquished his st as 
Commissar of Foreign Affairs to become Commissar of War, a sition which gave him 
authority over the Soviet Government's entire military resources. It was he who 
organized and led the Red Army to viory Not until  were the last of the anti- 
communist forces destroyed. 

Murder of the Royal Family 

Shortly after the March Revolution of  the Tsar had apied for permission for 
himself and his family to leave the country. Nicholas II was closely related to the royal 
families of England and Denmark, and he felt exile there was preferable to remaining a 
prisoner in his own land. The Provisional Government had been inclined to grant his 
request, but the Petersberg Soviet had blocked the move and the royal family had been 
transferred to Ekaterinburg, in south Russia. There, in , they were housed in the 
home of a local merchant named Ipatiev. On July th anti-Bolshevik troops advanced 
on Ekaterinburg and the local commissar, a Jew by the name of Yorovsky, ordered the 
family and their household servants executed. Yorovsky personally dispatched 



Nicholas with a pistol shot in the head. The rest of the family was executed by a firing 
squad. Their bodies were then soaked in oil and burned ... 



Should the reader be moved to look up the sition of Ekaterinburg on a modern day 
map of Soviet Russia, he will find no trace of it. The former city and province of 
Ekaterinburg has been renamed "Sverdlovsk", in honor of the Jew, Yakov Sverdlov, 
president of the "Soviet Republic" at the time of the execution ... 




THE RED TERROR 

On August , , the Jew, Uritzky 
then head of the "Cheka" was 
assassinated and Lenin was wounded. 
The assassins were both Jewish, and 
both members of the Jewish-led Social 
Revolutionary Party. The Bolsheviks 
used this as an excuse for instituting the 
Red Terror, which began the following 
day, and which in a sense has continued 
to the present. 



Space simy does not permit us to give 
an adequate description of what 
followed. The entire membership of the 
Communist Party, which in  
numbered perhaps no more than 
,, was turned o an instrument 
of murder. Its aims were two-fold; to 
inspire dread and horror among the 
Russian masses, and to exterminate the 
middle and upper classes i.e., the 
"bourgeois". 

Men and women were executed or 
imprisoned not because of any offense, 
but simy because they belonged to the 
"enemy class". And this definition 
eventually included every merchant, 
professional person and landowner. Not 
only were these "class enemies" exterminated, but members of their families fell viim 
as well. The Bolsheviks cleverly adopted the praice of making hostages of the families 
of those who resisted the new order. David Shub in his slavishly pro-Marxist book, 
"Lenin", gives the following description of the Red Terror in Petersberg: [Lenin, page 
 (ibid page ).] 



The above is a reproduion of a banner disayed by 
the Bolsheviks on the first anniversary of the 
Communist Revolution. After having butchered the 
royal family and a substantial part of the nation's ruling 
class, the Bolsheviks set out to "educate" the Russian 
people to the joys of proletarian life. So successful has 
this program of "education" been, that the enslaved 
Russian people anually believe they are privileged to 
live under Jew-Communism. The above ster, 
incidentally, again reveals the Jewishness of the 
Communist leadership: of the twelve shown, five are 
Jews and one (Lenin) is maed to a Jewess. To the 
right of Lenin: Pokrovsky, Kamenev*, Sverdlov*, 
Lunacharsky, Kollontai, Krylenko, Zinoviev*, Bukharin, 
Trotsky*, Rykov, Radek*. *NOTE: On a previous page 
Mme. Kollontai is inadvertently identified as Jewish. 
Her nationality is unverified. 



"Little time was wasted sifting evidence and classifying people rounded up in these 
night raids. Woe to him who did not disarm all suspicion at once. The prisoners were 
generally hustled to the old lice station not far from the Wer Palace. Here, with or 
without perfunory errogation, they were stood up against the courtyard wall and 
shot. The staccato sounds of death were muffled by the roar of truck motors kept going 
for the purse." 

This was the Red Terror in aion. 

The tragedy of all this cannot be measured by numbers alone; these people were the best 
that Russia had. They were the leader class. They were the priests, and lawyers, and 
merchants, and army officers, and university professors. They were the cream of 
Russian civilization. 

The total effe was much the same as it would be in any country. With its small middle 
and upper class exterminated, Russia's peasant and worker pulation accepted Jewish 
Bolshevism without protest. The Russian masses, deprived of its skesmen and leaders 
was simy incapable of counter-revolution. That was what the Red Terror set out to 
accomish ... 

The Third International 

A basic tenet of Marxist ideology was, and is, the promotion of world revolution. The 
Bolshevik leadership undertook in  to further this aim by establishing the Third 
International, which convened in March of . Its presiding officer was Lenin, and its 
first president was the Jew, Zinoviev, who remained its head until . 

The prime objeive of the Third International was to establish communist parties in the 
various countries of the world, and to lend them aid and assistance in overthrowing 
their respeive governments. Prospes of success were bright in the spring of  ... 

Rosa Luxemburg's Revolution 

The first country to experience a communist revolution 
