from St. Petersburg to Moscow. In the same month the Russian 
Social-Democratic Labor Party officially styled itself the 
Communist Party. 



The Jew Moisei Solomonovich Uritsky, a member of the Bolshevik Central 
Committee. He ayed a leading part in the Bolsheviks' armed take-over in 
Oober and later was made head of the Petrograd Cheka (secret lice). In 
this sition, he coordinated the pursuit and prosecution of members of the 
nobility, military officers and ranking Russian Orthodox Church clerics but 
left all rabbis alone. In fa, one of the first laws passed by the Bolsheviks 
after they seized were was to outlaw any anti-Jewish aivity which became 
punishable by death. 

Trotsky as "War Commissar" 

Meanwhile the enemies of the new regime were gathering 
strength. Before the year was over the Soviet Government was 
under attack on six war fronts. Some of these antiCommunist 
armies were organized by pro-Tsarist sympathizers; others were 
organized and financed by foreign governments. 

These "White Russian" forces constituted a dangerous threat 
to the new regime, and in March Trotsky relinquished his st as 



 Trotsky to Powere: The Red Terror Begins 


Commissar of Foreign Affairs to become Commissar of War, a 
sition which gave him authority over the Soviet Government's 
entire military resources. It was he who organized and led the 
Red Army to viory. Not until  were the last of the 
antiCommunist forces destroyed. 



Head of the Red Army Leon Trotsky 
"One of the greatest Jewish Generals in History." 

 Jewish Encyclopedia,  vol. , pg. . 


Chapter  

Encyclopedia Judaica 
on the "Russian Revolution" 

THE Encyclopaedia Judaica, published in Jerusalem, Israel, is a 
widely-quoted reference book for all things Jewish. This work is 
open about the Jewish role in Communism, particularly early 
Communism. It even s out that it was so Jewish that Jewish 
leaders were instrued to change their names to hide the Jewish 
domination. 


VOLUME  

C-Dh 

ENCYCLOPAEDIA 

JUDAICA 


Copyright ©  by Keler Publishing House Ltd., 
Jerusalem, Israel. 

Library of Congress Catalog Card Number: - 
First pring 



Not for sale in theU.S., Canada and Latin America 
Produced and pred in Jerusalem, Israel 



ENCYCLOPAEDIA JUDAICA JERUSALEM 



 Encyclopaedia Judaica on Bolshevism 



COMMUNISM 

The Com- 
munist movement and ideology ayed an imrtant part in 
Jewish life, particularly in the s, s, and during and 
after World War II. 


Under the entry for "Communism" in volume , page , the 
following appears: "The Communist Movement and ideology 
ayed an imrtant part in Jewish life, particularly in the s, 
s and during and after World War II." 


Communist trends became 
widespread in virtually all Jewish communities. In some 
countries Jews became the leading element in the legal and 
illegal Communist parties and in some cases were even 
instrued by the Communist International to change their 
Jewish-sounding names and se as non-Jews, in order not 
to confirm right-wing propaganda that presented Commu- 
nism as an alien, Jewish conspiracy 


On page , the Encyclopaedia Judaica  goes on to say that 
"Communist trends became widespread in virtually all Jewish 
communities. In some countries, Jews became the leading 
element in the legal and illegal Communist Parties." 

On page , the Encyclopaedia Judaica  reveals that the 
Communist International (an organization which coordinated all 
Communist parties around the world) instrued Jews to change 


The Secret Behind Communism  


their names so as, the body said, "not [to] confirm right-wing 
propaganda that presented Communism as an alien, Jewish 
conspiracy." 

Jewish Role in the Russian Communist Revolution 

' The Encyclopaedia Judaica describes in detail the imrtant role 
that Jews ayed in creating the Soviet Union. On page  it 
says: "Individual Jews ayed an imrtant role in the early 
stages of Bolshevism and the Soviet Regime." 


Individual Jews ayed an imrtant role in the carl} 
stages of Bolshevism and the Soviet regime. 


On page , it goes on to list the Jews prominent in the 
upper command of the Russian Communist Party. These 
included Maxim Litvinov (later to be the Soviet Union's foreign 
minister), Grigori Zinoviev, Lev Kamenev, Jacob Sverdlov, Lazar 
Kaganovich, and Karl Radek, among many others.  


Boltfwrtk Tbwo I . . . . 

