. Sam Carr (nee Schmil Kogan): Long-time member of the 
National Committee of the Communist Party of Canada (Budenz, 
Story, p. ).  

. Mos Childs (nee Moishe Chilovsky): Managed 
Communist Party USA's funding from the Comern (Budenz, 
Men, p. );  Worked as a Soviet espionage agent in North and 



The Secret Behind Communism  


Central America (Budenz, Men, pp. -). Childs also worked as 
a FBI informant from  onwards. 

. Joe Clark (nee Joseph Cohen): Professor at Brooklyn 
College (Budenz, Cry, p. ); Writer for the Daily 
Worker and New Masses (Budenz, Cry, p. ). 

. Judith Coon: Soviet agent in the US Department of 
Justice (Budenz, Cry, p. ). 

. Crystal Eastman: Wife of Communist leader: Max 
Eastman (Budenz, Story, p. ); Edited the Communist New 
Masses magazine (Budenz, Story, p. ). 

. Max Eastman: Edited the Communist New 
Masses magazine (Budenz, Story, p. ). 

. Gerhart Eisler: Former leader of the German Communist 
Party [the KPD]); Representative of the Comern in the United 
States (Budenz, Story, pp. -). 

. Joseph Fields (nee Joseph Felshin): Staff writer for The 
Communist (Budenz, Men, p. ); Wrote for the Daily 
Worker (Budenz, Men, p. ). 

. Benjamin Gitlow: Leading Communist funionary until 
 (Budenz, Story, pp. -; Men p. ;); Advised against 
helping striking and by then desperate miners (Budenz, Story, p. 
); Later became a leading exnent of 'anti- 
communism' (Budenz, Story, p. ; Cry, p. ; Techniques, p. 
). 

. Arthur Gleason: Wrote for and was emoyed by left- 
wing magazine: The Nation (Budenz, Story, p. ); Member of the 
Intercollegiate Socialist Society (Budenz, Story, p. ); Founded 
the Communist magazine: Labor Age (Budenz, Story, p. ). 

. Ben Gold: Head of the International Fur and Leather 
Goods Workers Union. (Budenz, Men, p. ; Techniques, p. ); 
Aively conspired to manipulate the American Federation of 
Labor while pretending not to be a Communist. (Budenz, Men, 
pp. ; ; Cry, pp. -; Techniques, p. ). 

. Jacob Gollosh: Born Yakov Naumovich Reizen; Chairman 
of the Communist Party USA's Control Commission (Budenz, 
Men, pp. ; ; Cry, p. ); Headed the Communist holiday 
company: 'World Tourists' (Budenz, Story, p. ; Men, p. ); 



 A Communist Defeor Spills the Beans 


Was a Soviet espionage agent (Budenz, Story, p. ; Techniques, 
p.).  

. Michael Greenberg: Soviet agent in the White House 
(Budenz, Cry, p. );  Worked with the pro-Communist 
Institute of Pacific Relations (Budenz, Techniques, p. ).  

. Abraham Heller: Managed the financial suprt given to 
the Communist Party USA by the Soviet Union (Budenz, Story, p. 
).  

. Annalee Jacoby: Pro-Communist writer associated with 
the Daily Worker (Budenz, Cry, p. ; Techniques, p. ).  

. Phillip Jaffe: Soviet espionage agent in China (Budenz, 
Men, pp. ; ;  Techniques, p. );  Used US government 
documents; given to him by Soviet agents, to help the Chinese 
Communist Party. (Budenz, Cry, p. ;  Techniques, p. ); 
Imrtant figure in the pro-Communist Institute for Pacific 
Relations (Budenz, Men, pp. -;  Cry, pp. ; ; ; ).  

. Albert Kahn: Communist author. (Budenz, Cry, p. ).  

. Felix Kuzman: Soviet espionage and underground 
network courier (Budenz, Men, pp. ; ; );  Former 
member of the Abraham Lincoln Brigade (Budenz, Men, p. ).  

. Harold Laski: British Communist author (Budenz, Story, 
p. );  Confident of Karl Radek; a leading Jewish Bolshevik, 
who told him of his opsition to Stalin and suprt of Trotsky. 
(Budenz, Story, p. ).  

. Avram Landy: In charge of Communist propaganda 
amongst Slavic groups in the United States (Budenz, Story, p. 
) 

. Adam Lapin: Washington D.C. and a foreign 
corresndent of the Daily Worker (Budenz, Story, p. ;i  Men; 
p. ) ;  

. Daniel de Leon: Set up and ran Communist and socialist 
trade unions to deliberately try and rival the American 
Federation of Labor (Budenz, Story, p. ).  

. Sam Liptzin: Writer for the Communist Party USA's 
Yiddish newspaper: Freiheit. (Budenz, Men, p. );  

. Jay Lovestone: General Secretary of the Communist Party 
USA (until ) (Budenz, Story, p. ).  



The Secret Behind Communism  


. Jacob Mindel: Soviet espionage agent in North America 
(Budenz, Men, p. );  Trained female Communists to seduce 
US military officers to learn military secrets (Budenz, Men, p. 
;  Techniques, p. ).  

. George Mink: High-Ranking Officer in the Abraham 
Lincoln Brigade (Budenz, Men, p. );  

. Steve Nelson (nee Steve Mesaros): Soviet espionage agent 
in North America (Budenz, Men, p. ;  Cry, p.  );  High- 
Ranking Officer in the Abraham Lincoln Brigade (Budenz, Men, 
pp. ; );  Helped the Chinese and German Communist 
parties (Budenz, Men, p. ).  

. Moissaye Olgin: Communist leader (Budenz, Men, p. 
);i  Author of Why Communism? (Budenz, Men, p. ; 
l Techniques, p. ).  

. Joseph Peters: Representative of the Comern in the 
United States (Budenz, Story, pp. -;  Men, p. ).  

. Joseph Pogany (former minister in the Bela Kuhn regime); 
Representative of the Comern in the United States (till ) 
(Budenz, Story, p. ;  Techniques, p. );  Condued 
espionage aivities against the US Government (Budenz, 
Techniques, p. ).  

. Abraham Lincoln Polonsky: Communist Hollywood Film 
and Radio Script Writer (Budenz, Cry, pp. -);  Soviet agent 
