

 


"To realize his an of seizing total control of Poland, Stalin 
formed two teams: one to satisfy appearances and the Western 
Allies, the other to anually rule Poland. The first was headed by 
the Polish Communist Wanda Wasilewska and the other by Jacob 
Berman, whom Stalin knew well," Korbonski wrote. 


The Jew Jacob (Jakub) 
Berman. He was in charge 
of the notorious State 
Security Services Urzad 
Bezpieczenstwa - the 
largest secret lice in Polish 
history and one of 
its most repressive 
institutions. Berman was 
the brother of Adolf 
Berman, a Zionist aivist 
who emigrated to Israel in 
. 


"The choice of Berman was 
comieed with his Jewish origin, 
which exonerated him from 
suspicions of Polish patriotism and 
advocacy of Poland's independence. 
Stalin regarded the Jews as 
cosmolitans whose loyalties would 
be to Zionism rather than the country 
of their residence. 

"Jacob Berman, who was a Soviet 
citizen, was camouflaged in the 
secondary sition of undersecretary 
of state at the Foreign Office and later 
at the Office of the Cabinet, from 
which he exerted control over all 
branches of the government. He had a 
dire telephone line to the Kremlin 
and to Stalin himself. That telephone 
was used on one occasion, after office 
hours, by William Tonesk, a Polish 
American who described the event in 
his erview published in the New 
York Polish Daily of June , .  


The principal instrument of 
Berman's were was his total control of the Ministry of State 
Security, which began under Stalin's instruions to liquidate all 
centers of ssible opsition, often by simy murdering 
persons suspeed of advocating Poland's independence, 
especially former members of the Home Army, which fought the 
Germans during the occupation." 

The team assembled by Berman at the beginning of his rule 
consisted of the following, all of them Jewish: 



 Iron Curtain Diators 

. General Roman Romkowski (Natan Griinsapau-Kikiel), 
was vice-minister of State Security, He was a member of the then- 
illegal Communist Youth Organization and was trained in the 
Komern "Lenin School." As vice-minister of State Security, 
Berman's confidant supervised the departments of investigation, 
training, and invigilation. He also managed the secret treasury of 
the Politburo, controlled by Jacob Berman, Hilary Mine, and 
Boleslaw Bierut, a Russified Pole promoted by Stalin. Bierut had 
served many years as an ernational agent of the Comern. 

. General Julius Hibner, born David Schwartz, was a 
Communist who had served in the civil war in Spain in the years 
-. 

He was aide to the minister of State Security, charged with 
the Border Defense Corps and the Internal Security Corps. In 
- he was commander of the ernal military forces and 
in - vice-minister of the erior. 

. Luna Brystygier was direor of the fifth department of the 
Ministry of State Security. 

. Colonel Anatol Fejgin was direor of the tenth 
department of the Ministry of State Security, his job was the 
tracing and liquidation of all Western influences and the 
colleion of damaging material about Party members, with the 
exception of Bierut. 

. The security lice colonel Joseph Swiatlo was in his 
youth a member of the Union of Young Communists. Two 
massive steel closets in his office contained material which 
incriminated every imrtant personality from Berman down 
and was kept for purses of blackmail. 

. Colonel Joseph Rozanski (Goldberg), a former clerk in a 
Warsaw law office and a veteran Communist, was the direor of 
the investigation department of the Ministry of State Security. 
Charged with abuse of were and extensive use of torture, 
Rozanski was first sentenced in December  to five years of 
imprisonment and then to fifteen. He was held in luxuriously 
aped quarters and released ten years ahead of time. Un 
his release, he settled in Israel. 



The Secret Behind Communism  


. Colonel Czaich (fiitious name) who headed the third 
department of the Ministry of State Security, was charged with 
the prosecution of the Home Army, the organization of resistance 
against the Nazis during the war. He was nicknamed "Akowere" 
(a Jewish version of the initials "A.K") of the Home Army. He 
disayed somewhat less cruelty than the other Bezpieka bosses. 

. Zygmunt Okret was the direor of the archives 
department of the Ministry, in charge of records and personal 
files. 

The above were far from being the only Jewish officials of the 
Ministry. Vior Klosiewicz, a Communist and member of the 
Council of State, stated in his erview condued by Teresa 
Toranska: "Accounts had to be settled in  and it was 
unfortunate that all the department direors in the Ministry of 
State Security were Jews." 

The reason was Stalin's decision not to use Poles, whom he 
did not trust, but a more cosmolitan element. The situation 
was aptly described by Abel Kainer in his essay "The Jews and 
Communism," in the litical quarterly Krytyka: 

"The archetype of the Jew during the first ten years of the 
Polish Peoe's Republic was generally perceived as an agent of 
the secret litical lice. It is true that under Bierut and 
Gomulka (prior to ) the key sitions in the Ministry of State 
Security were held by Jews or persons of Jewish background. It is 
a fa which cannot be overlooked, little known in the west and 
seldom mentioned by the Jews in Poland. Both prefer to talk 
about Stalin's anti-Semitism (the "doors" ot, etc.). The 
machine of Communist terror funioned in Poland in a matter 
similar to that used in other Communist ruled countries in Europe 
and elsewhere. What requires exanation is why it is operated by 
