Gosan and Socialist 

Revolutionaries in the Commissariat 
of Agriculture strongly preferred 
Bukharin and Rykov as party leaders 
to either Stalin or the Left. " - from 
Stephen F. Cohen: Bukharin and the 
Bolshevik Revolution: A Political 
Biography , - (Oxford, Oxford 
University Press, ), pp. -. 

The greatest tragedy of Soviet 
history, and perhaps the entire 
history of the th Century, is that this predominantly Jewish 
Left won its struggle against the ethnic Russian right, which had 
much more suprt from the people and also from the 



Cohen reveals that Nicholai 
Bukharin and the more Russian 
elements of the Communist Party 
were opsed to the mass 
murders of the Jewish elements 
that drove them on. 


 Final Words from Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn 

elleuals and nonparty specialists resnsible for the 
economic restoration. 

Not only was the Bolshevik Revolution largely a Jewish affair, 
but the greatest crime committed by the Bolsheviks was 
engineered and caed out by the Jewish faion over the 
opsition of the ethnic Russian faion. Jewish ethnic hatred and 
extremism ayed the crucial role in the greatest mass murder of 
all time. 

At the Leningrad Party Conference in early  Bukharin 
had criticized the 'capitalistic' nature of the Jewish mid-level 
bourgeoisie who had come to were and had taken the ace of 
the Russian bourgeoisie in the main cities of the USSR, and 
"whom we, comrades, must shary condemn." Former chief 
Bolshevik theorist Bukharin concluded by saying that the Jews 
themselves were resnsible for the new anti-Semitism. 

There were also reasons for the outburst of proletariat anti- 
Semitism in two other sensitive areas. The Russian working class 
young people were getting nowhere in their quest for 
advancement on the educational front. 

In , % of university students were Jews who had 
enjoyed a bourgeois background, Solzhenitsyn ed out. 

Mostly Jews, between  and %, occupied the main 
sitions in the domestic and foreign trade commissariats. Their 
empire included rural and urban store chains, restaurants, 
business canteens, prison and barracks galleys, cooperatives, and 
consumer goods produion. 

Management of the Gosan (State Plan) and the five-year 
ans was exercised by Rosenholz, Rukhimovich, Epstein, 
Frumkin, and Selemki; they controlled the nation's food supy. 

Despite the enormous bloodletting in -, millions of 
Jews still served the Stalinist regime with cadaver-like loyalty; 
they remained enthusiastic, unshakable, almost blind defenders 
of the cause of Socialism. Solzhenitsyn writes: 

"Cadaver-like obedience in the GPU, the Red Army, the 
diomatic service, and on the ideological front. The passionate 
participation of young Jews in these branches was in no way 
dampened by the bloody events of  - ." 



The Secret Behind Communism  


From the very beginning the secret lice were under the 
control of the 'Bolshevik Jews/ Solzhenitsyn revealed their names 
in the most eresting chapter of his book called "The Nineteen 
Twenties." 

Solzhenitsyn gives us the biographies of the mass murderers 
at their desks in the Cheka, the OGPU, and the GPU. But they 
were not just sitting at their desks. Uritzki, Unschlicht, 
Katznelson, Bermann, Agranov, Spiegelglas, Schwarz, Asbel, 
Chaifetz, Pauker, Maier, Yagoda, personally participated in the 
tortures, hangings, crucifixions, and incinerations. 

Years later, when the Gulag Archipelago was being 
expanded, they were again to be found in the front line of 
executioners. Israel Pliner was the slave master of the Moscow- 
Volga-Canal; Lazar Kogan, Zinovey Katznelson, and Boris 
Bermann direed the forced labor genocide at the White Sea 
Canal proje. 

Solzhenitsyn comments: "One cannot deny that history 
eleed very many Jews to be the executors of Russia's fate." 

Commissioned by the NKVD, the Jewish designer of 
execution systems, Grigori Mayranovsky, invented the gas chair. 

When, in , Mayranovsky, as the former head of the 
NKVD Laboratory Institute, was himself incarcerated, he wrote 
to Beria: "Please do not forget that by my hand hundreds of 
enemy- pigs of the Soviet State found their deserved end." 

The mobile gassing truck was invented and tested by Isay 
Davidovich Berg, head of the NKVD Economics Division in the 
Moscow region. 

In , a second acceleration in the Great Purge, prisoners 
were sentenced to death in conveyor-belt fashion, packed o 
trucks, taken to the aces of execution, shot in the back of the 
neck, and buried. 

In the economic sense, Isay Berg found this method of 
liquidation inefficient, time-consuming and cost-ensive. He, 
therefore, in  designed the mobile asphyxiation chamber, the 
gassing truck (Russian: dushegubka), as Solzhenitsyn describes 
in detail. 



 Final Words from Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn 


The doomed were loaded o a tightly sealed, cometely 
airtight Russian Ford; during the drive the deadly exhaust from a 
gasoline engine was direed o the seion containing those 
sentenced to death. Un reaching the mass gravesite, the truck 
dumped the corpses o the burial ditch. 

Solzhenitsyn lists the names of about fifty mass murderers of 
prisoners in his book. Their names betray their ethnic origin. 
Moise Framing, Mordichai Chorus, Josef Khodorovsky, Isaak 
Solz, Naum Zorkin, Moise Kalmanovich, Samuel Agurski, Lazar 
Aronstam, Israel Weizer, Aron Weinstein, Isaak Grindberg, 
Sholom Dvoylazki, Max Daitsh, Yesif Dreiser, Samuel Saks, Jona 
Jakir, Moise Kharitonov, Frid Markus, Solomon Kruglikov, Israel 
Razgon, Benjamin Sverdlov, Leo Kritzman. . . 

Also in this seion Solzhenitsyn reveals the names of the 
butchers who bossed the secret lice. They once headed the 
notorious Lubyanka torture prison and torture comex, now 


