embassy in , she became a corresndent at the United 
Nations Piure News Office in  and joined the China 
Welfare Fund. 

One year later she took up a st at the Radio Division of 
the United Nations Organization in New York. After she 
returned to China she became a leurer for the Verlag ftir 
fremdsprachige Literatur (Publishing House for Foreign 
Literature) in Beijing from  to . In  she worked as a 
journalist for "China im Bild" all pro-Communist publications 
aimed at spreading Communism in the West. 

Ruth Weiss was one of about one hundred foreign-born 
residents to receive Chinese citizenship in . In  she was 
named one of eleven foreign experts by the Communist Party of 
China that were part of the membership of the Chinese Peoe's 
Political Consultative Conference. She died in Beijing in . 

. Sidney Rittenberg (born ) is an American erpreter 
and scholar who lived in China from  to . He worked 



The Secret Behind Communism  


closely with PRC founder Mao Zedong, military leader Zhu De, 

and key statesman Zhou 
Enlai, and other leaders 
of the Communist party 
during the war, and was 
the only American 
citizen to join the 
Chinese Communist 
Party (CCP). He was 
with these central 
Communist leaders at 
Yan'an and was able to 
experience much of the 

. Sidney Shapiro (born ) was a Polish-born Jew, born in 
Warsaw but raised in New York. He resides in Beijing, and is a 
member of the Chinese Peoe's Political Consultative Council. 
Shapiro has held citizenship of the Peoe's Republic 
of China since , before the Cultural Revolution. He is a 
member of the Peoe's Political Consultative Conference, a 
governmental assembly of the PRC which ostensibly provides a 
forum for input from non-Communist litical organizations. 

Main Communist Chinese English Language 
News Source Run by the Jew Israel Epstein 

. Israel Epstein (  ) was a journalist and author. He 
was one of the few foreign-born non-Chinese to become a 
member of the Communist Party of China. Israel Epstein began 
to work in journalism at age , when he wrote for the Peking and 
Tientsin Times , an English-language newspaper based in Tianjin. 

In , he became editor of the Chinese Communist 
propaganda newspaper, China Reconstrus , which was later 
renamed China Today . He remained editor-in-chief of China Today 
until his retirement at age , and then editor emeritus. 

During his tenure at China Today , he became a Chinese citizen 
in  and a member of the Communist Party of China in . 
Israel Epstein was eleed as a member of the Standing 



Rittenberg and Mao Zedong. 

life of Mao and his suprters. 


 Spreading Communism in China 

Committee of the National Committee of the Chinese Peoe's 
Political Consultative Conference, an advisory body, in . 

During his life, Israel Epstein was honored by Zhou Enlai, 
Mao Zedong, Deng Xiaoping, Jiang Zemin, and President Hu 
Jao. His funeral was held at the Babaoshan Cemetery for 
Revolutionaries, in Shijingshan Distri, Beijing on June , . 
The ceremony was attended by many officials, among them 
President Hu Jao, Premier Wen Jiabao, as well as Politburo 
Standing Committee members Jia Qinglin and Li Changchun. 



Chapter  

The Key to Communism: Jewish Tribalism 

In hundreds of pages and under the weight of massive 
historical evidence, it will be hard for any reader to deny The 
Secret Behind Communism. Ultimately, the Marxist ideology and 
movements originated and direed by Jewish tribalists were 
driven in large part by a greater Jewish agenda. In short, the 
Communist revolution could not have succeeded and the 
Communist Holocaust could not have occurred without both an 
elemental Jewish tribalism and the suprt of organized Jewry in 
Russia and around the world. The Jewish community worldwide 
saw promoting Communism as being in Jewish self-erest. 

That being said, it would be an error to say that every Jewish 
Marxist was a Jewish racist. Indeed, some may have truly 
believed in the ideology they esused. But it is hard to conceive 
of a level of self-deception so great that ideologues would 
murder millions of people if they really believed in the atitudes 
of human rights they esused. 

Only a tiny minority of Jews aively opse Jewish tribalism. 
Even Jewish anti-Zionists will rarely criticize the Jewish tribalism 
and Jewish racism that is the source of Zionist influence and 
were. 

The vast majority of Jewish Communist leaders had to be 
conscious of the overwhelming Jewish privilege in the 
Communist movement. One cannot ignore the revenge aspe of 
the Communist reacement of the Gentile elite with a Jewish 
elite. 

How can anyone in the Communist Party dominated by the 
Jewish bourgeoisie truly believe they were really fighting for the 
proletariat? The Jewish favoritism and privilege associated with 
the Bolshevik revolution was never seriously challenged by 
ninety-nine percent of its Jewish participants. 

Ultimately, the same is true of Jewish progressives in the 
United States who speak for diversity at our educational 
institutions, and then run Harvard and the Ivy League with 


 The Key to Communism: Jewish Tribalism 

massive ethnic discrimination in favor of less-qualified Jews over 
better qualified non-Jews. The discrimination is so draconian that 
Jews who are only . percent of the student age American 
pulation are the biggest urality in the Harvard pulation. 

In my book. The Zionist Conspiracy, I show that the Jewish 
domination of Harvard is not due to greater merit or ability, but 
achieved by naked racial discrimination against better-qualified 
European and Asian Americans. Jews are admitted at a rate more 
than  times, or , percent greater than their merit justifies. 

Ultimately Jewish loss of were in the Soviet Union was 
brought about by Gentiles who finally rose against this tribal 
racism of the Jewish element. Aided in part by the Second World 
