


 South African Communism: the Usual Suspes 


Shanley; Monty Berman; Bertram Hirson and Neville Rubin- 
among many others. 

A South African Government Gazette Extraordinary (vol VI 
 Nov  pp -) listed "persons who have been office- 
bearers, officers, members or aive suprters of the Communist 
Party of South Africa". The list included  "clearly identifiable 
as Jews",  "white non-Jews" and two uncertain. 

According to the book Traitors' End: The Rise and Fall of the 
Communist Movement in Southern Africa ,  Jews ayed a 
dominant role in Communism in South Africa: 

"For the most part, the Jews had come to South Africa from 
Lithuania at the turn of the century... They had been pular at 
first, but by the mid-s this was no longer the case. The Jews 
had become heavily urbanized. In Johannesburg, they constituted 
 per cent of the pulation and were sufficiently conspicuous so 
that the metrolis was sometimes referred to, not as Jo'burg, but 
as Jewburg. 

"They aroused envy and some rancor during the years of 
depression because they controlled a large part of the business of 
Johannesburg and other cities... Anti-Semitism was fed by the 
economic discontent... A perhaps more imrtant ingredient was 
the prominence of South African Jews in finance, mining and the 
other economic command sts of the nation, on the one hand, 
and in revolutionary and racial reform movements on the other. 

"From the outset, the Jews had been prominent in the 
Communist Party and its various fronts. They were equally 
conspicuous in the various movements that sought to break down 
the baers separating the White from the non-White pulation. 
South African anti-Semitic propaganda depied the Jew as a 
deracinated element who sought to destroy White civilization and 
nationalism with the twin weans of Communism and 
ernational finance. Given the visible prominence of Jews in 
both areas, this dorine fell on receptive ears." 

The Treason Trial of  

According to the book Jews and Zionism: the South African 
Experience (-) [Dr. Gideon Shimoni, Oxford University 
Press, ], written by a Jewish author, the "extraordinary 
salience of Jewish individuals in the white opsition to the 
regime of apartheid" stands out. 



The Secret Behind Communism  



Those involved in the Rivonia ot: From top left, going right: 
Mandela, Sisulu, Kathadra, Bernstein (Jew), Mhlaba, Goldberg 
(Jew), Mbeki, Kantor (Jew), Motsoledi, Mlangeni, Wolpe (Jew), 
Slovo (Jew), Hepe (Jew). 

"Throughout this period Jewish names kept appearing in 
every facet of the struggle: amongst reformist liberals; in the 
radical Communist opsition; in the courts, whether as 
defendants or as counsel for the defense; in the lists of bannings 
and amongst those who fled the country to evade arrest. Their 
prominence was particularly marked in the course of the Treason 
Trial which occupied an imrtant ace in the news media 
throughout the second half of the s. 

"This trial began in December , when  people were 
arrested on charges of treason in the form of a conspiracy to 
overthrow the state by violence and to reace it with a state 
based on Communism. Twenty-three of those arrested were 
Whites, more than half of them Jews. They included Yetta 
Barenblatt, Hymie Barsel, Lionel (Rusty) Bernstein, Leon Levy, 
Norman Levy, Sydney Shall, Joe Slovo, Ruth (First) Slovo, Sonia 


 South African Communism: the Usual Suspes 

Bunting, Lionel Forman, Isaac Horvitch, Ben Turok, Jacqueline 
Arenstein, Errol Shanley, Dorothy Shanley. 

'In this extended five-year period between the emergence of 
violent opsition and its effeive suppression, the prominent 
involvement of individual Jews was in the public eye more than 
ever before. This was even more so than in the dramatic 
circumstances of the 'Rivonia arrests'. " 

The Rivonia Trial 

The famous Rivonia Trial of the s resulted from a raid on 
a farm near Johannesburg in which many of the top leadership of 
the Communist party were detained. Shimoni's book exained it 
this way: 

"On  July  the lice raided the home of Arthur 
Goldreich in Rivonia near Johannesburg, where it captured, by 
surprise, the leadership cadre of the Umkonto we Sizwe 
underground. Seventeen people were arrested. Five of those 
arrested were Whites, all of them Jews," Shimoni continued. 
"They were: Arthur Goldreich, Lionel Bernstein, Hilliard 
Festenstein, Dennis Goldberg and Bob Hepe.. [There was an] 
overwhelming impression that Jews were in the forefront of the 
White radicals who were trying to overthrow the system." 



Goldreich sits as lice search the secret Communist headquarters. 

The Rivonia ot included a an called "Operation 
Mayibuye," which was described as follows: "Operation 
Mayibuye [a an for guella warfare, armed invasion of South 
Africa and Communist conquest of the country] was drafted by 
Arthur Goldreich, perhaps the most imrtant of the men 
captured by the South African Police at Rivonia. Goldreich 



The Secret Behind Communism  


managed to bribe his way out of prison... During the trial, 
Goldreich was referred to by Nelson Mandela and other 
defendants as a military expert who served as an officer in the 
Israeli war for independence... Goldreich's an was modelled on 
the guella strategy of the Chinese Communists... Goldreich's 
notebook shows constant preoccupation with the praical details 
of revolutionary war. He goes o the types of exosives and 
fuses needed and their charaeristics.  [Traitors' End: The Rise 
and Fall of the Communist Movement in Southern Africa, Nathaniel 
Weyl, Arlington House, USA, , p, -]. 

Goldreich and fellow Communist Jew Harold Wolpe, (who 
used South African Communist Party funds to buy the farm in 
Rivonia), also helped locate sabotage sites for Umkhonto we 
Sizwe, the military arm of the ANC, and draft a disciinary code 
for guellas. Wolpe was arrested shortly after the Rivonia and 
taken to Marshall Square prison in the city, where Goldreich was 
already being held. There they managed to bribe a warder and 
escaped. Both fled to Israel, where Goldreich settled and where 
he died at the age of  in . 

In his autobiography. Nelson Mandela described Goldreich as 
having fought in the s with the military wing of the Jewish 
National Movement in Palestine. 
