Until his death in , "his suprt for the Soviet state, and for 
Stalin, never wavered. His loyalty and service were acknowledged in 
 when he received the Stalin Prize.  

He is most infamous for his viciously anti-German wartime 
propaganda. The Canadian Jewish News states: 

"As the leading Soviet journalist during World War II, 
Ehrenburg's writings against the German invaders were 
circulated among millions of Soviet soldiers."  

In one booklet called "Kill," Ehrenburg 
incites Soviet soldiers to treat Germans as 
sub-humans. Its final words include: 

"The Germans are not human beings. From 
now on the word German means to use the 
most teble oath.... We shall kill. If you have 
not killed at least one German a day, you have 
wasted that day... If you cannot kill your 
German with a bullet, kill him with your 
bayonet. If there is calm on your part of the 
front, or if you are waiting for the fighting, kill 
a German in the meantime. If you leave a German alive, the 
German will hang a Russian and rape a Russian woman. If you 
kill one German, kill anotherthere is nothing more amusing for 
us than a heap of German corpses. Do not count days, do not 
count kilometers. Count only the number of Germans you kill. 
Kill the German that is your grandmother's request. Kill the 
German that is your child's prayer. Kill the German that is your 
motherland's loud request. ... Kill."  


Hlatl Online 


Red Army: Millions of 
Eastern Europeans 
Women and Girls Raped 




 Introduion 


Ehrenburg's incendiary writings certainly contributed in no 
small measure to the orgy of murder and rape by Soviet soldiers 
against German and other Eastern European civilians. 

The Canadian Jewish News further writes: 

... The recent disclosure that Ehrenburg arranged to transfer 

his private archives to 
Jerusalem's Yad Vashem 
library and archive, while 
still alive, comes as 
a stunning revelation... 
Ehrenburg agreed... on 
condition that the transfer, 
and his will, remain secret 
for  years after his death. 

So we discover that a dedicated Bolshevik Soviet leader 
whose propaganda hid the Bolshevik Holocaust, had secretly 
willed his private papers, not to the Soviet Union, but to the 
Zionist State, where he is honored today at Yad Vashem. 

The honoring of a genocidal Bolshevik at Yad Vashem, the 
most imrtant Jewish memorial to the Holocaust, speaks of an 
enormous hycrisy that boggles the mind. Only in a deey 
corrupted morality could the most imrtant memorial in the 
world against genocide honor a man who suprted genocide. 
More imrtantly, there is not a word of criticism in the press. It 
seems that one man's genocidal maniac is another's man's hero. 

Zionist Israel today honors leaders who openly promote 
ethnic genocide in words just as hofic as Ehrenberg's. The 
former chief Sephardic rabbi of Israel, Rabbi Ovadia Yosef, calls 
for the extermination of the Palestinians. BBC quotes him: 

"It is forbidden to be merciful to them. You must send 
missiles to them and annihilate them. They are evil and 
damnable," he was quoted as saying in a sermon delivered on 
Monday to mark the Jewish festival of Passover... 

"The Lord shall return the Arabs' deeds on their own heads, 
waste their seed and exterminate them, devastate them and vanish 
them from this world," he said. 

Rabbi Yosef is the spiritual head of the wereful Shas Party, 
one of the Israeli Prime Minister's closest allies. He has also said 



The Secret Behind Communism  


that "The only purse of Gentiles on Earth is to serve Jews." 
Could one even imagine the world outrage if any litical leader 
in America or Europe was in litical partnership with someone 
who preaches that Jews must be exterminated? This alone reveals 
Zionist were in government and media across the world. 

The Bolshevik Holocaust: 

Down the Memory Hole 

Why there is vast 
knowledge and emotional 
attachment to a Holocaust 
perpetrated against Jews and 
so little attention on a larger 
Holocaust perpetrated by 
Jews, is clear. It is the result of 
Jewish influence in media and 
government. We should have knowledge and thus passion for all 
viims of genocide, not just for a group favored by the press. 

I begin with a short chapter from my book, Jewish 
Suprematism, for an roduion to the shocking historical data. 
After finishing The Secret Behind Communism, I urge you to read 
Jewish Suprematism and My Awakening for a deeper 
understanding of Jewish ethnic racism and extremism. 

Then I exore a wealth of material that has gone down what 
George Orwell called the "memory hole" in his classic novel, . 

I share with you some of Frank Britton's ground-breaking 
research on the topic, first published in , and supemented 
since that time, including my additions and updates to it. Then I 
delve o my own research and that of many other scholars on 
the topic. It is imrtant for me to state that some of the text here 
is not my own, and I don't take credit for it all. However, I have 
edited and added to the text in aces where needed. I am also 
indebted to some of the translations and the scholarship of 
Wolfgang Strauss who made key seleions of translations o 
English from Solzhenitsyn's Two Hundred Years Together. 

Some of the material is gleaned from articles and books by 
dozens of scholars on Bolshevism and its subsequent crimes. I 




 Introduion 

obviously take no credit for their original research, but I have 
tracked down and compiled a great deal of this mountainous 
