was no exception to this. By the s two out of the three most 
imrtant sitions in the party were held by Jews. 


The Secret Behind Communism  


"In the s, nearly a third of all distri party secretaries 
were Jewish. By the early s, between  and  percent of the 
Communist party's aivists (its cadres) were Jewish, even 
though Jews accounted for less than  percent of Britain's 
national pulation. Almost all Jewish Communists came from 
an Eastern European immigrant background." 

Some of the more prominent Communist Jews involved with 
the CPGB included Zelda Kahan, Theodore Rothstein, Andrew 
Rothstein, Phil Piratin, Sam Aaronovitch, Sam Lesser, Hedi 
Stadlen, Sue Slipman, Dora Montefiore, Ivor Montagu, Anita 
Halpin, Monty Goldman and many, many more. 

Some of these have also repackaged themselves and 
infiltrated social institutions. In general the party was made up of 
East End Jews and some gullible Gentiles from industrial cities. 

The Communist Gerry Gable and Other 
Jewish Supremacist "Anti-Fascists" 

One of its more infamous members was the hyper-Jew Gerry 


NATIONAL 
APPEAL 

HACKNEY BRANCH 
COMMUNIST PARTY OF BRITAIN 
Grand International Social 
and Garden Party 

pm tilt late, Sunday September  
Music ★ Video * Running Bu ffet ★ Bar 
Special Guest : (Serry Gable. Sea rchlight ) % 
Admission C/C concessions 
. Leaside Road. Clapton. London E LU 
Donations for the fight for peace and socialism to Monty 
Goldman (address as above, cheques payable to CPB) 
Children and everyone welcome 
Mnko ft a family event! 



Gable who presented himself to the comiant press as an " expert 
on the far right" in role as editor of the Searchlight "antifascist" 
magazine. 


Searchlight is nothing but an extremist Communist Party 
front organization, and Gable stood as a formal Communist Party 
candidate in London as early as . He has kept his Communist 



 Communists in Great Britain: Ditto 

Party affiliations and in  was the guest speaker at a 
prominent Communist Party meeting in London. 

Almost all of the contributors to this "antifascist" publication 
are Jews, with the longtime far-leftist American Jew Leonard 
Zeskind serving as their U.S. corresndent. 

Other prominent UK-based Jews involved with Searchlight 
include Ketlan Ossowski, and John P. Goldstein, who uses the 
pen-name "John P." to try and hide his Jewishness. 

Also closely allied to Searchlight is the equally Jewish 
Southern Poverty law Center in Montgomery, Alabama, USA (see 
Chapter ). 

Needless to say, none of the Jewish "anti-fascists" ever have 

anything to say about the 
racist Zionist state of Israel, 
which outlaws maages 
between Jews and non-Jews, 
and has racially-based 
immigration laws. 

The Socialist Workers Party 
and Tony Cliff 
(Real Name Yigael 
Gluckstein) 

Searchlight and Gable were 
closely involved with the 
setting up of the 'Unite 
Against Fascism' (UAF) 
organization. The UAF's other major comnent was the Socialist 
Workers Party (Britain) which was founded by the Israeli-born 
Communist Jew Tony Cliff, whose real name is Yigael Gluckstein 
(born in Israel). 

Searchlight and Gable left the UAF after anti-Zionist 
Communists took control of its governing body. Gable is also a 
radical Zionist whose son served in the Israeli army, and thus 
objeed to the anti-Israeli stance, and, comaining about anti- 
Semitism, left the UAF in a huff. 



Chapter  

South African Marxism: The Usual Suspes 

THE South African Communist Party was founded in  in 
Cape Town, and according to its launch manifesto, was 
constituted out of the following organizations: 

"The Communist Party of South Africa, which has been 
formed by the union of the former International Socialist League 
(S. A.), Social Democratic Federation of Capetown, Communist 
Party of Capetown, Jewish Socialist Society of Capetown, Jewish 
Socialist Society (Poalei Zion) of Johannesburg, Marxian Club of 
Durban, and other Socialist bodies and individuals, and which 
expes shortly to be affiliated to the World Communist 
International..."  [Manifesto of the Communist Party of South 
Africa, adopted at the inaugural conference of the Party, Cape 
Town,  July, ]. 

The Jewish prenderance in the party is obvious from that 
founding statement. 

The South African Communist Party Created 
Out of Jewish Socialist Organizations 

Almost all of the founding members were Jews, and for many 
years, almost all party officials were Jews, including the 
Chairman S.P. Bunting; the vice-Chairman E.S. "Solly" Sachs 
(also secretary of the Garment Workers Union); Molly 
(Zelikowitz) Wolton and Rebecca (Notlowitz) Bunting, both 
members of Executive Bureau; General Secretary and Editor: D. 
G. Wolton; General Secretary (in the s) Lionel "Rusty" 
Bernstein; A.Z. Berman (who headed the Industrial Socialist 
League which was one of the formation organizations of the 
SACP); the Communist writer David Shub; Bennie Weinbren 
(who direed the Non-European Trade Union Federation); Issy 
Diamond; Abraham Levy; Hymie Levin; Issie Wolfson; Julius 
Lewin; Louis Joffe; Dr Max Joffe; Lazar Bach; Fanny Klenerman; 
Michael Harmel; Sam Kahn; Katy Kagan; Eli Weinberg; Yetta 
Barenblatt; Hymie Barsel; Leon and Norman Levy; Lionel 
Forman; Jacqueline and Rowley Arenstein; Errol and Dorothy 
