They even admit their key role in the greatest mass murders of all 
time. However, they find it imrtant to cover it up in mainstream 
pr and broadcasting media in Europe and America. 

In December  it shared an article with its Jewish readers 
called "Stalins Jews," which tells fas about the Jewish role in 
mass murder that would certainly have been criticized as '’anti- 
Semitic" if any gentile historian or publication had told them. 

The article, written by well-known Jewish writer Sever 
Plocker, is subtitled: 

"We mustn't forget that some of (sic) greatest murderers of 
modern times were Jewish" 

Plocker wrote: 




The Secret Behind Communism  


"We cannot know with certay the number of deaths Cheka 
was resnsible for in its various manifestations, but the number 
is surely at least  million, including viims of the forced 
colleivization, the hunger, large purges, expulsions, 
banishments, executions, and mass death at Gulags. 

"Genrikh Yagoda was the greatest Jewish murderer of the 
th Century, the GPU's deputy commander and the founder and 
commander of the NKVD. Yagoda diligently 
imemented Stalin’s colleivization orders 
and is resnsible for the deaths of at least  
million people. His Jewish deputies established 
and managed the Gulag system/'^ 

To understand the incredible level of 
deception about the enormous Jewish crimes 
against humanity, just consider how the 
globalist Jewish-dominated media hides 
Yagoda's role in a genocide of at least  
million human beings. 

Jewish writers and a major Jewish Israeli 
website casually rert to their Jewish 
readers that the Jewish Bolshevik, Yagoda, 
murdered twice the number of the alleged 
. million viims counted by the pre- 
eminent Holocaust historian, Raul Hilberg. 

The Holocaust is "never forget." 

The Bolshevik Holocaust is "never remember." 

Yet, this Jewish genocidal murderer who ironically has an 
identical mustache to Hitler, and who murdered double the 
number of people than are alleged against Hitler, is cometely 
unknown. Not one person in a thousand would be able to 
identify Yagoda's very distinive name, much less associate it 
with mass murder. 

Why does the media tell us that we should "never forget" the 
Jewish Holocaust, but in regard to the much bigger Bolshevik 
Holocaust the message is "never remember." This illustrates The 
Secret Behind Communism in a more profound way than this 
author ever could express. 



Genrikh Yagoda, 
murdered twice the 
number of people 
alleged against 
Adolf Hitler. 
Although Jewish 
scholars realize this 
fa, not  of  
gentiles even know 
his name. 



 Introduion 


Ethnic Haired Expressed in Both Communism and Zionism 

This book exses the little-known fa that Zionism and 
Communism have the same ethnic and very similar ideological 
roots. Karl Marx was descended from a long line of Talmudic 
scholars, and he learned much of his Communist theory from 
Moses Hess. Hess later morphed o a rabid Jewish racial 
supremacist and Zionist while at the same time continuing to 
embrace the princies of Communism. 

Tragically, the ethnic cleansings and murderous ways of the 
Jewish tribal ists in Russia are being repeated in the Zionist ethnic 
cleansing of Palestine. Similar ethnic racism is at work in 
Palestine as it was in Russia, and in other European nations. 

It can be seen in the ethnic genocide against the Ukrainians. 
The Jewish Bolsheviks pursefully murdered them to reduce 
their numbers, and then flooded their country with non- 
Ukrainians to destroy their national/ ethnic unity (See: Holodomor 
chapter). Raphael Lemkin, father of the word genocide , wrote this 
in his article "Soviet Genocide in Ukraine." 

The fourth step in the 
process [genocide] consisted 
in the fragmentation of the 
Ukrainian people at once by 
the addition to the Ukraine 
of foreign peopies...In this 
way, ethnic unity would be 
destroyed and nationalities 
mixed. Between  and 
, the pulation of 
Ukraine changed from % 
Ukr ainian Genocide by the Bolsheviks Ukrainian to only %.. d 

The Soviet Archives in Moscow has this revealing statement 
from a Bolshevik leader in Ukraine showing that genocide there 
was to break their ethnic unity in opsition to Bolshevik rule. 

’'Famine in Ukraine was brought on to decrease the number of 
Ukrainians, reace the dead with people from other parts of the 
USSR, and thereby to kill the slightest thought of any Ukrainian 
independence."  




The Secret Behind Communism  


This volume reveals how Israel today, and shockingly even 
Yad Vashem, honors one of the worst Bolshevik criminals of the 
Second World War, Ilya Ehrenburg, and shows how Zionists 
embrace the same ethnic hatreds as did their Bolshevik brethren. 

The Israeli Holocaust Museum Honors Bolshevik Promoter of 
Genocide Who Hid Bolshevik Crimes from the World 

Ehrenburg was a leading ernational propagandist for the 
Bolshevik state while it committed the worst mass murder in 
history. He was also the chief propagandist for the Red Army, 
who urged on the genocidal mass murder of Germans and other 
Eastern Europeans. The Canadian Jewish News states: 

