Neither can the land, buildings, and industries of a nation be 
nationalized without creating havoc. As in Russia, such a 
program could only be enforced by resorting to the Red Terror. 



During the Hungarian Soviet Republic in , the Heroes Square of 
Budapest was cometely covered by red textile and at the basement of the 
obelisk a new statue was ereed: Marx with a worker and a peasant. The 
statues of Hungarian national heroes were toped. Hungarian national 
symbols were banned, and many Hungarian historic monuments were 
destroyed. 

During Bela Kun's three month reign of terror, tens of 
thousands of people  priests, army officers, merchants, 
landowners, professional people  were butchered. The 
communizmg of the country's industrial and agricultural 
resources produced a famine in the cities, and this, combined 
with the peasantry's antipathy for the Jews, resulted in Kun's 
eventual overthrow. 

In an amazingly frank rert, the New International Year 
Book ofl  & has summarized the situation: 

"One of the chief weaknesses in the new regime was 
antipathy to the Jews. In the country distris the feeling was 
widespread that the revolution had been a movement on the part 
of the Jews to seize the were for themselves, and the remark was 
frequently heard that if the Jews of Budapest died of starvation, 
so much the better for the rest of the country. The government of 
Bela Kun was comsed almost exclusively of Jews who held also 


The Secret Behind Communism  


the administrative offices. The Communists had united at first 
with the socialists who were not of the extremely radical party, 
but resembled somewhat the Labor parties or trade unionists 
groups in other countries. Bela Kun did not, however sele his 
personnel from among them, but turned to the Jews and 
constituted virtually a Jewish bureaucracy." 

After three months of blood, murder, and pillage, Bela Kun 
was desed and erned in a lunatic asylum. Later he was 
released and returned to Russia, where he assumed control of the 
Red Terror organization the Cheka, in South Russia. 

One repercussion was the association of Hungary's Jews with 
the suffering inflied by the Communists; since Kun and most of 
his colleagues were clearly Jewish  many Hungarians 
recognized a Jewish element in the Bolshevist conspiracy afoot in 
central Europe. 

As Louis Birinyi observed: "The personnel of the 
"government" were seleed from the ranks of the agitators, 
about ninety-five per cent of 'whose names tell us that they were 
of Jewish origin.' The country then was divided o distris, and 
at the head of each distri a commissar was aced. It was not 
uncommon for the Bolsheviks to ap janitors of Jewish 
churches to the office of commissars who held in the hollow of 
their hands the life or death of the people in their distris. Terror 
squads were organized, and the "red terror" was in full swing ."  



Chapter  
Trotsky in Decline 

LENIN died of a brain hemorrhage in January of . By this 
time the Communists had become firmly entrenched. The civil 
wars were over and every vestige of organized resistance to 
Jewish-Bolshevism had been destroyed. On Lenin's death the 
party leadership fell to fighting among itself. 

Lenin had, as early as May of  suffered a paralytic stroke 
which affeed his speech and motor reflexes. In December he 
suffered a second stroke, and his ace was taken by a 
triumvirate comsed of Zinoviev, Kamenev, and Joseph Stalin. 
Shortly afterwards Lenin suffered another stroke, and in  he 
died. 

Trotsky and Lenin 

In the early days of the new regime Trotsky had enjoyed near 
equality with Lenin in prestige and were. Outside of Russia, 
Lenin-Trotsky were regarded as a duality, and in current 
literature of that period their names were often hyphenated. 

The outside world had therefore fully expeed Trotsky to 
assume Lenin's mantle as party leader. But after  Trotsky's 
prestige in the Politburo had declined rapidly, as we shall see. 

In the year the triumvirate began to funion, the Politburo 
was comsed of Lenin, Zinoviev, Kamenev, Trotsky, Bukharin, 
Tomsky, and Stalin. The Lenin-Zinoviev-Kamenev "troika" had, 
of course, been dominant so long as Lenin was aive, but now 
Zinoviev and Kamenev, as the surviving members of the 
"troika," regarded themselves as Lenin's rightful successors, and 
they looked on Trotsky as a competitor. 

Into this piure Stalin insinuated himself. He allied himself 
with Kamenev and Zinoviev, and the three were able to turn the 
Politburo against Trotsky. Stalin thus became the junior member 
of the triumvirate. 

Trotsky describes the situation this way [Stalin, ibid page , 
] "Used as a counterweight against me, he was bolstered and 



The Secret Behind Communism  


encouraged by Zinoviev and Kamenev, and to a lesser extent by 
Rykov, Bukharin and Tonis ky. No one thought at the time that 
Stalin would someday loom away above their heads. In the first 
triumvirate Zinoviev treated Stalin in a circumspely 
patronizing manner; Kamenev with a touch of irony."  

Zinoviev was considered to be the senior triumvir, and he 
gave the opening address at the th Party Congress, a funion 



After falling out with Stalin, Trotsky was expelled and 
forced o exile in Mexico. There, in , he was 
assassinated by an NKVD agent with an ice-pick blow to 
the head. Above, Trotsky on his deathbed in hospital, 
Mexico City. 

heretofore reserved to Lenin. Zinoviev was not well received in 
this capacity, and before the Congress had adjourned, Stalin's 
control oveij the party machine gave him a dominant sition in 
the triumvirate. This was the situation shortly after Lenin's death. 

Stalin to Powere 

Stalin now moved to consolidate his sition. In April of  
he engineered Trotsky's removal as War Commissar. In the same 
month he broke with Zinoviev and Kamenev and allied himself 




 Trotsky in Decline 

with litburo members Bukharin, Rykov, and Tomsky, Trotsky, 
Zinoviev, and Kamenev now united their forces in opsition to 
Stalin. 
