government and desing their Jewish elite, those aions 
coincided with a profound shift from Communism to Zionism on 
the part of Jews all over the world. 

The  arrest of two senior officials at the American Israel 
Public Affairs Committee (AIPAC), the most wereful pro-Israel 
lobby in Washington D.C., on spying charges for Israel, refocused 
attention on the reality of Israeli spying operations against 
America and the "dual loyalty" (anually the single loyalty) 
psychology un which the Israeli state can rely from Jews all 
over the world. 



Rosen and Weissman, AIPAC agents arrested on charges of spying 
for Israel. Despite their "mole," the Gentile Franklin, being found 
guilty and sentenced to jail, the two Jews had all charges against 
them mysteriously dismissed. 

Steve Rosen, Keith Weissman and the AIPAC Case 

The arrest of gentile Lawrence A. Franklin (an analyst of 
Iranian affairs who worked in the Pentagon) in , revealed a 
network of Israeli spy networks that involved the passing of 



 The Tribal Shift: Spying Now for Israel 

"classified information from the mole, to the men at AIPAC, and 
on to the Israelis," according to a CBS rert.  

CBS sources said Franklin "described as a trusted analyst at 
the Pentagon," turned over a presidential direive on U.S. licy 
toward Iran while it was, "in the draft phase when U.S. licy- 
makers were still debating the licy." This put the Israelis, 
according to one source, "inside the decision-making loop" so 
they could "try to influence the outcome." 

Franklin worked in the Pentagon Office of Special Plans, run 
by the Jew Richard Perle, who was caught giving classified 
information to Israel back in  (see below). Perle was insisting 
that Iraq had "weans of mass destruion" which required the 
United States to invade Iraq. There were no WMDs, of course, 
and Perle has blamed the "bad elligence." Interestingly, much 
of the elligence was generously provided by Israel. 

Franklin ed guilty to several espionage-related charges and 
was sentenced in January  to nearly  years of prison, which 
was "miraculously" reduced to ten months house arrest. 

Franklin passed information to AIPAC licy direor Steven 
Rosen and AIPAC senior Iran analyst Keith Weissman who were 
both indied for illegally conspiring to gather and disclose 
classified national security information to Israel. The charges 
against those two Jews were mysteriously dropped. 

In an erview with the Jewish Forward newspaper of July , 
, Franklin described his errogation as follows: 

I was asked about every Jew I knew in OSD [Office of the 
Secretary of Defense], and that bothered me," Franklin said. His 
superiors at the time were both Jewish: Paul Wolfowitz, deputy 
secretary of defense, and Douglas Feith, undersecretary of defense for 
licy, whom Franklin believes was a target of the investigation. 
"One agent asked me, 'How can a Bronx Irish Catholic get mixed up 
with...' and I finished the phrase for him: 'with these Jews.'" Franklin 
answered, "Christ was Jewish, too, and all the astles." "Later I felt 
dirty," he added. 

The Franklin case was just one of many such incidents 
involving American Jews spying for Israel against America. Why 
would Israel, America's supsed "best ally" in the Middle East, 
want to launch aggressive spying aions against its "friend"? 



The Secret Behind Communism  

The Franklin case was not the only such event, as the list below 
shows: 

Jonathan Pollard.: The Most Damaging 
Jewish Spy in American History 

Jonathan Pollard is an American Jew born in Galveston Texas, 
who established a career as an elligence analyst for the US 
Navy. From his sition of trust within the US Navy, Pollard 
delivered over , pages of classified documents to Israel for 
which he was well paid. Included in those documents were the 
names of over  US agents in Europe and Mideast, who were 
traded for unknown compensation to Israel and eventually 
"eliminated." 

Some of the more serious damage done by Pollard was to 
steal classified documents relating to the US Nuclear Deterrent 
relative to the USSR and send them to Israel. According to 
sources in the US State Department, Israel then turned around 
and traded those stolen nuclear secrets to the USSR in exchange 
for increased emigration quotas from the USSR to Israel. 

Other information that found its way from the US to Israel to 
the USSR resulted in the loss of American agents operating inside 
Eastern Europe. 



The most damaging Jew spy against America in its history Jonathon 
Pollard was sentenced to life imprisonment in  for espionage. 
Right, a surveillance video from  shows him stealing documents. 
While in prison, Pollard renounced his United States citizenship and 
became an Israeli national. 


 The Tribal Shift: Spying Now for Israel 

The official U.S. government resnse to an apication 
which opsed a reduced sentence for Pollard, described the 
damage done to the United States as follows: "[It is] difficult to 
conceive of a greater harm to national security than that caused 
by... Pollard's treasonous behavior." The United States' nuclear 
deterrent cost an estimated five trillion taxpayer dollars during 
the s and s to build and maain, and less than $, for 
Pollard to undermine. Israel waited thirteen years to admit 
Pollard had been spying for them, and now lobbies for his 
release, having granted him Israeli citizenship. 

s Jewish Spies for Israel against America 

: John Davitt, former chief of the Justice Department's 
ernal security seion notes that the Israeli elligence service 
is the second most aive in the United States after the Soviets. 

: A hidden microphone anted by the Israelis is 
discovered in the Office of the US Ambassador in Tel Aviv. 

: Telephone taps are found conneed to two telephones 
in the residence of the US military attache in Tel Aviv. 

The Lavon Affair 

: "The Lavon Affair". Israeli agents recruit Egyptian 
citizens of Jewish descent to bomb Western targets in Egypt, and 
ant evidence to frame Arabs, in an attempt to incite an 
American war against Egypt. The early arrest of the Jewish 
agents exsed the ot, and the Israeli defense minister Pinchas 
Lavon resigned to try and avoid Israel being blamed. The an 
was sanioned at the highest levels of the Israeli government and 
had the personal approval of David Ben-Gurion. 

