formation and tutoring of the Chinese Communist party which 
still rules that nation of . billion to the present-day. 

The first large group of Jews who aved in China did so 
under British proteion following the First Opium War. Many of 
these Jews were of Indian or Iraqi origin, due to British 
colonialism in these regions, and they became the largest dealers 
in opium. The second community came in the first decades of the 
th century when many Jews aved in Hong 
Kong and Shanghai during those cities' periods of economic 
expansion. 

The Shanghai Ghetto 

Another wave of Jews aved in the late s and s, 
fleeing from the rise of Nazi Germany. Shanghai was notable for 
its volume of Jewish refugees, since it was one of the few aces 
in the world where a visa was not required for entry. By , 
nearly , Jews had found shelter there. 

True to form, many of these Jews became highly aive in the 
Chinese Communist Party. Here is a partial list: 

. Grigori Naumovich Voitinsky (  ) was a Russian 
Jew and Comern official sent to China in  as an advisor to 
conta the prominent Chinese radicals such as Chen Duxiu, just 
before the formation of the Communist Party of China. The 
aual process of forming the infant Party can be mostly 
attributed to his influence. 

In , the Soviet Union established the Far Eastern Bureau 
in Siberia, a branch of the Third Communist International, or the 
Comern. It was resnsible for managing the establishment of 
a Communist party in China and other countries. 

Soon after its establishment, the bureau's deputy manager 
Voitinsky aved in Beijing and contaed the Communist 
vanguard Li Dazhao. Li arranged for Voitinsky to meet with 
another Communist leader, Chen Duxiu, in Shanghai. 



 Spreading Communism in China 


In August , Voitinsky, Chen Duxiu, Li Hanjun, Shen 
Xuanlu, Yu Xiusong, Shi Cuntong, and others began to establish 
the Comern China Branch. 

The Shanghai Chronicle was set up in  in Shanghai 
by other Russian Communist Jews and received financial aid 
from the Soviet-Russian government in early . Voitinsky and 
his colleagues came to China in the guise of editors and rerters 
for the newspaper, but also set up the Comern's East Asia 
Secretariat in the newspaper office. 

From then on, the Shanghai Chronicle became both a 
propaganda vehicle for the East Asia Secretariat anci a cover 
for Bolshevik aivity in China. Because the newspaper staff 
assisted Soviet Russian and Comern personnel stationed under 
cover at the newspaper in aivities to establish a Communist 
organization in China, the newspaper as a whole ayed a special 
role in the early Communist movement in China. Although 
the Shanghai Chronicle stopped publication at tire end of  
because Russian aid came to an end, many staff members 
continued to work for Bolshevism. 



First Minister of Health in Mao Zedong 
Government was an Austrian Jew 

. Jakob Rosenfeld (-), more commonly known 
as General Luo, served as the Minister of Health in the 



The Secret Behind Communism  


 Provisional Communist Military Government of 
China under Mao Zedong. Rosenfeld, a Jew born in Lemberg, the 
Austro-Hungarian Empire (today Lviv, Ukraine), fled to the 
Shanghai ghetto in . 

From  he served the Chinese Communist force as a field 
door for the New Fourth Army, the Eighth Route Army and the 
Northeast Peoe's Liberation Army during the outbreak of the 
Second Sino-Japanese war and Chinese civil war. He participated 
in the Peoe's Liberation Army's march on Beijing and was 
rewarded with the senior government st in the st-war 
Communist Chinese government. 

In , Rosenfeld emigrated to Israel and died two years 
later. China has ereed a statue in his honor, a hospital in Junan 
County, Shandong was named after him, and in  a large 
exhibit was mounted in Beijing's National Museum of China in 
tribute to him. The museum exhibit in his honor was inaugurated 
by Chinese President Hu Jao. 

. Stanislaw (Moishe) Flato ( - ) was a Polish Jew, 
born in Warsaw and who studied medicine in Paris. While in 
France, he joined the French Communist Party in . He then 
volunteered for service on the Communist side in the Spanish 
Civil War, joining the Spanish Communist Party. He was 
erned un his return to France in  for his military and 
subversive aivities, but released and then fled to China in 
August . 

He became a member of Communist Party of China, and 
served as a head of International Red Cross doors at Peoe's 
Liberation Army. 

After World War II, Flato returned to Poland in September 
 and joined the reconstituted Polish Communist Party with 
the new rank of Colonel. Flato served on the Polish army's 
General Staff from  to  and later became Chief Adviser at 
the Polish Embassy in Beijing, China, from -. Thereafter 
he became deputy direor at the Department for Asia in Ministry 
for Foreign Affairs of Poland. He died in . 

. Eva Sandberg ( -) was a German Jewess who 
emigrated to The Soviet Union in the s to join her co- 



 Spreading Communism in China 

religionists. In  she maed a visiting Chinese 
Communist, Xiao San. The same year, San was ordered by the 
Communist International to rert for service to the 
revolutionary base atYan'an in China, and Sandberg 
accompanied him. 

After many adventures with the First (or Central) Red 
Army Xiao and Sandberg took over the editorial department at 
the Reds' Lu Xun Academy of Arts. Finally in , with the 
Chinese Civil War over  and a Communist viory Sandberg 
came o her own and began making films of the Peoe's 
Republic for use by the Communist news agencies of Europe. She 
and San later fell out with the Chinese Communist leadership 
and were arrested. After years of ernal exile, Sandberg died in 
Beijing in . 

. Ruth F. Weiss, also known as Wi Lush, (  ) was 
an Austrian Jewess who fled to Shanghai in . She worked as 
a journalist in that city, and later became a teacher at the Jewish 
School in Shanghai, at the School of the Chinese Committee of 
Intelleual Cooperation, and at the West China Union 
University. After working briefly as a secretary at the Canadian 
