spread the seeds of defeatism 
among the German pulation 
much as the Bolsheviks had done 
in Russia. 

On November rd a mutiny broke out in the navy at Kiel, 
followed by rioting by the Social Democrats. On November th 
the Kaiser renounced his throne and the Social Democrats 





The Secret Behind Communism  


proclaimed a Socialist Republic. Two days later, on Nov. th, 
they agreed to an Armistice with the Allies. 

There now occurred an event which was to embitter the 
German people against the Jews for all time, and which 
eventually contributed to the rise of Adolf Hitler. This was the 
demobilization of the German armies. 

It should be exained that Germany did not surrender by the 
terms of the November Tlth Armistice; the agreement was that 
all German armies were to withdraw to the pre-war boundaries 
of Germany as a preliminary to a negotiated peace. 

But as the German armies retreated to German soil, the 
Revolutionary government, fearful lest the Revolution be upset, 
ordered them demobilized. On November th Germany still 
ssessed the mightiest military machine on earth; thirty days 
later it had nothing. Instead of being able to negotiate peace on 
the terms of Wilson's Fourteen Pos, a heless and prostrate 
Germany got the Versailles Treaty. 



No sooner had the German armies been demobilized than the 
more extreme elements of the Social Democratic Party, led by 
Rosa Luxemburg, laid ans to seize control of the revolution as 
the Bolsheviks had done in Russia. 



 Exrting the Revolution 

The Munich Bolshevik Revolution 

John Toland in his book Hitler (p. ), stated 

"In Munich another insurreion broke out on November , 
(). It was led by Kurt Eisner, a small elderly Jew wearing a 
black floppy hat which, large as it was, couldn't contain a shock 
of wild hair. Epically untidy, he was a living cartoon of the 
bomb-throwing Red."  

He declared Bavaria "A free state" the day after the one year 
anniversary of the Bolshevik revolution in Russia and made 
himself Minister-President of Bavaria. Two other Jews, Lujo 
Brentano and Villa Jaffe, served for a little while as Peoe's 
Commissar for Trade and finance minister, respeively. 

He was shot only three months later by "a right wing 
nationalist" of Jewish ancestry, then another Jew, Ernst Toller, 
proclaimed Bavaria a Soviet Republic on April , , with 
several Jews in leading sitions. 

It was a total farce. His deputy for Foreign Affairs, (a 
psychiatric patient at that) for instance, declared war on 
Switzerland. Six days later, on April , , the Communist 
party seized were with yet another Jew as the leader, Eugen 
Levine. Now the farce became a bloody farce with several 
hostages taken from the elite, at the instigation of Lenin. 

Eight men were accused as right-wing spies and executed. On 
May ,  the Communist adventure ended. Loyal elements of 
the army and Freikorps entered Bavaria in a force of about , 
men, defeated the Communists and executed Levine along with 
 others. In the street fights another  suprters of the 
revolutionary government had been killed  

Aided by funds provided by the Soviet ambassador, the Jew 
Joffe, Rosa Luxemburg's "Spartacus Bund" in January of  
attempted to overthrow the revolutionary government. 

The revolt, following bloody street fighting, was quelled and 
its leaders, Rosa Luxemburg and her fellow Jew Karl Liebknecht, 
were imprisoned and later executed by German army officers. 

Following the execution of Rosa Luxemburg, the Third 
International dispatched the Jew, Karl Radek, to lead the party. 



The Secret Behind Communism  


Later the Jewess, Ruth Fischer, assumed control of the German 
Communist party, and remained at its head till . 

Bela Kun's Reign of Terror in Hungary 

Following World War I, Hungary also had a Communist 
Revolution. In this case the instigator was the Jew, Bela Kun 
(Cohen), who imsed a Communist regime on the country in 
the spring of . 

Bela Kun had participated in the Bolshevik Revolution in 
Russia, and following the Armistice, he and a group of Jewish 

revolutionaries, using forged passrts, 
moved o Hungary and established 
the Communist newspaper, Voros 
Ursay (Red News). 

Well supied with finances by the 
Soviet government, and aided by the 
pro-Communist resident Jewish 
pulation, Kun quickly becanae the 
diator of all Hungary. Bela Kun 
proceeded to follow the pattern of the 
Bolshevik revolution. Says Encyclopaedia 
Britannica: "Kun's programme was to 
'arm at once, and forcibly transfer every 
industry and all landed property without conservation o the 
hands of the proletariat.' At first he collaborated with the Social 
Democrats?? but soon shouldered them aside, nationalized all 
banks, all concerns with over  emoyees, all landed property 
over  ac., every building other than workmen's dwellings. 

All jewelry, all private property above the minimum (e.g. two 
suits,  shirts,  pair of boots and  socks) was seized; servants 
abolished, bathrooms made public on Saturday nights; priests 
jailed with the insane, criminals and shopkeepers, emoying 
paid assistants were declared unfit for society and their 
businesses taken from them. 

The result of this program was, as in Russia, economic and 
social chaos. The nationalization of every private bathroom in a 
country cannot be accomished without profoundly affeing 
the social and moral tone of its society. 




 Exrting the Revolution 


