
 Russians Rise Up & Zionism Surges  

 Jews Come to America  

 The U.S. Communist Party  

 A Communist Defeor in America Spills the Beans  

 Spies, Spies and more Spies in America  

 Atomic Treason  

 The Tribal Shift: Spying Now for Israel  

 Communism in Hollywood  

 A Tribal Media  

  The Communist Origins of Neoconservatism  

 The Communist Movement in Britain  

 South African Marxism: The Usual Suspes  

 Spreading of Communism to China  

 The Key to Communism: Jewish Tribalism  

 Final Words from Nobel Laureate Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn  



Introduion 


"You must understand. The leading Bolsheviks who took over 
Russia were not Russians. They hated Russians. They hated 
Christians. Driven by ethnic hatred they tortured and slaughtered 
millions of Russians without a shred of human remorse. 

The Oober Revolution was not what you call in America the 
'Russian Revolution.' 

It was an invasion and conquest over the Russian people. 

More of my countrymen suffered hofic crimes at their 
bloodstained hands than any people or nation ever suffered in the 
entirety of human history. 

It cannot be overstated. Bolshevism committed the greatest 
human slaughter of all time. 

The fa that most of the world is ignorant and uncaring about 
this enormous crime is proof that the global media is in the hands 
of the perpetrators."  

 Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn 

These were startling words, 
sken to me by the famous 
Russian writer and philosopher 
Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn when I had 
the privilege of meeting him in 
Moscow in . 

His words made me fully 
realize the fa that most of the 
people of the world know little 
about the tribalist entity which 
created and drove the Communist 
juggernaut that took over Russia. 
They also know frightfully little 
about the greatest slaughters in history, the genocide of tens of 
millions of people that was spawned by deep ethnic hatred. 

For so many people, even for some of those who have studied 
the "Russian Revolution" in history courses in universities around 
the world, this is "The Secret Behind Communism." This secret, 
even though ain to see if one just looks closely, is rarely sken 
about in either the mainstream press or in mainstream academia. 




 Introduion 

The revolution occurred in Russia, and although a percentage 
of Russians participated in it, it was not a "Russian Revolution." It 
was led by an alienated, non-Russian, Jewish ethnic minority that 
hated Russia, Russians, and the Tsar for their alleged anti- 
Semitism. As will be documented in this book, their fellow 
tribalists around the world financed, and their shock troops 
executed the brutal takeover of the Russian government. Un 
achieving total were, their deep, psychopathic, racist hatred 
became manifest in the greatest human slaughter of all time. 

Any historian who has studied modern Communism from its 
ideological origins in Karl Marx and Moses Hess, through the 
mass disssession, forced starvations, and Gulags of the 
twentieth century, is aware that Communists are the real world 
champions of mass murder. There is no historical dispute that 
Communist regimes killed many times more innocents than any 
other government in history, including Hitler's Germany. 

But unlike thousands of even lowly soldiers of Germany, the 
Red Terror murderers of millions have not been hunted down 
across the face of the Earth. They have not faced trial for their 
hofic crimes against humanity. Perhaps even more imrtantly 
they have never faced the court of pular revulsion. Why? It is 
because these Communist perpetrators have been shielded by 
their tribal brethren who now identify with Zionism who have an 
inordinate influence on media, academia, and governments. 

The deaths in just one of the many Communist killing fields 
totaled  to  million. Men, women and children of the Ukraine 
were starved, killed, imprisoned, and worked to death in what is 
called the Holodomor. It is a death toll equal to or even greater 
than the numbers in what now is called the "Holocaust." 

Today, most people through mass media and government 
commemoration, are aware of and empathize with the viims of 
the Holocaust, but  percent of humanity are cometely 
unaware of the Ukrainian Holodomor. 

The world has been inundated with both fiional and non- 
fiional dramas about the sufferings of Jews and Jewish children, 
such as Anne Frank, in the war. However, the great masses have 
not been led to shed tears for the little girls of Ukrainian and 




Russian heritage who suffered and died. They are unknown, 
unremembered and unmourned in the media of today. Peoe 


are unconscious and cut off from empathy for the millions 





 Introduion 


murdered by the Bolsheviks in Russia, even if they have a vague 
knowledge of millions suffering under Communism. Very few 
people have an emotional attachment to the viims of the 
Communists because 
