
Bom of the same Roots: 

Communism & Zionism 

It was in this atmosphere that the twin movements of 
Marxism and Zionism began to take hold and dominate the mass 
of Russian Jewry. Ironically, both Zionism and Marxism were 
first promulgated by westernized German Jews. 

Zionism, whose chief advocate was Theodore Herzl, took root 
in Russia in the s in competition with Marxism, whose high 
priest was Karl Marx, grandson of a rabbi. 

Eventually almost all Russian Jews came to identify himself 
with either one or the other of these movements. 

Jewish Terrorists in Russia 

As an outgrowth of this litical 
fermentation, there appeared at the 
beginning of the century one of the most 
remarkable terroristic organizations ever 
recorded in the annals of history. 

This was the Jewish 
dominated Party of Socialists- 
Revolutionaries (PSR), which between 
 and  was resnsible for the 
assassination of no less than six fust 
ranking leaders of the Imperial 
government, including Minister of 
Education Bogolev (); Minister of 
Interior Sipyagin (); Governor of 
Ufa, Bogdanovich (); Premier 
Viachelav von Plehve (); Grand 
Duke Sergei, uncle of the Tsar (); 
and General Dubrassov, who had suppressed the Moscow 
insurreion (). 

Chief archite of these terroristic aivities was the Kovno- 
born Jew, Grigory Gershuni, who headed the "terror seion" of 



The Jew Grigori Gershuni 
master-minded the terror 
against the Tsar's 
ministers. Meanwhile, 

Jews the world over spread 
hate propaganda against 
the Imperial government. 


 Communism & Zionism: Born of the Same Mother 

the Social Revolutionary Party and who was a cofounder of the 
party. 

In charge of the "fighting seion" was Yevno Azev, son of a 
Jewish tailor, and one of the principal founders of the party. Azev 
later otted, but was unable to carry out, the assassination of 
Tsar Nicholas II. Azev was later exsed as also working as a 
lice spy, and was forced to flee from the wrath of his erstwhile 
revolutionary comrades to exile in Germany. 

Gershuni was arrested as a result of Azev's spy work, and 
was sentenced to life imprisonment. This marked the end of the 
terroristic aivities of the party, but the effe of these litical 
murders was far reaching. Never again was the royal family, or 
its ministers free from the fear of assassination. 

Soon another prime minister would be shot down this time 
in the very presence of the Tsar. This was the backdrop for the 
revolution of . 



Chapter  

Bloody Sunday & the  Revolution 


THE revolution of , like that of , occurred in an 
atmosphere of war. On Jan. nd, , the Japanese captured Port 
Arthur, and thereby won the decisive viory of the Russo- 
Japanese war. 

Later in January there occurred a tragic incident which was 
the immediate cause of the  revolution, and which was to 
affe the attitude of Russia's industrial pulation toward the 
Tsar for all time. This was the "Bloody Sunday" affair. 

The Imperial government, in its attempts to gain the favor of 
the industrial pulation, and in its search for a way to combat 
Jewish revolutionary aivity, had adopted the taic of 
encouraging the formation of legal trade unions, to which 
professional agitators were denied membership. These trade 
unions received official recognition and were proteed by law. 

Father Gan 

One of the most outstanding trade union leaders and 
certainly the most unusual was Father Gan, a priest in the 
Russian Orthodox Church. On the day Port Arthur fell a number 
of clashes occurred in St. Petersburg's giant Putilov works 
between members of Father Gan's labor organization and 
company officials. 

A few days later the Putilov workers went on strike. Father 
Gan resolved to take the matter direly to the Tsar, Nicholas II 
(Tsar -). On the following Sunday thousands of St. 
Petersburg's workmen and their families turned out to 
participate in this appeal to the "little father". 

The procession was entirely orderly and peaceful and the 
petitioners caed patriotic banners expressing loyalty to the 
crown. At the palace gate the procession was met by a flaming 
volley of rifle fire. Hundreds of workmen and members of their 
families were slaughtered. This was "Bloody Sunday," certainly 
one of the blackest days in Tsarist history. 



 Bloody Sunday & the  Revolution 

Was Tsar Nicholas II resnsible for Bloody Sunday, as 
Marxist propagandists have claimed? He couldn't have been 
because he was out of the city at the time. Father Gan had 
marched on an empty palace. But the harm had been done. 


i ** 

( 


nri 


Bloody Sunday turned Russia's industrial pulation against the Tsar. 
Jewish agitators capitalized on this to promote the  revolution. Chief 
leader of the  revolt was Trotsky. 

Revolution of  

Bloody Sunday marked the beginning of the  revolution. 
For the first time the Jewish Marxists were joined by large 
numbers of the working class. Bloody Sunday delivered Russia's 
