instantaneous and far-reaching. There was a widespread belief in 
and out of the government, that if the Jews were dissatisfied with 
the rule of Alexander II  whom the crypto-Jew, D'lsraeli, had 
described as "the most benevolent prince that ever ruled 
Russia"  then they would be satisfied with nothing less than 
outright domination of Russia. 



 The Ethnic War on the Russian Peoe 


Up to  Russian licy had consistently been direed in 
an attempt to "Russianize" the Jew, preparatory to accepting him 
o full citizenship. In line with this licy, free and compulsory 
education for Jews had been roduced, repeated attempts had 
been made to encourage them to settle on farms, and special 
efforts had been made to encourage them to engage in the crafts. 

Now Russian licy was reversed. Hereafter it became the 
licy of the Imperial government to prevent the further 
exoitation of the Russian people by the Jews. Thus began the 
death struggle between Tsar and Jew. 

All through  there was widespread anti-Jewish rioting all 
over the empire. Large numbers of Jews who had been permitted 
to settle beyond the Pale of Settlement were evied. 

In May of  the May Laws (Provisional Rules of May , 
) were imsed, thus imementing the new governmental 
licy of Alexander III (Tsar -). 

The May Laws shook the empire to its foundations. The 
following passage is taken from Encyclopaedia Britannica ; 

"The Russian May Laws were the most conspicuous 
legislative monument achieved by modern anti-Semitism ... Their 
immediate results was a ruinous commercial depression which 
was felt all over the empire and which profoundly affeed the 
national credit. 

"The Russian minister was at his wit's end for money. 
Negotiations for a large loan were entered un with the house of 
Rothschild and a preliminary contra was signed, when ... the 
finance minister was informed that unless the persecutions of the 
Jews were stopped the great banking house would be compelled 
to withdraw from the operation ... In this way anti-Semitism, 
which had already so profoundly influenced the domestic licies 
of Europe, set its mark on the ernational relations of the 
weres, for it was the urgent need of the Russian treasury quite as 
much as the termination of Prince Bismarck's secret treaty of 
mutual neutrality which brought about the Franco-Russian 
alliance." 

Thus, within a period of  years (from the rd partition to 
) the Jews, although constituting only .% of the pulation, 
had been able to entrench themselves so well in the Russian 



The Secret Behind Communism  


economy that the nation was almost bankrupted in the attempt to 
dislodge them. And, as we have seen, the nation's ernational 
credit was also affeed. 

Tensions Between Jews and Tsarist Regime Rise 

After  events served increasingly to sharpen the enmity 
of Jewry toward Tsarism. The May Laws had not only restried 
Jewish economic aivity, but had attempted  unsuccessfully, as 
we shall see  to preserve Russia's cultural egrity. 

Hereafter Jews were permitted to attend state-suprted 
schools and universities, but only in ratio to their pulation. 
This was not unreasonable since Russia's schools were flooded 
with Jewish students while large numbers of her Gentile 
pulation were illiterate, but to the Jews this represented 
another bitter "persecution," and all the world was acquaed 

with the enormity of this new 
crime against Jewry. 

Alexander Ill's 
Proclamation on Jewry 

On May rd a delegation of 
Jews headed by Baron Gunzberg 
called on the new Tsar Alexander 
III (Tsar -) to protest the 
May Laws and the alleged 
discrimination against Jewry. 

As a result of the investigation 
which followed, Tsar Alexander III 
issued an edi the following Sept. 
rd, a part of which is given here: 

"For some time the government 
has given its attention to the Jews and to their relations to the rest 
of the inhabitants of the empire, with a view of ascertaining the 
sad condition of the Christian inhabitants brought about by the 
condu of the Jews in business matters... 

"During the last twenty years the Jews have gradually 
ssessed themselves of not only every trade and business in all 
its branches, but also of a great part of the land by buying or 
farming it. With few exceptions, they have as a body devoted their 



Tsar Alexander III. 


 The Ethnic War on the Russian Peoe 

attention, not to enriching or benefiting the country, but to 
defrauding by their wiles its inhabitants, and particularly its or 
inhabitants. 

"This condu of theirs has called forth protests on the part of 
the people, as manifested in as of violence and robbery. The 
government, while on the one hand doing its best to put down the 
disturbances, and to deliver the Jews from oppression and 
slaughter, have also, on the other hand, thought it a matter of 
urgency and justice to adopt stringent measures in order to put an 
end to the oppression praiced by the Jews on the inhabitants, 
and to free the country from their malpraices, which were, as is 
known, the cause of the agitations."  

Ironically, although the world is conditioned to think that 
attempts to limit all kinds of Jewish influence are violations of 
human rights, the Tsars anually saw their efforts as a defense of 
the most basic human rights of their subjes. Of course, this 
perspeive is certainly not allowed in a global media where the 
same forces are well-ensconced. 

Who was right and who was wrong? 

The time came when the Jewish Bolsheviks gained the upper 
hand and murdered the Tsar, his wife and children. 

They went on to commit the greatest mass murder in human 
history. That sobering fa should historically answere the 
question who the ultimate violators of humanity anually were. 



Chapter  
