
But now it was too late. In February of  Zinoviev was 
expelled from the Politburo, then from the presidency of the St. 
Petersburg (Leningrad) Soviet, and finally as president of the 
Third International. Less than a month later (Oober ) Trotsky 
and Kamenev were also expelled from the Politburo. 

This marked the end of any effeive resistance to Stalin. The 
next year Zinoviev, Kamenev, and Trotsky were removed from 
the party's Central Committee, and shortly afterwards all three 
were expelled from the party. In  Trotsky was exiled abroad. 
In June of  Stalin became the supreme diator of Russia. 

His closest associate throughout this time was the Jew Lazar 
Moiseyevich Kaganovich, who in  was leader of 
the Bolshevik party in Belarus. During the Oober Revolution, 
Kaganovich was the leader of the revolt in Homel. 



Chapter  
Lazar Kaganovich: 

Mass Murder & the Holodomor 

In May , when Stalin 
became the General Secretary of the 
Communist Party, he transferred the 
Jew Kaganovich to his apparatus to 
command the Organizational 
Department or Orgburo of the 
Secretariat. 

The Jew Lazar Kaganovich, is ssibly 
the greatest single mass murderer in all 
history. Resnsible for the deaths of at 
least  million people us the Ukrainian 
starvation Holocaust, he personally signed 
execution orders for at least , people. 
Kaganovich was a devoted servant of Stalin, and in  he became Chairman 
of the Commission for the Vetting of the Party Membership. This allowed 
him to ensure that anyone opsed to Stalin was expelled from the party, 
leading to a purge which historians have incorrely presumed to be anti- 
Jewish, simy because so many Jews were Communists, and some 
prominent ones such as Trotsky had fallen out with Stalin. In reality, the 
Soviet purges of the s were direed by this Jew. 

Kaganovich's department was resnsible for all assignments 
within the apparatus of the Communist Party, and thus had one 
of the most imrtant sitions in the Soviet state. 

In , Kaganovich became a member of the party's Central 
Committee and from  to , he was also the First Secretary 
of the Communist Party of the Ukrainian SSR. 

In , Kaganovich became a member of the 
Soviet Politburo and the First Secretary of the Moscow Obkom of 
the Communist Party (-) and Moscow Gorkom of the 
Communist Party (-). 

He supervised the imementation of many of Stalin's 
economic licies, including the colleivization of agriculture 
and rapid industrialization. During the s, he oversaw the 





 Lazar Kagonovich: Mass Murder & the Holodomor 

destruion of many of Moscow's oldest monuments, including 
the Cathedral of Christ the Savior. 

When Kaganovich gleefully destroyed the Church of the 
Savior he let loose his deep Jewish hatred for Russia, Christianity 
and all of its values. He pronounced: 

"There is Mother Russia stripped of her skirt." 

Kaganovich was given the task of imementation of the 
colleivization licy that caused a catastrophic - famine 

known as the Holodomor in 
the Ukraine. During this 
man-made famine, anywhere 
between . and  million 
Ukrainians died of starvation 
in a peacetime catastrophe 
unprecedented in European 
history. Kaganovich per- 
sonally oversaw grain 
confiscations during the 
same period. 

Similar licies also 
inflied enormous suffering 
on the Soviet Central Asian 
republic of Kazakhstan, 
the Kuban region, Crimea, 
the lowere Volga region, and 
other parts of the Soviet 
Union. 

On January , , the 
Kiev Appellate Court found 
Kaganovich sthumously 
guilty of genocide against Ukrainians during the catastrophic 
Holodomor famine. 

The Department of Wet Affairs 

In  Kaganovich organized a special department of the 
Soviet secret lice, with himself as the head. It was referred to as 
the department of "wet affairs," with "wet" meaning "bloody." 




The Secret Behind Communism 


 


This was the seion which handled clandestine mass executions, 
of the sort caed out later at Vinnitsa and at Katyn, and at a 
thousand other aces throughout the Soviet Union over the next 
two decades. 

The massacre of thousands of Polish officers at Katyn  
uncovered by the Germans during World War   was blamed 
on the Nazis orginally, although the truth of Kaganovich's role 
was later uncovered following the fall of the Soviet Union. 

When the German Army invaded the Soviet Union in , it 
was Kaganovich who was the savior of the Jews: he arranged for 
the evacuation of all Jews from the frontier areas and their 
resettlement far to the east, where they would be safe from the 
Germans. His licy was to let the Ukrainians and the Russians 
bear the brunt of the German invasion, but prote the Jews from 
hardship and danger at any cost. 

Khrushchev Accuses Kaganovich 

When the Gentile Communist Nikita Khrushchev accused 


Kaganovich in  at a Soviet Party Congress of having 


