returned to Germany he was arrested by the lice. In  he 
was convied of treason and sentenced to six years 
imprisonment. This was later quashed by the German supreme 
court, because Wolf was aing from the tetory of the then- 
independent GDR. 

In  he was convied of unlawful detention, coercion, and 
bodily harm (perpetrated against viims of the Stasi), and was 
given a suspended sentence of two years imprisonment. Wolf 
died in . 



Chapter  

Russians Rise Up & Zionism Surges 

THE struggle between Zionist Jews (who endorsed the basic 
economic and social princies of Communism, as can be seen to 
this day in Israel's kibbutzes, where everything is communally 
owned by the kibbutz members) and Communist Jews who 
(correly) regarded Zionism as another form of nationalism, 
grew ever more ense after Stalin's death. 

Many leading Jews had already fallen afoul of the 
Communist hierarchy, especially in the Great Purges of the s. 
Zionists eventually came o open confli with the Soviet 
authorities, particularly after the creation of the state of Israel, 
which was also (correly) viewed by hardline Gentile 
Communists as an illegal state formed on land stolen from the 
Palestinians through illegal Jewish immigration. 

World War II and the Rise of Russian Nationalism 

The outbreak of the Second World War and the invasion of 
the Soviet Union by Germany in  irreparably altered the 
make-up of Soviet society. Jewish involvement in the horrors of 
Communism was an imrtant faor in Hitler's desire to destroy 
the USSR and in the anti-Jewish aions of the German National 
Socialist government. Jews and Jewish organizations were also 
imrtant forces in inducing the Western democracies to side 
with Stalin rather than Hitler in World War II. 

By late , many observers around the world fully expeed 
the Soviet Union to collapse in the face of the massive German 
military viories on the Eastern Front. The USSR's ruling elite, 
fighting for its very existence, called un the one reserve it had 
always, ideologically speaking, disdained: Russian nationalism. 

In exhorting the Russian people to fight the German invaders, 
Soviet propaganda switched from being purely an ideological 
struggle between National Socialism and Communism, o one 
pitting Russian nationalism and independence against German 
aggression and imperialism. 



The Secret Behind Communism  


This shift  in effe a call to Russian nationalism, instead of 
"worker ernationalism," can be said to mark the turning  
in Jewish influence in the Soviet Union. 

Jewish Control Wanes in the Soviet Union 

Despite their decline as a result of the growth of Russian 
nationalism, Jews still maained an imrtant role in the 
Communist elite of the USSR right to the very end of that state, as 
outlined in the book The Jewish Century by Yuri Slezkine 
(Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, ).  

According to Slezkine a Jewish author Jewish elite status 
in the USSR persisted despite the Great Terror of the late s, 
which disprortionately affeed the litical elite. On the 
whole Jews were underrepresented as viims of the Great 
Terror. And although the Jewish percentage of the litical elite 
did decline after the purges of the late s and the promotion 
of former peasants and working class Russians, this did not affe 
Jewish predominance as a professional, cultural, and managerial 
elite. 

Jewish elite status remained even after the purge was 
expanded to all seors of the Soviet elite, due at least partly to 
"the widespread sense [among Russians] that the great viory 
[in World War II] entitled them to a greater role in decision 
making." 

Slezkine shows the very high percentages of Jews in various 
institutions in the late s, including the universities, the 
media, the foreign service, and the secret lice. For exame, the 
deans among philosophers, historians, and legal scholars were 
ethnic Jews, and, as already noted, Jews constituted % of the 
Soviet Academy of Science Institute of Literature. As for the 
Jewish role as "vanguard of the working class," Jews still made 
up % of the staff at the Trade Union Council's publication Trud 
even after a purge that cut their numbers in half. 

The campaign against the Jews began only after the agee of 
mass murder and dertations in the USSR, and was much less 
lethal than those mounted against a long list of other ethnic 
groups, whose typical fate was dertation under the most brutal 
of circumstances (Cossacks, Chechens, Crimean Tatars, Volga 



 The Russians Rise & Jews Embrace Zionism 

Germans, Moldavians, Kalmyks, Karachai, Balkars, Ingush, 
Greeks, Bulgars, Crimean Armenians, Meskhetian Turks, Kurds, 
and Khemshins). 

The campaign against the Jews was also much less consistent 
and effeive than the Soviet campaigns against the children of 
the former elite the faory owners, the Cossack officers, and 
the middle classes and elligentsia had been"- 

Unlike the purges of the s that sometimes targeted Jews 
as member of the elite (albeit at far less than their percentage of 
the elite), the anti-Jewish aions of the late s and early s 
were targeted at Jews because of their ethnicity. Similar purges 
were performed throughout Soviet-controlled Eastern Europe" 

"All three regimes [Poland, Romania, Hungary] resembled the 
Soviet Union of the s insofar as they combined the ruling 
core of the old Communist underground, which was heavily 
Jewish, with a large ol of upwardly mobile Jewish 
professionals, who were, on average, the most trustworthy among 
the educated and the most educated among the trustworthy."" 

Speaking of the situation in Poland, Khrushchev suprted 
the anti-Jewish purge with his remark that "you have already too 
many Abramoviches." 

Whereas in the s and s children of the pillars of the 
old order were discriminated against, now Jews were not only 
being purged because of their vast overrepresentation among the 
elite, but were being discriminated against in university 
admissions. Jews, the formerly loyal members of the elite and 
willing executioners of the bloodiest regime in history, now 
"found themselves among the aliens."ioo 

Jews retained their elite status and occupational profile until 
the collapse of the Soviet Union in , but "the special 
relationship between the Jews and the Soviet state had come to 
an end  or rather, the unique symbiosis in pursuit of world 
revolution had given way to a unique antagonism over two 
competing and incommensurate nationalisms."  

Rise of Russian Nationalism Creates "Anti-Semitism" 
