the most repressive and murderous evil in the history of 
mankind: Communism. Obviously, knowledge of that fa does 
not create good public relations for Jews. 

The answere to the second question of "how" was more 
elusive. I realized that only very wereful forces could suppress 
imrtant parts of the historical record and create a false 
impression of a "Russian Revolution" when there were only  
ethnic Russians in the highest levels of the first Bolshevik 
government. Obviously the Jews historically did have a lot of 
were  as evidenced by Jacob Schiff, the Rothschilds, and 
others  but the were to change the perception of history  
that seemed presterous. Yet only a few months before, when 
Mattie Smith had told me at the Citizens Council that the Russian 
Revolution was Jewish, I had thought the idea was ridiculous. 
Now I knew differently, and I knew I was just beginning to 
discover a different reality in the world that was not mentioned 
by the NY Times. 

One of the repid researchers that impressed me in those 
years was Frank Britton. The next few chapters will highlight his 
research with additional commentary. 



Chapter  

The Ethnic War On the Russian Peoe 

The following includes much of Frank Britton's historical research with my 
updating, editing and commentary added 

UNDER the reign of Tsar Alexander I (Tsai - -) of 
Russia many of the restriions against Jewish residence beyond 
the Pale of Settlement were relaxed, especially for the artisan and 
professional classes. 

A determined effort was made to establish Jews in agriculture 
and the government encouraged at every oprtunity the 
assimilation of Jews o Russian 
national life. 

Nicholas I 

Alexander's successor, Nicholas 
I (Tsar -), was less inclined 
to favor Jewry, and in fa viewed 
their inroads o the Russian 
economy with alarm. He was much 
hated by the Jews. 

Prior to his reign, Alexander I 
had allowed any male Jew the 
privilege of escaping compulsory 
military duty by paying a special 
draft-exemption tax. In  
Nicholas I abolished the custom, 
with the result that Jews were for Tsar Alexander I 

the first time taken o the Imperial armies. 

In , Nicholas I further antagonized Jewry by abolishing 
the institution of the Kahal, and in that same year he prohibited 
by law the traditional Jewish garb, specifying that all Jews 
should, except on ceremonial occasions, dress in conformity with 
Russian standards. These measures, and many others like them, 
were aimed at facilitating the assimilation of Jewry o Russian 
life. 




 The Ethnic War on the Russian Peoe 


The Tsarist government was much concerned by the Jews' 
failure to become Russianized, and viewed with extreme hostility 
the ancient Jewish custom of maaining a separate culture, 
language, mode of dress, etc.  all of which contributed to keep 
the Jew an alien in the land of his residence. 

It is to this determination to "Russianize" and assimilate 
Jewish extremists that we can ascribe the unusual efforts made by 
the Imperial government to provide free education to its Jews. 

In  all schools were thrown open to Jews and attendance 
for Jewish children was made compulsory. Compulsory 
education was not only a novelty in Russia, but in any country in 
the early th century. 

In Russia education was generally reserved for a privileged 
few, and even as late as  only % of her gentile pulation 
had been inside a school. The net result of the Imperial 
government's assimilation program was that Russian Jewry 
became the best educated segment in Russia. This eventually 
worked to the destruion of the Tsarist government. 

Alexander II 

The reign of Alexander II marked the apex of Jewish fortunes 
in Tsarist Russia. By  they were becoming dominant in the 



Tsar Alexander II lying in state after his assassination in a ot 
hatched in the home of the Jewess Hesia Helfman. 



The Secret Behind Communism  


professions, in many trades and industries, and were beginning 
to filter o government in increasing numbers. 

As early as  Alexander II had permitted Jewish university 
graduates to settle and hold governmental sitions in greater 
Russia, and by  athecaries, nurses, midwives, dentists, 
distillers, and skilled craftsmen were permitted to work and 
reside throughout the empire. 

Nevertheless Russia's Jews were increasingly rebellious over 
the remaining restras which still bound the greater part of 
Russian Jewry to the Pale of Settlement, and which, to some 
extent at least, restried their commercial aivities. 

Herein lay the dilemma: the Imperial government could 
retain certain of the restriions against the Jews, and by doing so 
incur their undying hostility, or it could remove all restras and 
thus pave the way for Jewish domination over every phase of 
Russian life. 

Certainly Alexander II viewed this problem with increasing 
concern as time went on. He lost a considerable amount of his 
enthusiasm for liberal causes after an attempt was made to 
assassinate him in . 

He dismissed his "liberal" advisors and from that time on 
disayed an inclination toward conservatism. This is not to say 
he became anti-Jewish, but he did show more firmness in dealing 
with them. 

In  there was another attempt on his life, and another in 
the following year when his wer palace was blown up. In  
a ot hatched in the home of the Jewess, Hesia Helfman, was 
successful. Alexander II was blown up and so ended an era. 

The May Laws 

The reaion to the assassination of Alexander II was 
