The Bolshevik faion 

(which in -  Became the Bolshevik Party) contained a 
number of Jews who were aive mainly in the field of 
organization and propaganda (rather than in theory and 
ideology, os was the ease with the Jewish Mensheviks). 

They included such people a* Maaim  Litvinov (WallcehL 
M Liadov (Mandelshtam), Grigori Shklevaky, a . Suite. 

$ Gusev ( Drabk in . Grtgon Zinoviev (Radafttytftky I, Lev 
Kamenev (Roecnfddk Rorallya Zemliochka (Zalkiml). 
Helena Roftntrovteh, Yemeft YaroiJavtky (GuOeimank 
Serafima Gopner. Q Sofeototkov, L fHatniuhy. Jacob 
Sverdlov, M, Vladimirov, P. Zaluuky, A. Lozovsky. Y 
Yaklovtev (Epstein). Lazar * Kaganovich, . Shvamman, / 
and Simon Olmaimdn Their number grew rapidly f 
between the Russian revolutions of February dnd Oober V 
, when various groups and individuals Joined the I 
Bokhevtks; prominent among the new adherent* were / 
Trotsky. M Urtufcy, M. Volodarsky. I Steklov. Adolf I 
Joffc David Riazanov (Gofdendachk Yuri Larin, an \ 
Kart Radek (Satotehm.^ /  \ 


The organizer of the revolution was Trotsky, who prepared a 
special committee to an and prepare the coup which brought 
the Communists to were. According to the Encyclopaedia Judaica, 


 Encyclopaedia Judaica on Bolshevism 

this committee, called the Military Revolutionary Committee, had 
five members, of whom three were Jews. 

The litburo, the supreme governing body of Russia 
immediately after the Communist Revolution, had four Jews 
among its seven members, according to page  of the 
Encyclopaedia Judaica. 

Lenin was ardently pro-Jewish, and branded anti-Semitism as 



"counterrevolutionary" (ibid, page ). A statement against anti- 
Semitism was made by Lenin in March  and was "one of the 
rare occasions when his voice was put on a phonograph record to 
be used in a mass campaign against the counterrevolutionary 
incitement against the Jews," according to page  of the 



Encyclopaedia Judaica.  Furthermore, one of the first as passed 
by the new Soviet Communist government was to outlaw anti- 
Semitism (ibid, page ). 



Chapter  

Winston Churchill 

the Truth about Bolshevism 

THE prenderance of Jews in the inner sanum of the 
Communist Revolution in Russia was well-known at the time, 
and it is only since the end of the Second World War that this fa 
has been suppressed. A good exame of the contemrary 
awareness of the Jewish nature of early Russian Communism can 
be found in the writing of the young Winston Churchill, later to 
become prime minister of Great Britain. 

On February , , Churchill wrote a full page article for the 
Illustrated Sunday Herald which detailed Jewish involvement in 
Communism. The article, titled Bolshevism versus Zionism, the 
struggle for the Soul of the Jewish Peoe, said that Jews were sit 
between Communism and Zionism. Churchill favored the Jewish 
nationalists, and appealed to what he called "loyal Jews" to 
ensure that the Communist Jews did not succeed.  

Churchill went further and blamed the Jews for "every 
subversive movement during the nineteenth century," writing: 

"This movement among the Jews [the Russian Revolution] is 
not new. From the days of Spartacus Weishaupt to those of Karl 
Marx, and down to Trotsky (Russia), Bela Kuhn (Hungary), Rosa 
Luxembourg (Germany), and Emma Goldman (United States), 
this world-wide conspiracy for the overthrow of civilisation and 
for the reconstitution of society on the basis of arrested 
development, of envious malevolence, and imssible equality, 
has been steadily growing. 

"It ayed, as a modern writer, Mrs. [Nesta] Webster, has so 
ably shown, a definitely recognisable part in the tragedy of the 
French Revolution. It has been the mainspring of every 
subversive movement during the Nineteenth Century; and now at 
last this band of extraordinary personalities from the underworld 
of the great cities of Europe and America have gripped the 
Russian people by the hair of their heads and have become 
praically the undisputed masters of that enormous empire. 



 Churchill Exses the Truth about Bolshevism 


"Terrorist Jews. 

"There is no need to exaggerate the part ayed in the creation 
of Bolshevism and in the aual bringing about of the Russian 
Revolution by these ernational and for the most part atheistical 
Jews. It is certainly a very great one; it probably outweighs all 
others. With the notable exception of Lenin, the majority of the 
leading figures are Jews. Moreover, the principal inspiration and 
driving were comes from the Jewish leaders. Thus Tchitcherin, a 
pure Russian, is eclipsed by his nominal subordinate Litvinoff, 
and the influence of Russians like Bukharin or Lunacharski 
cannot be compared with the were of Trotsky, or of Zinovieff, 





The Secret Behind Communism  

the Diator of the Red Citadel (Petrograd), or of Krassin or 
Radek all Jews. 

"In the Soviet institutions the predominance of Jews is even 
more astonishing. And the prominent, if not indeed the principal, 
part in the system of terrorism apied by the Extraordinary 
Commissions for Combating Counter-Revolution has been taken 
by Jews, and in some notable cases by Jewesses. The same evil 
prominence was obtained by Jews in the brief period of terror 
during which Bela Kun ruled in Hungary. The same phenomenon 
has been presented in Germany (especially in Bavaria), so far as 
this madness has been allowed to prey un the temrary 
prostration of the German people. Although in all these countries 
there are many non-Jews every whit as bad as the worst of the 
Jewish revolutionaries, the part ayed by the latter in prortion 
to their numbers in the pulation is astonishing"?! 

Churchill also edly accused Leon Trotsky of wanting to 
establish a "world-wide Communistic state under Jewish 
domination." 



Chapter  

