simultaneously." 



Chapter  
Final Words from 

Nobel Laureate Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn 

This book began with remarks from my personal discussions 
with Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn. He was a viim of Bolshevism and 
through his literary genius he laid bare the most hofic killing 
machine in all of world history. 

Communism in all its forms, worldwide, has brutally 
oppressed and murdered far more people than the official, 
celebrity-endorsed numbers ascribed to Hitler's Germany. In fa, 
the Communist death toll exceeds the total of all oppressive 
regimes in the history of mankind. 

Although an academic is reluant to use the word evil. 
Communism, based on its hofic record, may be regarded as the 
greatest embodiment of evil in human history. 

Many nations have waged wars and committed great crimes 
against civilian pulations during those conflis and conquests. 
But no regime has ever pursefully enslaved, tortured, 
imprisoned and murdered more of its own nation's pulation 
than the Bolshevik tyranny in Russia. Add to this Communism's 
subsequent incarnations of Marxist inhumanity. 

Just to make it more ssible to grasp the almost 
unimaginable magnitude of the Bolshevik genocide against 
humanity, it is accurate to say that Marxism's Russian, European 
and worldwide terrors led to the murder of more human beings 
than the total number of every man, woman and child in Great 
Britain today - about  million people! 

Yet, there is no Ziomedia erest in remembering the 
innocent people murdered and crushed by Communism. The 
same Ziomedia endlessly obsesses with vivid dramatizations of 
Germany's National Socialist years as the sum of all evil. Yet, the 
far more numerous viims of Communism are cometely 
ignored in comparison with those of the Holocaust. 

The litically-corre official establishment total of six 
million in a Nazi Holocaust has been headlined for almost 



 Final Words from Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn 

seventy years. The Jewish-executed Communist Holocausts of 
ten times that number are systematically Memory-Holed. 

The Secret Behind Communism and its hofic mass murder is 
hardly a secret. The fas are there for all to see. But, the Jewish- 
dominated American and ernational media do not want you to 
be aware of it. The Ziomedia seeks, year after year, to avert the 
European anger that would erupt if our people were to ever fully 
feel the pain that lost millions of our own people have suffered at 
the hands of alien Communists. 

It is thus fitting that this work ends where it began: with 
words committed to writing by the great Russian patriot and 

Nobel prize winner, from his book 
Two Hundred Years Together, The 
Russian-Jewish History -,^ 
and from other of his published 
articles and texts. Two Hundred Years 
Together is perhaps the Nobel 
prizewinner's most imrtant book. 

The book has not been 
published in English. It has not been 
reviewed in the major controlled 
media of the world. It has been in 
many ways made secret in the same 
way that its subje has been made 
secret. 

The fa that this ensely- 
documented book, written near the 
end of the life of a Nobel 
Prizewinner in literature, one of the 
greatest writers of our time could 
not be translated and published in 
English by a major publisher, is a 
fa that screams a defining and fatal 
fa about the present world we live 
in. The Jewish tribal extremists have more were in the world 
today than they have ever had in history. And the evidence is 



The final books of Nobel 
Prizewinner in literature, 
Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn, has 
not been made available to 
the English-speaking world. 
After reading The Secret 
Behind Communism, one 
understands exaly why. 



The Secret Behind Communism  


convincing that they are driving the greatest confli of the st 
century, the so-called "Clash of Civilizations." 

The Suppression of Solzhenitsyn 

It is time to share some of the information hidden by the 
suppression of this book. Here are some of Solzhenitsyn's 
documented revelations. Some of the text which follows was 
written by Wolfgang Strauss, to which we are indebted for some 
of the imrtant quotations from this monumental work. 

Solzhenitsyn s out that "Many more Jewish voices than 
Russian are heard in this book." The reason for this becomes 
obvious as one delves o the book. For exame, even the 
"Russian" Social Democracy Party, from which the Bolsheviks 
were to emerge, was created out of personnel drawn from the 
Allgemeine judische Arbeiterbund in Lithuania, Poland, and Russia. 

In his work, Solzhenitsyn writes of the "stranglers of Russia," 
the "hangmen of the dirty revolution"  and then goes on to 
describe them in detail: the "Bol'sheviki yevrey," or the "Jew 
Bolsheviks." In another ace he uses the term "Bol'shevististkiye 
Juden" (Bolshevistic Jews). 

Superordinate to these is the key expression -"Yevreyskiy 
vopros" (the Jewish Question). After  the Communist censors 
in no way forbade this expression, even with regard to Jewish 
Bolsheviks the Jewish question was not a taboo. 

On the contrary, the Jewish question became the central 
theme of the Party ideology, which had become a secular 
religion. Lenin himself set the exame in  with his famous 
instruive paper "On the Jewish Question in Russia," published 
by the Moscow Proletariat Publishing House (cited by 
Solzhenitsyn). 

The overwhelming Jewish domination of the Communist 
movement was so obvious that it was arousing unrest among the 
ninety-eight percent non-Jewish pulation. Lenin s out the 
Jewish leadership and disprortionate percentage among the 
