VVe>! Prussia ), Mar.\ wjs the son of Jewish par- 
ents. I Icinrich and Henrietta Mars. I k inrieh Marx 
became a successful lawyer, and when an edi 
prohibited Jews from being advocate* he con- 
vened to Protestantism in . In -. when 
Karl was six years old. his father converted his 
eight children, the authoritative Encyclopedia 
Judaica rerts. Heinrich, whose original name 
was Hirsche! ha- cvi. was the son of a rabbi and 
the descendant ol'ulmudic scholars lor many gen- 
erations. Hlrsafs brother wa> chief rabbi of 
Trier. Heinrich M maed Henrietta 
Prcssburg. who originated in  lungary and whose 
ihrlu-r hrvnmc ri rahhi in NiimceaiL Holland 





 Communism with the Mask Off 

Until I looked o the foundations of Communism, I had 
always thought Karl Marx was a German. In fa, I had read that 
Marx's father was a Christian. It turns out that his father, a 
successful lawyer, was a Jew who had converted to Christianity 
after an edi prohibited Jews from praicing law. Much later, in 
, I read an article from the Chicago Jewish Sentinel boasting 
that Marx was the grandson of a rabbi and "the descendant of 
Talmudic scholars for many generations."^ An excellent article 
in the Barnes Review s out the "Racism of Marx and 

Engels." 

Not only was Karl Marx from a long line of Talmudic 
scholars, he also hated Russians with a passion that could be 
described as pathological. I looked up Karl Marx in the Jewish 
encyclopedias, and I found to my amazement that the man who 
taught him many of the princies of Communism was Moses 
Hess. As incredible as it might seem, contemrary Zionist 
leaders venerate Moses Hess as the "forerunner" of modern 
Zionism. In The Encyclopedia of Zionism in Israel, under the entry 
for Moses Hess, is the following: 

Pioneer of modern socialism, social philosopher, and 
forerunner of Zionism.... Hess was thus a forerunner of litical 
and cultural Zionism and of socialist Zionism in particular. He 
became deey involved in the rising socialist movement. Karl 
Marx and Frederick Engels acknowledged that they had learned 
much from him during the formative years of the movement....  
The Encyclopedia of Zionism in Israel . 

After months of reading from many major, first hand sources, 
I realized that the elderly lady in the offices of the Citizens 
Council had been essentially right, at least about the origins of 
the Communist revolution. I felt as if I were sitting on the edge of 
a volcano. Every new piece of information seemed to both 
confirm and clarify the issue ever further. 

In The Last Days of the Romanovs, Robert Wilton, on 
assignment for The London Times in Russia for  years, summed 
up the "Russian Revolution" in these words: 

The whole record of the Bolshevism in Russia is indelibly 
impressed with the stamp of alien invasion. The murder of the 



The Secret Behind Communism  


Tsar, deliberately anned by the Jew Sverdlov and caed out by 
the Jews Goloshekin, Syromolotov, Safarov, Voikov, and 
Yurovsky, is the a, not of the Russian people, but of this hostile 

invader. 

In , a major New York publisher, the Free Press, a 
division of Simon & Schuster, published a book by Israeli 
historian Louis Rart called Stalin's War Against the Jews. In it 
the author casually adinits what we Gentiles are not supsed to 
know: 

Many Jews were euphoric over their high representation in 
the new government. Lenin's first Politburo was dominated by 
men of Jewish origins... 

Under Lenin, Jews became involved in all aspes of the 
Revolution, including its dirtiest work. Despite the Rs' vows to 
eradicate Anti-Semitism, it spread rapidly after the revolution  
partly because of the prominence of so many Jews in the Soviet 
administration, as well as in the traumatic, inhuman Sovietization 
drives that followed. Historian Salo Baron has noted that an 
immensely disprortionate number of Jews joined the new 
Soviet secret lice, the Cheka.... And many of those who fell 
afoul of the Cheka would be shot by Jewish investigators. 

The Colleive leadership that emerged in Lenin's dying days 
was headed by the Jew Zinoviev, a 
loquacious, curly-haired. .. 

I began to realize that there was 
once widespread knowledge of the 
Jewish leadership of the "Russian 
Revolution/'  an exame can be 
found in the National Geographic 
Magazine's May  edition. An 
article entitled "The Revolution in 
Russia" describes the Jewish 
leadership of the terroristic 
Communist Revolution: 

Revolutionary leaders nearly all 
belong to the Jewish race and the most 
effeive revolutionary agency is the Jewish Bund,... The 
government has suffered more from that race than from all of its 




^national 

GEOGRAPHIC 

MAGAZINE 

-  .. < - 

THE RUCK CITY OF PETRA 




 Communism with the Mask Off 

other subjes combined. Whenever a desperate deed is 
committed it is always done by a Jew and there is scarcely one 
loyal member of that race in the entire Empire. 

The fas were indisputable. An enormous fa of history has 
been wiped away from the elleual consciousness of the West 
as thoroughly as a file can be erased from the hard disk of a 
desktop computer. In his classic novel , George Orwell 
wrote about historical truth "going down the Memory Hole." 
This had been the fate of the truth regarding the real perpetrators 
of the "Russian Revolution." I asked myself two questions: "Why 
was the historical truth about the Communist Revolution 
suppressed?" and "How, in a free world, could that suppression 
have been accomished?" The first question had an obvious 
answere in the fa that the forces of ernational Jewry would not 
want it generally known that they were the primary authors of 
