
The Jewish Mr. Goldberg was a "technical officer" (that is, a 
bomb maker) in the ANC's armed wing arrested at Rivonia. He 
was sentenced in  to four terms of life imprisonment. He was 
the only white member of Umkhonto we Sizwe to be arrested 
and sentenced in the Rivonia Trial to life imprisonment. He was 
released in , after  years in prison. His first stop after being 
released was to visit his daughter in Israel, before going on to 
exile in London. 

Rivonia was not the end of Jewish Communist involvement 
in the "armed struggle." According to Shimoni's book: 

"When the secret African Resistance Movement (ARM) was 
crushed during , it again became evident that many Jews were 
involved. One of its founders was identified as Monty Berman and 
others were Adrian Leftwich and Bertram (Baruch) Hirson. Among 
those who were associated with ARM were Neville Rubin and 



 South African Communism: the Usual Suspes 


Michael Schneider [and] others imicated were Frederick and Rhoda 
Prager, Raymond Eisenstein and Hugh Lewin." (pp. -). 

Other Communist Jews and the Subversion of South Africa 

According to the book Cutting Through the Mountain: 
Interviews with South African Aivists [Edited by Immanuel 
Suttner, Viking-Penguin, England and USA ], 

"a disprortionate number of individual Jews ayed a part in 
transforming South Africa... There are two streams: those who fought 
'within the system' as jurists, members of parliament, via the media, 
or in civil society, and those who entered 'illegal' organizations which 
were socialist. Communist or mass-based in charaer." (p.) 

The book 'welcomes (these Jews) back not only as worthy 
South Africans, socialists, Communists or liberals, but as worthy 
Jews' (p.). Some of the 'remarkable people' (page vii) who are 
heroes of the book include: 

Taffy Adler who was involved in the s and 's in the 
'formation and consolidation of the black trade union 
movement'. His father was a Lithuanian Jew who emigrated to 
South Africa in  and who was tremendously loyal to Stalin 
and Russian Communism' right up to the fall of the Soviet Union 

in . His uncle, Michael Harmel, 
became general secretary of the South 
African Communist Party. 

Ray Alexander (Rachel 

Alexandrowich) aved in South Africa 
from Latvia and joined the SA 
Communist Party five days later. She 
ayed a leading role in the organization 
of trade unions. She was maed to the 
Jew Jack Simons, a 'devoted Communist' 
and leurer at the University of Cape 
Town. 

Pauline Podbrey (Podbrez) born in 
Lithuania came to South Africa at the age of eleven. She joined 
the Communist Youth League, run by Max Joffe, and the related 
Labor League of Youth, run by Hilda Bernstein. Of the 
Communist Party she says 'the majority of the members were 




The Secret Behind Communism  

Jewish... looking back on it now, it seems as if everybody was 
Jewish/ (Suttner, p.). 


Winnie and Nelson Mandela and Joe Slovo photographed at an ANC 
Communist Party rally in . Joe Slovo was the "Brains" Behind the ANC. 

Piured here is Nelson Mandela, a former, self-proclaimed 
violent member of a Communist terrorist cell. It shows how 
imrtant it is for one's image if he has worked for Jewish 
suprted movements rather than against them. 

(Note from the author) When I was  I joined a non-violent 
Klan group at my school. I condemned violence then as I still do. 
Not a single member of my organization was ever even accused 
of violence. Although I have certainly evolved in my views and 
moved on in my life, because I dare to opse Jewish racism and 
supremacism, I am still condemned by the Ziomedia even though 
I made a clean break from my former affiliation almost  years 
ago. Contrast my non-violent past with Mandela sing under 


 South African Communism: the Usual Suspes 

a symbol under which more people died than any other in 
history. Such are the double standards today in the Zio-media. 

The most famous Communist in South Africa was Joe Slovo. 
Born in Lithuania to a devout Jewish family, he came to South 
Africa where he joined the Young Communist League at the age 
of sixteen. He became a central member of the Communist Party 
of South Africa and a 'hard-line Stalinist', becoming general 
secretary in . 

He concentrated on building up Umkhonto we Sizwe, the 
'armed wing' of the ANC (African National Congress), becoming 
its chief of staff and head strategist in the campaign of bombings 
direed at civilian targets and other as of terror. He only 
abandoned his commitment to Stalinism and Soviet-style 
Communism when the Soviet bloc started falling apart in the late 
s and it became necessary to do so. A key strategist 
representing the ANC in the negotiations with F.W. De Klerk's 
government in the handover of were, he became a minister in 
Mandela's Cabinet when the ANC came to were in . He 
died of cancer a few years later. South Africa's Chief Rabbi Cyril 
Has officiated at the funeral of Joe Slovo, calling Slovo "a better 
Jew than most" (Fair Lady  May  p. ). 

The Jewess Gill Marcus, the daughter of parents involved 
with the Communist Party, a long-time member of the Party and 
of the ANC, is now a Deputy Governor of the South African 
Reserve Bank after being a member of the first Mandela Cabinet. 

Ronnie Kasrils: The Jewish Head of the ANC's Intelligence 

The Jew Ronnie Kasrils became a central figure in the South 
African Communist Party and in its armed wing alongside Joe 
Slovo. He became head of military elligence of the ANC's 
military wing. After the ANC came to were, he was aped 
to the Ministry of Defense, and later became head of the South 
African government's secret service, the National Intelligence 
Service (NIS). When Kasrils returned to South Africa, he was 
lionized by a local Jewish establishment belatedly eager to 
associate itself with the struggle. His piure was put in the 
Jewish Museum in Cape Town and his name in the Book of 
Honor. The Jewish community basked in his refleed glory."  



Chapter  

Spreading of Communism to China 

Incredible as it sounds, Jews also ayed a leading role in the 
