Jews. The reason was that the litical lice, the base of 
Communist rule, required personnel of unquestionable loyalty to 
Communism. These were people who had joined the Party before 
the war and in Poland they were predominantly Jewish." 

Roman Zambrowski, born Rubin Nussbaum, who held 
several dominant litical sitions. In  he was deputy 
speaker of the Seym (parliament) and its aual master over the 
ineffeual speaker Wiadyslaw Kowalski. 



 IRON CURTAIN DICTATORS 

Another senior Jew was Tadeusz Zabludowski, the ruthless 
direor of the Office of the Press, Publications and 
Entertainments, which was in fa the office of censorship. He 
was resnsible for banning books and exerted total control over 
every publication, including books and theater performances as 
well as films and radio programs. He was assisted by Julia Mine, 
the wife of Hilary Mine, who headed the Polish News Agency, 
which was awarded the monoly in the distribution of news 
and the management of the press. 

Roman Werfl, a Communist since his youth and a journalist, 
was successively the editor of such periodicals as Nowe 
Widnokregi , Glos Ludu, and Naive Drogi. He was the direor of the 
"I Csiazka I Wiedza" publishing house, which enjoyed a 
monoly of book publishing. 

Leon Kasman was the editor of the official Party organ; he 
had been a Communist already before the war. 

One of the dominant figures in the field of publishing and 
propaganda was Jerzy Borejsza, brother of the secret lice 
colonel Joseph Rozanski, who set the licy of the press and its 
goals. He was assisted by "general" Vior Grosz and was 
promoted during the war in the Soviet Union from enlisted man 
to general for litical services. He was the head of the litical 
education department of the Polish army and was charged with 
the Communist indorination of the troops. 

An imrtant role was also ayed by Eugeniusz Szyr, a 
veteran of the Spanish civil war and a member of the "Union of 
Polish Patriots" formed in Moscow. He held the office of vice- 
premier. 

Key sitions in the Communist Party were held by Arthur 
Starewicz, secretary of the central committee of the Party, also a 
member of the Union of Polish Patriots, generally known as "The 
Muscovites." 

A different role was assigned to Adam Schaff, a prewar 
Communist and a scholar and professor. He dedicated himself to 
the spreading of Marxist philosophy and published numerous 
works on the subje. 



The Secret Behind Communism  


The key sitions in the 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs were 
held by Jews, often with 
assumed Polish names. 

Wincenty Rzymowski, a Pole, 
served as front man, with the 
title of minister, but the aual 
control was in the hands of vice- 
minister Zygmunt Modzelewski. 
The office of the ostensible 
minister of foreign affairs was 
later held by such insignificant 
figures as Stanislaw 

Skrzeszewski, who was a school 
teacher in Krakow before the 
war, as well as others, including 
Stefan Werblowski, greeted at the airrt on his return from 
abroad by a delegation of Jewish officials, Marian Naszkowski 
and others. The control of the ministry was in the hands of 
Mieczyslaw Ogrodzinslcj, who adopted a Polish name as did his 
colleagues. 

An imrtant diomatic role was ayed by Julius Katz- 
Suchy, Poland's delegate to the United Nations, and Manfred 
Lachs, who served as chairman of the legal committee of the UN 
Assembly and was later aped a member of the International 
Tribunal in The Hague. There were many ambassadors and 
consuls, among them Henryk Strasburger and Waclaw 
Szymanowski; Consul Tadeusz Kassern, who became 
disenchanted with the system and committed suicide; Eugene 
Milnilciel, ambassador in London; Ludwik Rajchman, head of a 
Polish economic mission to the United States, and many others. 
In addition to the key personalities mentioned here, a very heavy 
prortion of the senior and middle-level officials were also 
Jewish. 

The Ministry of Justice was under the control of Leon Szajn, 
the vice-minister and pre-war president of the leftist Association 
of Legal Aides and wartime member of the Union of Polish 



Zygmunt Modzelewski 



 Iron Curtain Diators 

Patriots snsored by Stalin in Moscow. After the war he was 
assigned to the Democratic Party, kept by the Communists to 
ensure appearances of uralism for the benefit of the West. He 
soon became the secretary general of that party, as well as vice- 
minister of justice. 

His principal assistants were Stefan Rozmaryn and the 
prosecutor Jacob Sawickj, Jews who together with Colonel Stefan 
Kurowski, represented Poland's legal contingent at the 
Nuremberg trials of the Nazi leaders. Kurowski ended his career 
as the chief justice of the Supreme Court, which counted several 
Jewish judges, among them Mieczyslaw Szerer. 

Among other members of the ruling Jewish-Communist elite 
were: Stefan Zolkiewski, minister of education in the years - 
, who made Communist indorination the first priority; 
Ludwik Grosfeld, former minister of finance of the government 
in exile, who after his return to Poland joined the Communist 
National Council. 

Emil Sommerstein, a prewar member of parliament, was 
aped minister for war reparations; the eminent et Julian 
Tuwim, who returned to Poland from the West in  to become 
an enthusiastic champion of Communist rule; Wladvslaw 
Matwin, one of the founding members of the Moscow Union of 
Polish Patriots, who held several imrtant sitions, among 
them that of editor of the chief Communist press organ, the 
Trybuna Ludua (Tribune of the Peoe). 

Anthony Aister was vice-minister of the Interior; Stefan 
Arski, well-known journalist and senior official of the 
Communist Party; Isaac Kleinerman, head of the office of the 
presidium of the National Council; Jacob Prawin, Party aivist; 
and Ozias Szechter, a veteran Communist. 

As a result, a pular anti-Communist uprising in Poland in 
Oober  took on a strong anti-Semitic undertone. 

