Also significant was the fa that the theatre of war was 
situated in those areas most heavily pulated by Jews. By , 
it should be remembered, Russia's Jewish pulation was 




The Secret Behind Communism  


nearing the seven million mark. (The exa figure given in 
the Universal Jewish Encyclopedia is ,,). 

A substantial number of these resided in Russian-Poland, 
which was a war zone. The majority of those Jews, out of hatred 
for the Tsarist regime, were inclined to favor a German viory. 

As a result, the Imperial high command was compelled to 
remove all Jews from the war area in the early part of . In 
May of , for exame, the supreme command expelled all 
Jewish residents from the provinces of Courland and Grodno. 

Altogether, nearly a half million Jews were forced to leave 
their homes in the military zone. These expellees were at first 
required to remain within the Pale of Settlement, but in August of 
 they were permitted to settle in all cities in the empire. 

Thus it was that as the war progressed a flood of Tsar-hating 
Jews began infiltrating the cities beyond the Pale. 



Chapter  

The March  Revolution 

The revolution occurred in March of , in St. Petersburg, 
capital city of the Romanovs. From beginning to end the revolt 
involved an amazingly small number of people when we 
consider that the fate of  million Russians was at stake. 

The revolt came, as we have tried to indicate, because of 
Jewish unrest, because of Jewry's dissatisfaion, and above all, 
because of Jewry's determination to destroy Tsarism. 

By the Spring of  Russia's unstable urban pulation had 
been thoroughly isoned by this dissatisfaion. A food shortage 
in St. Petersburg fanned this dissatisfaion o the flame of 
revolution. 

St. Petersburg in the third year of World War I was Russia's 
chief armaments produion center, and by reason of this 
ssessed the largest industrial pulation of any city in Russia. 
It also had the largest Jewish pulation of any city outside the 
Pale of Settlement. 

By March, , a breakdown in the Russian transrtation 
system resulted in a severe food shortage in the city. At the same 
time, many of the city's faories began shutting down due to 
material shortages. Both of these faors were extremely 
imrtant in the days immediately ahead. 

The desperate food shortage affeed virtually every family in 
the city. Furthermore, the enforced idleness of the working 
pulation due to faory shutdowns  threw vast numbers of 
workmen onto the streets. 

Day-by-Day Account 

Given here is a day by day account of the events which 
resulted in the overthrow of the Tsar and the establishment of the 
Provisional Government: 

March th: It was evident by this time even to foreign 
visitors that trouble was brewing. Bread lines were growing 
day by day, and faory workmen began to appear on the streets 



The Secret Behind Communism  


in large numbers. During the day the lice began mounting 
machine guns in strategic aces throughout the city. 

March th: The government brought a large number of 
Cossack troops o the city in anticipation of trouble. Revolution 
was now freely predied, and many of the shops in expeation 
of this began boarding up windows. The few remaining faories 
were closed by strikes and the lice mounted more machine 
guns. The Tsar, who was visiting the troops at the front, still had 
not returned to the city. The Duma remained in session. 

March th: Crowds of women began a series of street 
demonstrations in protest over the bread shortage. Agitators, 
many of whom were veterans of the  revolution, began to 
take charge and organize diversionary demonstrations. Here and 
there the crowds sang the "Marseillaise" regarded in Russia as 
a revolutionary song. A number of red flags appeared. At the 
corner of Nevsky Prospekt and the Catherine Canal mounted 
lice, aided by Cossack cavalry, dispersed the crowds. There 
were no casualties. Significantly, however, the crowds had raised 
the red flag of revolution without being fired on. 

March th: The Nevsky from Catherine Canal to Nicholai 
Station was jammed from early morning with crowds, which 
were larger and bolder than on the preceding day. Streetcars 
were no longer running. The Cossack cavalry, under orders to 
keep the Nevsky clear of demonstrators, repeatedly charged the 
mobs, and a few people were tramed. But it was observed that 
the cavalrymen used only the flats of their sabers, and at no time 
used fire arms. This encouraged the mob, which held the 
Cossacks in dread. Meanwhile, agitators were constantly at work. 

March th: During the afternoon huge crowds colleed 
around Nicholai Station. An American photographer, Donald 
Thompson, has described in vivid fashion the scene there  : 
"About two o'clock a man richly dressed in furs came up to the 
square in a sleigh and ordered his driver to go through the 
crowd, which by this time was in a very ugly mood, although it 
seemed to be inclined to make way for him. He was impatient 
and probably cold and started an argument. All Russians must 
have their argument. Well, he misjudged this crowd, and also 



 The March  Revolution 


misjudged the condition in Petrograd. I was within  feet of 
this scene. He was dragged out of his sleigh and beaten. He took 
refuge in a stalled street car* where he was followed by the 
workingmen. One of them took a small iron bar and beat his head 
to a pulp. This seemed to give the mob a taste for blood. 
Immediately I was pushed along in front of the crowd which 
surged down the Nevsky and began smashing windows and 
creating general disorder. Many of the men caed red flags on 
sticks. The shops along the Nevsky, or most of them, are 
proteed by heavy iron shutters. Those that were not had their 
windows smashed. I noticed about this time that ambulances 
were coming and going on the side sheets. There were usually 
three or four people lying in each one/' 



Russian Jews demonstrate in favor of the Revolution, with 
banners in Hebrew proclaiming "Long live the Universal 
Workers Union" and "Long Life to the International 
Proletariat," March . 

