
It was never proven that Frankfurter was a Communist Party 
member, but an amazing number of his proteges, including Alger 
Hiss, have turned out to be. 

Judith Coin 

One of the most publicized treason 
trials was that of tire Jewess Judith Coin 
in June of . She was caught red-handed 
passing classified documents from Justice 
Department files to a Russian agent, who 
was emoyed by the United Nations. 

She was convied of espionage and 
sentenced to  years in prison. Later the conviion was set aside 
by the Supreme Court on the grounds that the FBI had arrested 

her improperly and without a 
warrant. 

Gerhart Eisler 

The highest ranking 
Communist ever brought to trial in 
the U.S. was Gerhart Eisler. 

Between  and February of 
 he was the secret boss of the 
Communist Party in the U.S. In 
those years he commuted regularly 
between the U.S. and Russia, using 
the aliases Berger, Brown, Edwards, and others. 

His right hand man, and the second ranking cominform 
(Communist Information Bureau) agent in the U.S. was "J. 
Peters," author of the "Peters' Manual." His real name was 
Goldberger, and like Eisler was a Jew. 

Several of Eisler' s family have also been prominent in the 
party. A brother, Hans, has built an outstanding reputation as a 
writer of revolutionary songs. He was emoyed as a songwriter 



Eisler celebrated on a stamp 
issued by the Communist East 
German government. 



The Secret Behind Communism  

in Hollywood. A sister, Ruth Fischer, was a Communist agent for 
a number of years. 

Newsweek described Eisler in its February , , issue as 
the "number one Red agent". When his last legal appeal had 
failed he jumped bail and secretly boarded the Polish 
liner MS Bntory bound for London in May . He was 
discovered by the crew only after the ship was at sea. 

Once in England, authorities allowed him to leave for 
the German Democratic Republic, where Eisler became chief 
of East German radio and a leading propaganda voice for the 
Communist government. After his death during an official visit 
to Armenia, several schools and streets in East Germany were 
named in his honor. 

The American Politburo 

One of the top news stories of  was the trial of Eugene 
Dennis and the Convied Eleven. Colleively, this group 
comprised the National Secretariat of the American Communist 
Party; in other words, the American Politburo. 

The much publicized trial was held in the court of Judge 
Harold Medina. Perhaps no other single event has served better 
to demonstrate the Jewishness of the American Communist 
party. Here were the top party executives driven out o the 
open for everybody to see. How many were Jewish? At least six. 
They are: 

. Jacob Stachel, a Russian-born Jew. 

. John Gates (Jew name Israel Regenstreif), editor-in-chief of 
the Daily Worker and a former officer in the Communist Brigade 
in Spain. 

. Gilbert Green (Greenberg). 

. Gus Hall (real name, Arvo Mike Halberg. It was claimed he 
was Jewish, Finnish or Lithuanian, or all three). 

. Irving Potash, a Russian-born Jew. 

. Carl Wer (Jew name Philip Carl Weissberg). 

The racial identity of Eugene Dennis (Waldron), Robert 
Thompson, and John Williamson has not been determined. 



 Spies, Spies and more Sppes in America 

Ten of the eleven were sentenced to  year's in federal prison 
and fined $,, each. Thompson received a three year 
sentence. 

The Silvermaster Group 

The Silvermaster spy ring operated primarily in the U.S. 
Department of the Treasury but also had contas in the Army 
Air Force and in the White House. 

It was under the control of Nathan Gregory Silvermaster, a 
Jew from Odessa, Russia, who worked as an economist with 
the United States War Produion Board (WPB) during World 
War II, Silvermaster was the head of a large ring 

of Communist spies in the U.S. 
government. All but three were Jews: 

. Nathan Gregory Silvermaster, 

Chief Planning Technician, 

Procurement Division, United States 
Department of the Treasury; Chief 
Economist, War Assets Administration; 
Direor of the Labor Division, Farm 
Security Administration; Board of 
Economic Warfare; Reconstruion 

Finance Corration Department of 
Commerce. 

. Helen Silvermaster, wife. 

. Anatole Boris Volkov, stepson. 

. Solomon Adler aka Schlomer Adler, U.S. Department of 
the Treasury. 

. Chandler, Norman Bursler, United States Department of 
Justice Anti-Trust Division. 

. Frank Coe, Assistant Direor, Division of Monetary 
Research, Treasury Department; Special Assistant to the U.S. 
Ambassador in London; Assistant to the Executive Direor, 
