
The person they were yelling at in that ad was SAG President 
Alan Rosenberg (take a guess). The scathing rebuttal to the 
ad w as written by entertainment super-agent Art Emanuel 
(Jew with Israeli parents) on the Huffington Post, which is 
owned by Arianna Huffington (not Jewish and has never 
worked in Hollywood .) 


 

Recent columns 




 Communism in Hollywood 


"Joel Stein -LA Times - Jews Run Hollywood” 

The Hollywood film industry is almost exclusively a Jewish 
enterprise. According to an article in the LA Times of December 
, , by Jewish journalist Joel Stein , "Jews totally run 
Hollywood/'  

In a candid admission of Jewish were, Stein wrote: 

"How deey Jewish is Hollywood? When the studio chiefs took 
out a full-page ad in the Los Angeles Times a few weeks ago to 
demand that the Screen Aors Guild settle its contra, the open letter 
was signed by: News Corp. President Peter Chernin (Jewish), 
Paramount Piures Chairman Brad Grey (Jewish), Walt Disney Co. 
Chief Executive Robert Iger (Jewish), Sony Piures Chairman 
Michael Lynton (surprise, Dutch Jew), Warner Bros. Chairman Barry 
Meyer (Jewish), CBS Corp. Chief Executive Leslie Moonves (so 
Jewish his great uncle was the first prime minister of Israel), MGM 
Chairman Harry Sloan (Jewish) and NBC Universal Chief Executive 
Jeff Zucker (mega-Jewish). If either of the Weinstein brothers had 
signed, this group would have not only the were to shut down all 
film produion but to form a minyan with enough Fiji water on hand 
to fill a mikvah. 

The person they were yelling at in that ad was SAG President 
Allen Rosenberg (take a guess). The scathing rebuttal to the ad was 
written by entertainment super-agent Ari Emanuel (Jew with Israeli 
parents). 

The Jews are so dominant, I had to scour the trades to come up 
with six Gentiles in high sitions at entertainment companies. When 
I called them to talk about their incredible advancement, five of them 
refused to talk to me, apparently out of fear of insulting Jews. The 
sixth, AMC President Charlie Collier, turned out to be Jewish. 

As a proud Jew, I want America to know about our 
accomishment. Yes, we control Hollywood. Without us, you'd be 
flipping between "The  Club" and "Davey and Goliath" on TV all 
day. 

So I've taken it un myself to re-convince America that Jews run 
Hollywood by launching a public relations campaign, because that's 
what we do best. I'm weighing several slogans, including: 
"Hollywood: More Jewish than ever!"; "Hollywood: From the people 
who brought you the Bible"; and "Hollywood: If you enjoy TV and 
movies, then you probably like Jews after all." 



The Secret Behind Communism  


I called ADL Chairman Abe Foxman, who was in Santiago, Chile, 
where, he told me to my dismay, he was not hunting Nazis. He 
dismissed my whole prosition, saying that the number of people 
who think Jews run Hollywood is still too high. The ADL ll, he 
ed out, showed that % of Americans think Hollywood execs 
"do not share the religious and moral values of most Americans," and 
% think the entertainment industry is waging an organized 
campaign to "weaken the influence of religious values in this 
country." 

That's a sinister canard, Foxman said. "It means they think Jews 
meet at Canter's Deli on Friday mornings to decide what's best for the 
Jews." Foxman's argument made me rethink: I have to eat at Canter's 
more often. 

"That's a very dangerous phrase, 'Jews control Hollywood.' What 
is true is that there are a lot of Jews in Hollywood," he said. Instead of 
"control," Foxman would prefer people say that many executives in 
the industry "happen to be Jewish," as in "all eight major film studios 
are run by men who happen to be Jewish." 

But Foxman said he is proud of the accomishments of American 
Jews. "I think Jews are disprortionately represented in the creative 
industry. They're disprortionate as lawyers and probably medicine 
here as well," he said. He argues that this does not mean that Jews 
make pro-Jewish movies any more than they do pro-Jewish surgery. 
Though other countries. I've noticed, aren't so big on circumcision. 

I appreciate Foxman's concerns. And maybe my life spent in a 
New Jersey-New Yorik/Bay Area-L.A. pro-Semitic cocoon has left me 
naive. But I don't care if Americans think we're running the news 
media, Hollywood, Wall Street or the government. I just care that we 
get to keep running them."  ["How Jewish is Hollywood?" By Joel 
Stein. Los Angeles Times, December , ]. 

Hollywoodism: Boasting of a Jewish Takeover 

A  made-for-television film documentary aired on the 
Arts & Entertainment cable network boasted of the preeminent 
Jewish role in media and the shaping of our society to their 
purses. It was made by Elliot Halpern & Simcha Jacobvici 
Produions, and written and direed by Simcha Jacobvici. It 
was called Hollywoodism: Jews , Movies and the American Dream , and 
also titled Hollywood: An Empire of their Own. The documentary 
shows how Jews overcame the Gentile filmmakers such as 
Thomas Edison and D.W. Griffith, took over the Hollywood film 



 Communism in Hollywood 


industry and gradually reaced their traditional American 
themes. Movies such as 
Griffith's "Birth of a 
Nation" which honored 
our traditional heritage 
became reaced with 
paeans to the Jewish 
agenda of immigration 
and multiracialism. They 
erview Jewish author 
Neil Gabler, who frankly tells how they "devoured" the values of 
traditional America: 

"They created their own America, an America which is not the 
real America... But ultimately this shadow America becomes so 
pular and so widely disseminated that its images and its values 
come to devour the real America. And so the grand irony of all of 
Hollywood  is that Americans come to define themselves by the 
shadow of America that was created by the Eastern European 
Jewish immigrants who weren't permitted in the precins of the 
real America ."  

The film even quotes Gabler as saying that the leading 
Hollywood moguls were all Jewish persecuted refugees from 

Tsarist Russia and their origins 
within just a few hundred 
