Here is what a former staffer said on this topic to the 
Montgomery Advertiser: "they're drowning in their own 
affluence," said Pamela Summers, a former SPLC legal fellow. 
"What they are doing in the legal department is not done for the 
best erest of everybody [but] is done as though the sole, 
oveding goal is to make money. I think people associate the 
SPLC with going to court. And that's why they get the money. 
And they don't go to court. There have only been a handful of 
court cases over the years, many of which remain unresolved." 

The Montgomery Advertiser also erviewed former SPLC 
associate Courtney Mullin. Mullin declared that "they pretend to 
be on a side that has moral underpinnings (but) they do damage 
by their dishonesty. I mean the little old lady from North 
Carolina sends her $ thinking that she's going to help, then it's 
just going to line the coffers of the Southern Poverty Law Center 
so they can have the most beautiful building in the world and 
have all this money in the bank. That's wrong." 



Chapter  

Communism in Hollywood 

NO discussion of Communism would be comete without 
giving some attention to the Hollywood scene. Shortly after , 
a number of investigations by the House Committee on Un- 
American Aivities, and by California's "Tenney Committee," 
unearthed a veritable hotbed of Communism in the movie 
colony. 

The Hollywood Ten 

In  the ten leading film writers of the Hollywood Film 
Colony, nine of whom are known Jews, were convied for 
contempt of Congress and sentenced to prison. All had appeared 
before the House Committee on Un-American Aivities in , 
and all had refused to testify. 

The Film Colony went all-out in its suprt. A group of film 
notables, including Lauren Bacall and Humphrey Bogart, 
chartered a special ane to Washington. Jewish publications 
everywhere raised the cry that the Un-American Aivities 
Committee was viimizing a group of artists who, at the worst, 
were liberally inclined. 

As events proved, the committee knew exaly what it was 
doing. Six of the "Hollywood Ten" were Communist Party 
members. The other four had flagrantly pro-Communist records. 

Furthermore, as screen writers they were in a particularly 
advantageous sition to insert subtle bits of red propaganda 
o piures. Given here is a roll-call of the Hollywood Ten: 

. Alvah Bessie, a screenwriter. A Communist party member, 
he wrote for the party publication. New Masses. 

. Herbert Biberman, received a six month sentence and a 
$,. fine. A party member, he was the Yiddish husband of 
academy award winning aress Gale Sondergaard. 

. Lester Cole, also a party member. 

. Edward Dmytryk, who belonged to  fronts. Fined and 
sentenced. 



 Communism in Hollywood 


. Ring Lardner, Jr., a script writer and party member. 

. John Howard Lawson, a Broadway aywright and screen 
writer. Wrote "Professional/  "Success Story." A party member. 

. Albert Maltz, wrote "Merry-go-Round," "Snake Pit." A 
party member. 

. Sam Ornitz, a screen writer. 

. Adrian Scott, nationality not verified. 

. Dalton Trumbo, a party member. 



We have already made some mention of the convied 
"Hollywood Ten" who received sentences for contempt of 
congress. There are hundreds of other high aced Jews with pro- 
Communist records in the film colony, including millionaire 
aors, direors, producers, writers, and executives. 

The question immediately arises as to why so many of these 
wealthy and privileged Jews embrace Communism. The answere 
is, of course, that Communism is not an economic movement, but 
a racial movement. Communism cannot be understood, or dealt 
with, on any other basis. 

An Easy Target 

There is a question in the minds of many as to how and why 
the Communists took over Hollywood. To begin with, the 




The Secret Behind Communism  


Hollywood motion piure industry is the most imrtant vehicle 
of propaganda in the whole world today. 

Hollywood exerts a greater influence over the America and 
the entire world than all other propaganda mediums combined. 
It was therefore a prime target for Communist infiltration. And 
since the film industry is overwhelmingly Jewish, Communist 
agents encountered a minimum of difficulty in setting up shop. 
To give the reader some idea as to the extent of the Jewish control 
over Hollywood here are the fas from Jewish writers working 
for Jewish run media organizations. 

Angeles @!mes opinion 

OPINION 

How Jewish is Hollywood? 

A ll finds more Americans disagree with the statement that Jews control Hollywood.' But 
here's one Jew who doesn't. 

By Joel Stein 
December  .  

I have never been so upset by a ll in my life. Only % of Americans now believe ’the movie and 
television industries are pretty much run by Jews." down from nearly % in . The Anti- 
Defamation League, which released the ll results last month, sees in these numbers a viory 
against stereotyping. Aually , it just show s how dumb America has gotten. Jews totally run 
Hollywood, 

How deey Jewish is Hollywood? When the studio chiefs took out a full-page ad in the Los Angeles 
Times a few weeks ago to demand that the Screen Aors Guild settle its contra, the open letter was 
signed by: News Corp. President Peter Chernin (Jewish), Paramount Piures Chairman Brad Grey 
(Jewish), Walt Disney Co. Chief Executive Robert Iger ( Jewish). Sony Piures Chairman Michael 
Lynton (surprise. Dutch Jew), Warner Bros. Chairman Barry Meyer (Jewish). CBS Corp. Chief 
Executive Leslie Moonves (so Jewish his great uncle was the first prime minister of Israel). MGM 
Chairman Harry Sloan (Jewish) and NBC Universal Chief Executive Jeff Sucker (mega-Jewish). If 
either of the Weinstein brothers had signed, tills group would have not only the were to shut down 
all film produion but to form a minyan with enough Fiji water on hand to fill a mikvah. 
