* The "Fuchs-Gold Atom Spy Case," 

* The "Rosenberg-Sobell Case," and 

* The case of "Eugene Dennis and the Convied Eleven." 

It was imssible, of course, to conceal altogether the 
Jewishness of the overwhelming majority of the defendants. But 
Jewish propagandists exhausted every trick in trying. 

One Jewish publication  Look magazine ran a piure story 
on the spy trials in which the defendants were variously 
described as "typical Americans" ... "American born" . . . and "as 
American as ape pie." 

So there will be no further doubt regarding the racial identity 
of the American Communist party, we have accumulated 
photographs and data on virtually every Communist indied or 
tried for Communistic aivity since . The reader may judge 
for himself. 

The Amerasia Case 

In early  the FBI arrested six individuals the majority of 
them Jews for stealing  highly confidential documents from 
State Department files. This became known as the Amerasia Case. 
Those arrested were: 



 Spies, Spies and more Spies in America 

. Phillip Jaffe, a Russian Jew 
who came to the U.S. in . He was 
editor of the magazine, Amerasia, and 
was the former editor of the 
Communist paper. Labor Defense. He 
was convied and fined. 

. Andrew Roth, a Brooklyn-born 
Jew with a lieutenant's commission in 
Naval Intelligence. 

. Mark Gayn, a writer, born in 
Manchuria of Russian-Jewish parents. 
His real Jewish name was Julius 
Ginsberg. 

. John Stewart Service, a Gentile and high-ranking State 
Department official who gave Jaffe much of the stolen material. 

Also arrested were Emmanuel Larsen and Kate Mitchel, 
nationality unknown and believed to be Jewish. 

Only two of those arrested were anually brought to court, 
with the trial of the ringleader, Philip Jaffe, one of the strangest 
on record. Late one Friday afternoon he was rushed o court 
without any previous notice or publicity, and before anyone 
knew what was going on he eaded guilty, and was sentenced 
and fined. 

By paying the comparatively insignificant sum of $,. he 
was relieved from the danger of any future prosecution. Roth 
paid a $. fine. 

John Stewart Service was not prosecuted, nor was he 
discharged from his high State Department sition. The State 
Department, despite the constant prodding of Senator McCarthy 
of Wisconsin, refused to accept the evidence against him. Four 
times he was called before the State Department's "loyalty 
board," and four tunes he was cleared. 

This in spite of an FBI wire recording of his transaions with 
Jaffe! Not until the fifth loyalty hearing was it decided that there 
were "reasonable" grounds for suspeing his loyalty. This came 
six years after the original arrests. Somewhere, hidden hands 
were pulling wires. 





The Secret Behind Communism  
Alger Hiss Case 

The second treason case also involved the State Department. 
This was the trial of Alger Hiss, protege of Supreme Court Justice 
Felix Frankfurter. Hiss, like Acheson, was a student under 
Frankfurter at Harvard. 

Hiss was one of the most influential men in the State 
Department. At Yalta he had been a Roosevelt advisor; at San 
Francisco he helped draw up the United Nations charter. And he 
was an imate friend of the secretary of state. 

Hiss, although a Communist, was not convied for being 
one. He perjured himself by denying his Communist aivities, 

this charge that he was tried and 
convied. 

The Alger Hiss trial was also a 
unique one. Dean Acheson's wife 
campaigned to raise funds for his 
defense. Acheson himself declared: 
'TTI not turn my back on Alger 
Hiss." 

Felix Frankfurter, an Austrian- 
born Jew who became an Associate 
Justice of the United States Supreme 
Court, friend and adviser of 
President Franklin Roosevelt, 
anually took the witness stand to 
testify as a charaer witness for his 
protegA In spite of all this. Hiss was 
convied and sent to the 
penitentiary. 

this treasonable drama is worth 
commenting on. Frankfurter, along with Lehman and Henry 
Morgenthau, was one of the most influential Jews in America at 
that time. In addition to Acheson and Hiss, he was resnsible 
for the acing of an estimated  of his "proteges" in high 
aces. These include: 

. Nathan Witt, former general secretary of the National 
Labor Relations Board; 


however, and it was on 



Felix Frankfurter 
A Supreme Court Justice who 
had numerous proteges become 
prominent Communists 

Frankfurter's role in 


 Spies, Spies and more Spies in America 

. Lee Pressman, chief legal counsel for the CIO; 

. John Abt, key attorney for the SEC, AAA, and WPA. 

All are Marxist Jews; Pressman later admitted being a card 
carrying party member. 
