Company. In the article it states how the firm of Kuhn, Loeb & 
Company "floated the large Japanese War Loans of -, 
thus making ssible the Japanese viory over Russia." It also 
goes on to say: 

Mr. Schiff has always used his wealth and his influence in the 
best erests of his people. He financed the enemies of autocratic 
Russia and used his financial influence to keep Russia away from 
the money market of the United States. 

Jacob Schiff anually gave somewhere between $ million 
and $ million to finance the Jewish-Communist revolutionaries 
in Russia, a sum that would be the equivalent of many hundreds 
of millions of dollars by today's dollar value. Rabbi Marvin S. 



The Secret Behind Communism  


Andelman, in his book To Eliminate the Opiate , cites two sources 
documenting Schiff's financial suprt of the Communist 
Revolution and ultimate repayment by them. 

Jacob Schiff is credited with giving twenty million dollars to 
the Bolshevik revolution. A year after his death the Bolsheviks 
desited over six hundred million rubles to Schiff's banking 
firm Kuhn & Loeb*  I (L oe b arK j Trotsky ne Bronstein, piured below) 



It puzzled me that the violently anti-capitalist R Party would 
be suprted by some of the most prominent capitalists in the 
world. But, I finally realized that the Russian Revolution was not 
ultimately about the triumph of an economic ideology, it was 
about the culmination of an age-old struggle between two 
wereful peoples  the Jews and the Russians  in an ethnic 
war that tragically ended in the totalitarian tyranny of the 
Communist diatorship. Even worse, the score was ultimately 
settled in the terror of the blood-washed cellars of the Cheka and 
the frozen death of the Gulags. 

The fa that supercapitalists such as Jacob Schiff could 
suprt a nakedly socialist regime such as Communism made me 
question whether there was something more to Communism 
than met the eye. What was it about Communism that made it so 




 Communism with the Mask Off 

attraive to Jews, who were largely well-educated non- 
proletarians, when Communism was supsed to be, in Lenin's 
words, "a diatorship of the proletariat"? Obviously, by and 
large, Jews were nothing like Marx's "workers of the world," for 
no group was more involved in capitalism or the manipulation 
and use of capital than the Jewish community. 

I checked out the Communist personalities that Mattie Smith 
told me were in the Jewish Who's Who in World Jenny. Atheist 
Leon Trotsky as well as atheist Maxim Litvinov, the Soviet 
Minister of Foreign Affairs, are proudly listed in the direory of 
famous Jews compiled by the leading Jewish rabbinical groups of 
the world. 

Winston Churchill, in his eloquent article "Zionism Versus 
Bolshevism: A Struggle for the Soul of the Jewish Peoe," had 
argued that Communism and Zionism were distin ideologies 
that were competing, as he put it, "for the soul of the Jewish 
people." But something didn't seem quite 
kosher in this supsed titanic struggle, for 
it appeared that many Zionists also 
suprted Communism and, at least in the 
early years, many Communists were 
sympathetic to Zionists. Millions of Jews, 
even supercapitalists such as Jacob Schiff, 
suprted the Communist revolution in 
Russia. The struggle seemed to be like that 
of two brothers who might sometimes 
argue between themselves but who always 
stand together against their common enemies. 

In , I read a book called Trotsky and the Jews, written by 
Joseph Nedava and published by the Jewish Publication Society 
(Philadelphia, ). The book s out that before the Russian 
Revolution, Leon Trotsky (born Lev Bronstein) used to ay chess 
with Baron Rothschild of the famous Rothschild banicing family. 
What could the Rothschilds, the biggest banking house in 
Europe, ssibly have in common with a leader who wanted to 
destroy capitalism and private property? Conversely, why would 
a dedicated Communist be a close friend of the most wereful 



The Secret Behind Communism  


"capitalist oppressor" in the world? Could it be that they saw 
Communism and Zionism, as two very different avenues to a 
similar goal of were and revenge against the Tsars? 

A Jewish journalist (M. Waldman) who knew Trotsky from 
the period of his stay in Vienna ("when he used to ay chess 
with Baron Rothschild in Cafe Central and frequent Cafe Daily to 
read the press there").  

A number of questions arose: ) Could Communism simy 
have been a tool they adapted to defeat and rule their Russian 
antagonists? ) Did the Jews believe they were in confli with 
only Russians or with other peoples as well? ) Was Communism 
originally part of a strategic imperative that reached far beyond 
the confines of Soviet Russia? These were imrtant questions. I 
thought that I might find their answeres in the philosophical 
origins of Communism. 

I resolved to investigate the ideological roots of 

Communism. I found 
Das (Capital^ and the 
Communist Manifesto  
in my public library. 
Karl Marx's books were 
obtuse, especially the 
parts describing the 
Hegelian dialeic, but 
they made some sense 
if one believed that 
mankind had a 
machine-like nature as 
Marx theorized. One of 
my teachers made the 
often-repeated, orly-thought-out comment that Communism 
was great in theory but faulty in praice. To my way of thinking, 
to be a great idea it must work in praice, and Communism 
obviously doesn't. There has never been a theory that has 
promised more human happiness yet delivered more verty, 
mental and physical oppression, and more human misery and 
death. 


Inside Judaica 


Insights on questions of Jewish erest by Dr. Frederick Lachman. 

Executive Editor, Encyclopaedia Judaicu 

O. Was Karl Man A JcwV 
A. Born in the Rhineland low u ol frier (then 
