Commission." He was a Chicago Jew. 

. James Edward Jackson, , the party's "Southern 
Regional Direor." 

. William Norman Marron, , executive secretary of the N. 
Y. State Communist Party. He was a Russian-Jew. 

. Sidney Steinberg, the party's "Assistant National Labor 
Secretary." He was a Lithuanian Jew. 

These "second-tier defendants" were prosecuted in three 
waves: , , and  and their trials were held in over a 
dozen cities, including Los Angeles, New York, Pittsburgh, 
Philadelphia, Cleveland, Seattle, Baltimore, Seattle, Detroit, St. 
Louis, Denver, Boston, Puerto Rico, and New Haven. 

The defendants also used Jewish lawyers (five defense 
attorneys at the  trial had been jailed for contempt of 
court, and two of them, Abraham Isserman and Harry Sacher, 
were disbarred from further legal praice). 

Six of the West Coast Communists arrested were Jews: 

. Henry Steinberg, a Polish-Jew; 

. Rose Chemin (Kusnitz), a Russian-Jewess; 

. Frank Carlson, a Russian Jew; 

. Ben Dobbs, a New York Jew; 

. Frank Speor, a Russian-Jew; 



The Secret Behind Communism  


. A Richmond, a Russian Jew. 

Of the remaining nine, Dorothy Healey, Philip Connelly, and 
Otto Fox are gentile; Carl Rude Lambert is believed to be Jewish, 
and the identity of the others has not been determined. 

Of the five arrested in the east, four were Jewish. They are: 

. Roy Wood, , a gentile and chairman of the Washington 
D.C., Communist Party; 

. Regina Frankfeld, , a party organizer in Cleveland; 

. George Meyers, , a party organizer; 

. Philip Frankfield, , an organizer; 

. Rose Blumberg, of Brooklyn. 

By May , another  Communists were indied, of 
whom  were convied, nine acquitted, while juries brought no 
verdi in the other cases. 

Three Gentiles: Vanderbilt Field, 

Whittaker Chambers and Elizabeth Bentley 

Some attention should be devoted to three gentiles who have 
figured prominently in several of the treason trials. The three are: 
Whittaker Chambers, Elizabeth Bentley, and Vanderbilt Field. 

None of the three has been indied or convied of a crime, 
and none were party members. In fa, two became enemies of 
Communism. Nevertheless they deserve a ace in any 
description of the American Communist party. 

Because he is a Gentile and because he has a famous name, 
Vanderbilt Field is perhaps better known to the American public 
than any other member of the Communist conspiracy. This 
prominence is not accidental. 

Jewish propagandists, whether Communist or not, invariably 
seek to conceal the Jewish nature of Communism by giving 
lavish publicity to gentiles such as Field. As a  of fa. Field 
did not belong to the party, nor was he among those arrested 
when the top leadership was being rounded up. 

Field was secretary of the "Civil Rights Congress Bail Fund," 
which was entrusted with raising bail for party members in 
trouble. He was maed to the Jewess, Anita Cohen, former wife 
of the convied spy, Raymond Boyer. 



 Spies, Spies and more Spies in America 

One of the principal witnesses against Alger Hiss at his trial 
was Whittaker Chambers, who like Hiss was a Gentile. 
Chambers  of pumpkin letter fame  was formerly an editor of 
the Daily Worker and later an associate editor of Time magazine. A 
produ of Columbia university Chambers began his 
underground work for the party in . He later renounced 
Communism and joined the Catholic Church. Like Elizabeth 
Bentley, he gave invaluable aid to the FBI and the un-American 
aivities committee in their efforts to track down key members 
of the Communist party. Chambers was maed to a Jewess. 

Elizabeth Bentley, a produ of Vassar, is another former 
Communist who has done much to exse the Communist 
underground. For several years she served as a courier for a 
Communist espionage network. She was the mistress of the Jew, 
Jacob Golos, a trusted Soviet agent and her immediate superior. 
He died of a heart attack on Thanksgiving day, . 

It was after his death that Elizabeth Bentley turned against 
the party and started co-operating with the FBI and the un- 
American Aivities Committee. 

Mos Cohen/Peter Kroger 

Mos Cohen was born in New York in  of a Jewish 

Russian father and a Jewish. 
Lithuanian mother. In , 
Cohen joined the Mackenzie- 
Papineau Battalion and fought as 
a foreign national volunteer in 
the Spanish Civil War on the 
Communist side. He returned to 
the U.S. in  , having been 
recruited to work as a spy for 

Lorna Cohen. SoVlet forei S n  diligence. 

In , Cohen maed Lona 
Cohen who was an aivist in the Communist Party USA and a 
courier for Manhattan Proje physicist, Soviet spy and " devout 
Jew" Theodore Hall, (see below). Cohen was also instrumental in 
relaying atomic bomb secrets to the Kremlin in the late s. 



The Secret Behind Communism  


"Thanks to Cohen, designers of the Soviet atomic bomb got 
piles of technical documentation straight from the secret 
laboratory in Los Alamos," the Soviet newspaper Komsomolskaya 
Pravda announced. 

Cohen was drafted o the American army during World 
