

The Secret Behind Communism  


its finances: Robbery, kidnapping, and theft became regular party 
aivities. 


On one occasion a loyal Bolshevik maed a rich widow to 
secure funds for the party treasury. These aivities were referred 
to in party circles as "expropriations." The most famous 
expropriation was the Tiflis bank robbery, engineered by young 
Josef Stalin shortly after the London Congress. 

The Mensheviks bitterly criticized these taics, while Lenin 
stoutly defended them as a necessary means of raising capital. 
The "expropriation" question broke out again and again as a 
 of contention between the two faions. Aually a great 
deal of Lenin's strength came from this source. With money thus 
raised he was able to pay the traveling expenses of delegates to 
these various congresses, and this gave him a voting were 
which was probably out of prortion to his following. 



Lenin's opsition on the 
expropriation question came not only 
from Martov's Menshevik faion, but also 
from the Jewish Bund and Rosa 
Luxemburg's Polish Social Democrats. 
The Jewish Bund and Rosa Luxemburg's 
faion usually sided with the Mensheviks 
in these ra-party squabbles, and it was 
not until , when they were anually 
incorrated o the Bolshevik faion, 
that Lenin was able to control the entire 
party. 

The Tiflis bank robbery has now 
become a part of the legend which 
surrounds Stalin, and it is perhaps 
worthwhile to give it some attention. 
Although the robbery was engineered by 
Stalin, then a minor party worker, the aual holdup was caed 
out by an Armenian by the name of Petroyan, who is known in 
Russian history as "Kamo." Kamo's method was crude but 
effeive: he tossed a dynamite bomb at a bank stagecoach which 
was transrting , rubles in currency. 


Maxim Maximovich 
Litvinov, Born Meir 
Henoch Mojszewicz 
Wallach-Finkelstein, was 
a Russian revolutionary 
and prominent Soviet 
diomat. 



 The Origin of the Bolshevists 

In the resulting exosion some  people were killed and 
Kamo escaped with the loot, which consisted mainly of  ruble 
notes. The Bolsheviks encountered considerable difficulty in 
converting these  ruble notes o usable form. It was decided 
that agents in various countries would simultaneously cash as 
many as ssible in a single day. The operation was not a 
comete success. The Jewess, Olga Ravich, who was one day to 
marry Zinoviev, was apprehended by lice authorities, as was 
one Meyer Wallach, whose real name was Finklestein, and who is 
better known as Maxim Litvinov. Litvinov later became 
Commissar of Foreign Affairs (-). 

Three Communist Newspapers Launched: All Run by Jews 

In the autumn of  the 
Bolsheviks began publishing the 
Proletariie, with Lenin, Dubrovinsky, 
Zinoviev, and Kamenev (the latter two 
Jewish) as editors. 

In the same year the Menshevik 
organ, Golos Sotsial-Demdkrata began 
publication, edited by Plekhanov, 
Axelrod, Martov, Dan, and Martynov 
(Pikel), all of whom were Jewish with 
the exception of Plekhanov. In Oober 
of , the Vienna Pravda was 
launched, with Trotsky as editor. 

Lenin-Zinoviev-Kamenev Troika 

In  Lenin, Zinoviev and 
Kamenev formed a "troika." It was to 
endure until Lenin's death in . 
Zinoviev and Kamenev were Lenin's 
inseparable companions. Later, when 
the Bolsheviks were in were, Trotsky 
would become co-equal with Lenin, and even something of a 
competitor, but Kamenev and Zinoviev were never Lenin's 
equals nor his competitors  they were his right and left hand. 
They would argue with him, and fight with him, and opse him 



Grigory Yevseevich 
Zinoviev was born Ovsei- 
Gershon Aronovich 


Radomyslsky Apfelbaum , 
is best remembered as the 
longtime head of the 
Communist International 
and the archite of the 
several failed attempts to 
transform Germany o a 
Communist country during 
the early s. 


The Secret Behind Communism  

in party councils, but the "troika" was broken only when Lenin 
died. 

January Plenum 

In January of , the  top leaders of the Party met in what 
historians refer to as the "January Plenum of the Central 
Committee." Its purse was, as always, to promote party unity. 

One outcome was that Lenin was compelled to burn the 
remainder of the  ruble notes from the Tiflis expropriation, 
which he had been unable to cash anyway. Another outcome of 
the January Plenum was the recognition of the newspaper, Sotsial 
Demokrata, as the general party newspaper. Its editors were the 
Bolsheviks, Lenin and Zinoviev, and the Mensheviks, Martov 
and Dan. Lenin was the only Gentile. 

Trotsky's semi-independent Vienna Pravda was also declared 
to be an official party organ, and Kamenev was aped to help 
edit it. Who could have foretold in the year  that within 
seven short years this Yiddish crew would be the lords and 
masters of all Russia? 

Germans Allow Lenin to Enter Russia 

