War Two, but resumed his elligence work for the Soviet Union 
after the war. He and his wife worked closely with the infamous 
KGB Colonel. Rudolph Abel (who was later arrested and 
swopped for U pilot Gary Poweres). Abel was another of the 
tribe, "fluent in Yiddish."  

In , the Cohens went to live in the Soviet Union, but by 
 they had been redeoyed back to Britain under the names 
Peter and Helen Kroger. They sed as antique book dealers, and 
worked with a Communist espionage group known as the 
Portland Spy Ring that had penetrated the Royal Navy. 

The Cohens were arrested in  by British Intelligence, and 
served eight years in prison before being exchanged for a British 
elligence agent being held in the Soviet Union. The Cohens 
were awarded the Order of the Red Banner and the Order of 
Friendship of Nations for their espionage work. 

After the dissolution of the Soviet Union, they also were 
given the title of Hero of the Russian Federation by 
the Yeltsin government. They lived out their lives 
on KGB pensions until their deaths  Lana in  and Mos in 
 without ever revealing the name of the "American" 
scientist who helped pass vital information about the United 
States atomic bomb proje. 

The Mocase Espionage Case 

The Mocase espionage case made news in , when five 
Jews were charged with being Soviet agents over the previous 
decade and a half. The Jewish spies were: 

. Boris Morros, American Communist Party member. 

Paramount Studios producer, Soviet agent, and ultimately a 

FBI double agent. 

. Jack Soble, sentenced to  years, brother of Robert Soblen; 

. Myra Soble, sentenced to V years; 



 Spies, Spies and more Spies in America 

. Robert Soblen, sentenced to life for spying at Sandia Lab, 
etc., but escaped to Israel, then committed suicide; 

. Mark Zborowski; received a four-year prison sentence in 
. 

Fred Rose and the Canadian Spy Ring 

Canada has also had spy trouble. There as in the U.S., the 
Soviet Embassy served as headquarters for espionage aivity. 
There, as in the U.S. the principal charaers in the ot were 
Jews. 

In early  an emoyee of the Russian embassy in Ottawa 
packed hundreds of secret Russian documents o a suitcase and 
turned himself over to Canadian authorities. As a result, a spy 
ring was uncovered which included  among others  a member 
of the Canadian Parliament and a professor at McGill university. 

Leader of the ring, and by far its most 
imrtant member, was Fred Rose 
(Rosenberg) the only Communist in the 
Canadian Parliament. Rose, a Polish Jew, 
was the ringleader, the recruiter, and the 
courier for the ring. 

On June , , Rose was 

sentenced to prison for hi's aivities. The 
following year (Dec. . ) Dr. 

Raymond Boyer, a professor at McGill 
university was sentenced to two years in 
prison for having given Rose 
information concerning the secret exosive, RDX. Boyer was 
maed to the Jewess, Anita Cohen. Arraigned with Rose were 
Samuel Gerson (of Russian-Jewish parentage), and another Jew, 
David Shugar. Other Jews imicated in the Fred Rose spy ring 
included: J. Isidor Gottheil, Israel Halperin, and Sam Carr 
(Cohen). 

Rose was released from prison in  and in  he went to 
settle in Communist Poland. There he worked for many years as 
English-language editor of Poland, a magazine designed to spread 
Communist propaganda in the West. While living in Poland, his 
Canadian citizenship was revoked in , and he died in . 





Chapter  
Atomic Treason 

ON February rd, , British elligence agents arrested a 
diminutive German-born atomic scientist by the name of Klaus 
Fuchs. He was accused, and subsequently convied, of passing 
atomic secrets to the Russians. 

At the beginning of World War II Fuchs had been erned by 
the British as an enemy alien. He was subsequently released from 
British custody and admitted to the U.S. at the personal 
instigation of Albert Einstein. 

As a scientist for the Manhattan Proje, he had access to 
America's innermost atomic secrets between  and , and 
he is said to be one of the few men familiar with the overall 
construion of the A-bomb. 

He served nine years in prison in England, and un his 

release, emigrated to 

Communist East Germany 
where he was received with 
acclaim and served in the 
Institute for Nuclear Research in 
Rossendorf, near Dresden. 

The Fuchs-Gold Spy Ring 

Aing on information 
obtained from Fuchs, the FBI 
began a series of investigations 
which resulted in the eventual 
arrest of nine other members of 

The Communist Jew spy Harry the rin §- ° f theSe nine ' a of 
Gold is arrested. As courier for the whom were later convied, 
spy ring, he quite literally delivered eight were Jewish. Here is a 
the atom bomb secrets to the Soviet brief description o£ the entire 
Union.  

ring: 

. Harry Gold (Jew name Goldodnitsky). A chemist, he was 
born in Switzerland of Russian-Jewish parents. He studied at 




 Atomic Treason 

Drexel University, University of Pennsylvania, and Xavier 
