Communist Jew spies Joel Barr 
and A Sarant 



The Secret Behind Communism  


. Max Elitcher, longtime friend of Rosenberg and Sobell 
from their days at CCNY before testifying against them. 

. Vivian Glassman, fiancee of Joel Barr. 

. Ruth Greenglass, escaped prosecution in exchange for her 
husband's testimony against his sister and brother-in-law, the 
Rosenbergs. 

. William Perl, aive in Young Communist 
League at CCNY, then met A Sarant at Columbia University; 
served  years for perjury. 

. Morton Sobell, involved with Barr, Perl and Julius 
Rosenberg at CCNY; sentenced to  years at Alcatraz. 

. A Sarant, who worked on secret military radar at the 
United States Army Signal Corps laboratories at Fort Monmouth, 
New Jersey. Alexandre Feklisov, one of the KGB case officers 
who handled the Rosenberg spy apparatus described Sarant 
and Joel Barr as among the most produive members of the 
group. Sarant was recruited as a Soviet espionage agent by Barr. 

The Venona proje transcript records showed that Sarant and 
Barr delivered  authentic drawings relating to the APQ-, an 
advanced and secret airborne radar system developed joly by 
the Massachusetts Institute of Technology and Western 
Eleric for the United States military. 

In  Sarant moved to Ithaca, New York where he worked 
at Cornell University in the physics laboratories. Sarant's next 
door neighbor was Philip Moson, a former Manhattan 
Proje scientist and personal friend who joined the Communist 
Party of the United States in . 

Two days after Julius Rosenberg's arrest on  July , 
the FBI erviewed Sarant but did not arrest him, although it 
ssessed decrypted KGB cables that clearly identified Sarant as 
a member of the Rosenberg ring. Three days later Sarant ran 
away with a neighbor's wife and fled to Mexico, They ultimately 
ended up living in the Soviet Union, where Sarant developed the 
Soviet bloc's first automated anti-aircraft wean. Their 
technology was quickly deoyed and was in use, with some 
minor modifications, o the s. 



 Atomic Treason 


In  Sarant and Barr moved to Leningrad where they were 
aced in charge of a military eleronics research institute. They 
have been credited with being the founders of the 
Soviet microeleronics industry, in part because Sarant and Barr 
conceived of, designed and won litical backing for the creation 
of Zelenograd, the Soviet Union's Silicon Valley. 

In  Sarant received a state honor for the UM-, a 
computer that was widely used in Soviet industry. He led the 
team that created the Uzel, the first digital computer installed in a 
Soviet submarine. The Uzel was egrated o the Kilo class 
submarines and as of  was still in use in the Russian, Iranian, 
Chinese and Indian navies. Sarant died in . 

. Andrew Roth, Office of Naval Intelligence liaison officer 
with United States Department of State. 

. Saville "Sarry" Sax. He was born in New York City in 
, where he was roduced to Soviet agents by his mother, 
Bluma Sax (-) who worked for a Communist front 
organization called Russian War Relief. 

Sax went by the cover name "Oldster," and periodically 
traveled to New Mexico to colle information from 
Hall/Holtzberg (see below). The true depths of Sax's treason 
only became known when the Venona transcripts were released 
to the public. Sax ended up teaching "values clarification" in 
New York, openly boasting of his role in the atomic spy ring and 
the fa that he had never been prosecuted, until his head in . 

Behind the Atom Treason 

The question which instantly comes to mind is: how were 
Communist agents able to ferret out our valuable atom secrets 
when so much secrecy surrounded the entire proje? Why was it 
that Russia had the full secret of atom-bomb manufaure before 
the American people even knew of the existence of atomic 
weans? 

These questions are especially puzzling when we consider the 
fantastic security measures taken to safeguard the secret. Well- 
known author Bob Considine once described a fire which burned 
down a large building housing an atomic installation. Although 



The Secret Behind Communism  


firemen could have easily saved the building, ant guards 
would not permit them to enter the restried area because they 
didn't have authorized passes! 

Not even members of the U.S. Congress were let in on the 
secret. Yet the Soviet agents were able to penetrate this security 
wall as though it weren't there. How did they do it? 

First it should be remembered that a central figure in the 
atomic program was Albert Einstein, a foreign-born Jew with a 
record of  red fronts to his credit. It has never been proven that 
Einstein was an aual party member, but there can be absolutely 
no doubt as to where his sympathies lay. Nor can there be any 
doubt regarding the red t of his friends. 

A list of those around Einstein reads like a Who's Who of 
Communism. It was Einstein who was instrumental in having 
Fuchs brought to the United States. 

Furthermore, it should be remembered that the chief of the 
Los Alamos installation between -, when most of the 
secrets were stolen, was the Jew, Robert Oppenheimer. Robert 
Oppenheimer had a brother, Frank, who was also an atomic 
scientist and who was a card carrying Communist. Frank 
Oppenheimer belonged to "Professional Unit No.  of the 
Communist Party," while on the staff at Cal-Tech. 

As mentioned above, the Communist Jewess spy Elizabeth 
Zarubina/ Lisa Rozensweig set up a ring of young Communist 
physicists around Oppenheimer. The detailed information which 
they obtained could only have come from Oppenheimer. It was 
long suspeed that Oppenheimer who freely admitted to being 
a Communist sympathizer was one of the "senior scientists" at 
Los Alamos who passed on the real nuclear secrets to the sse of 
Jews around him. 

Finally, it should be noted that shortly after V-J day Harry 
Truman turned America's atomic energy program over to a 
board consisting of five men, three of whom were Jews. Not only 
that, but the Jewish chairman, David Lilienthal, had belonged to 
at least two Communist fronts previous to his apment. This 
was the background to the atom treason. 

