



Chapter  

Iron Curtain Diators 

IN the Communist satellite nations, as in Russia, Jews 
occupied almost every key sition of were. Perhaps no better 
proof of this can be found than in John Gunther's book, Behind the 
Iron Curtain.  Gunther revealed that in st-war Poland, 
Hungary, Romania, and Czechoslovakia, Jews ayed leading 
roles in all the one-party Communist states. Given here is a brief 
description of these "Iron Curtain Diators." 



The Jew Rakosi, on the far left, during the  "Second World Festival 
of Youth and Students" Communist front meeting. 

Hungary 

The three "Muscovites" mentioned by Gunther are the Jews, 
Matyas Rakosi, Erno Gero, and Zoltan Vas-numbers one, two 
and three in the st-war Hungarian government, set up by the 
Soviet military commander of Hungary who disregarded the 
result of an eleion in November  (in which the Communist 
Party only lled % of the vote) and installed a one-party 
Communist state. 

Rakosi was born Matyds Rosenfeld in present-day Serbia and 
was the de fao ruler of Communist Hungary between  and 
  first in his capacity as General Secretary of the Hungarian 



The Secret Behind Communism  


Communist Party (-) and 
later as General Secretary of the 
Hungarian Working Peoe's Party 
(-). After Stalin's death, 
Rakosi was recalled to the Soviet 
Union and aced in ernal exile 
until his death in . 

Erno Gero (born Erno Singer) 
was briefly in  the most 
wereful man in Hungary as first 
secretary of its ruling Communist 
party. An early Hungarian 
Communist, Gero fled Hungary for 
the Soviet Union after Bela Kun's 
brief Communist government was overthrown in August . 
During his two decades living in the USSR, Gero was an aive 
KGB agent. Through that association, Gero was involved in 
Comern  the ernational organization of Communists  in 
France, and also fought in the Spanish Civil War. 

Gero became a member of Hungary's High National Council 
(provisional government) in , and was aped to a senior 
government st after the Soviet military commander 
disregarded the result of an eleion in November  (in which 

the Communist Party only lled % of 
the vote), and installed a one-party 
Communist state. Gero was Rakosi's 
right-hand man, but was removed from 
were following Stalin's death. After a 
period of exile in the Soviet Union, he 
was allowed to return to Hungary where 
he lived until his death in . 

Zoltan Vas 

Zoltan Vas (on left) was a longtime 
Communist who was aped 
government commissioner for Budapest 
public supies in February , and also served as mayor of 
Budapest the same year. "Eleed" to the one-party state 




Erno Singer/Gero 




 Iron Curtain Diators 


parliament in November , Vas served as secretary of the 
Economic Supreme Council until , when he was aped 
president of the National Planning Office. He was on the Central 
Committee of the Hungarian Communist Party in , and an 
alternate member and then full member of the Political 
Committee from  to . From February , he headed the 
Materials and Produce Management Secretariat set up within the 
government secretariat. Like the other Stalinists, he was forced 
from were after the Soviet diator's death. He died in . 

Poland 


The st-war government of Poland was dominated by 
Jewish Communists as well. The most imrtant of which were 
named Mine, Skryeszewski, Modzelewski, and Berman. The first 



three were of cabinet rank, while 
Jacob Berman's official sition 
was that of Under-Secretary of 
State  a mirror office. Aually, 
Berman, who was a Soviet citizen, 
was the undisputed boss of 
Poland. 

Hilary Mine, an economist 
and a Communist veteran who 
had spent the years - in 
Russia and was well known by 
Stalin, was second in rank only to 
Jacob Berman. He was the 


The Jew Hilary Mine 


economic diator and the author 
of the Three Year Plan. Mine was 


vice-premier and member of the Politburo from  to , 
when he resigned and admitted his "errors and misjudgments." 


According to the book by Polish national hero and journalist 
Stefan Korbonski called The ]ms and the Poles in World War II, in 
the decade up to , Poland acquired Jewish overlords not only 
in government and the Communist party but in the secret lice, 
in the administration of justice, and in the machinery of litical 
indorination. 



The Secret Behind Communism 
