in Office of Strategic Services (Budenz, Cry, p.).  

. Julia Stuart Poyntz: High-Ranking Communist Party USA 
Leader (Budenz, Story, p. );  Assassinated by the GRU 
(Soviet Military Intelligence) in  for preparing to break away 
from the Communist Party USA (Budenz, Story, p. ; Cry, p. 
).  

. Mos Raprt: Communist leader in Washington 
state (Budenz, Men, p. ).  

. Andrew Roth: Stole US Military documents for the Soviet 
Union (Budenz, Cry, p. ).  

. Harry Sacher: Communist Party USA Lawyer (Budenz, 
Cry, p. ).  

. Solomon Schwarz: Writer for the Daily Worker (Budenz, 
Story, p. ).  



 A Communist Defeor Spills the Beans 


. Nathan Gregory Silvermaster: Soviet spy in the US 
government (Budenz, Men, pp. -).  

. Jacob ']ack' Stachel: Communist leader and 
representative to the Comern (Budenz, Story, p.  ;  Men, p. 
; Techniques, p. );  Took his orders from Joseph Peters, 
Alexander Bittelman and Joseph Pogany. (Budenz, Story, pp. - 
; ; ; ; ;i  Men, pp. ; ; ; ; ); 
Endorsed lying to serve the Communist cause (Budenz, Story, p. 
).  

. Joseph Starobin: Foreign Affairs editor of the 'Daily 
Worker' (Budenz, Story, p. ; Men, p. ).  

. Sid Stein: Communist Party USA's Labor Commissar 
(Budenz, Cry, p. );  

. Alexander Trachtenberg: Long-time member of the 
Communist Party USA's Central Committee (Budenz, Story, p. 
; Men, pp. ;  ; Techniques, p. );  

. Joseph Woodrow Weinberg: Soviet espionage agent 
inside the United States' atomic program (Budenz, Cry, p. ).  

. Robert William Weiner: Treasurer of the Communist 
Party USA (Budenz, Story, p. ;  Men, p. );  In charge of a 
large private Communist slush fund. (Budenz, 'Men, pp. - 
).  

. Louis Weinstock: Communist union leader (Budenz, Men, 
pp. ; ) 

. Max Weiss: Secretary of the Young Communist League 
(Budenz, Men, p. );  

. Harry Dexter White (Weiss): Soviet agent in the US 
Treasury Department (Budenz, Techniques, p. ).  



Chapter  

Spies, Spies and more Spies in America 

THE American Communist Party snsored an elaborate 
elligence network on behalf of the Soviet Union, involving 
over  members aing as agents. This massive spying network 
started from the very earliest times of the Soviet Union, and 
lasted right until the dissolution of the USSR. By then, Jews 
working as agents for the Israeli government had reaced the 
Jewish Communists as the most extensive spy network in 
America. 

Both the American Communist Party 
and Israel could rely un the loyalty of 
American Jewry to provide a constant 
source of Fifth Column recruits, while at 
the same time shouting down as "anti- 
Semites" anyone who dared  this fa 
out. 

Manfred Stern: 

Prominent Early Soviet Spy 

Manfred Stern (aka Emilio Kleber, 
Lazar Stern, Moishe Stern, Mark Zilbert) 
was a Jewish member of the GRU, the 
Soviet military elligence and one of the 
most prominent early Soviet spies in the U.S. 

He also served as military advisor in China, and gained fame 
under his nom de guerre as General Kleber, leader of 
the International Brigade during the Spanish Civil War. 

In , Stern became the GRU's chief spy in the United 
States. Based in New York City and operating under the cover 
name of Mark Zilbert, he managed a network of sources and 
agents involved in the theft of military secrets. In one operation 
they stole the ans for a new American tank. 

Another operation was foiled by a source who went to U.S. 
Naval Intelligence and continued to deliver faked documents to 




 Spies, Spies and more Spies in America 

the Soviets. The apparatus kept a safe apartment on West th 
Street, owned by the Jewess Paula Levine. 

Stern eventually fell out with his Communist bosses. Recalled 
to the Soviet Union, he was arrested and erned in a Gulag, 
where he died in . 

Alexander Petrovich Ulanovsky 

Alexander Petrovich Ulanovsky (AKA Ulrich, 
William Joseph Berman, Bill Berman, Felik, 
Long Man, Nathan Sherman) was the chief 
illegal "resident" for Soviet Military Intelligence 
(GRU), in the United States from  until . 

Ulanovsky came to America to take over the 
GRU apparatus assembled by his 
predecessor, Manfred Stern. He returned to 
Europe after the failure of several GRU 
operations, notably a bungled scheme to 
counterfeit U.S. currency. 

Ulanovsky resurfaced in Copenhagen in , operating 
under the alias Nathan Sherman, as the head of a Soviet 
espionage ring that colleed military information on Nazi 
Germany. 

The Danish lice arrested Ulanovsky and two other 
American Jews, Leon Josephson and George Mink, following a 
search of their hotel room which turned up codes, money, and 
multie passrts. The motive for the search was a charge of 
rape against Mink by a chambermaid. 

Ulanovsky told the Danish lice that the three Jews were 
"anti-fascists" aing on their own (a common taic, even today, 
see chapter on "The Communist Movement in Britain"), but the 
