Aeeietanl AtQuUmt Stem ermL 



HEAD QUARTERS, ra ARMY COUPS, 

Dspasymisv or van Tsnmnis, 

Ho % Spring, MU*., Jan. , . 

fiimu. Oboxss,  
Ho. . J 

In rsuaaee of direions from the General-in-Chief of the Army, 
General Orders Ho. , from them Headquarters, dated Oxford, Miss., 
December th, , is hereby revoked. 

By Ossn or Mar. On. U. . Okavt. 


JHO. A. RAW LI KB, 
Assistant Adjutant General. 



General Ulysses S. Grant's General Order No. , a 
repetition of General Order No. , which contained the 
revocation issued by President Abraham Lincoln. 



The Secret Behind Communism  


On December , , General Ulysses S. Grant issued 
General Orders No. . This order banished all Jews from 
Tennessee's western military. General Orders No.  declared: 

". The Jews, as a class, violating every regulation of trade 
established by the Treasury Department, are hereby expelled 
from the Department. 

. Within  hours from the receipt of this order by Post 
Commanders, they will see that all of this class of people are 
furnished with passes required to leave, and anyone returning 
after such notification, will be arrested and held in confinement 
until an oprtunity occurs of sending them out as prisoners, 
unless furnished with permits from these headquarters. 

. No permits will be given these people to visit headquarters 
for the purse of making personal apication for trade permits. 

By order of Major Gen. Grant." 

The expulsion order caused an uproar amongst the Jews, who 
petitioned President Abraham Lincoln to rescind the order. This 
duly happened and they were allowed back in to continue with 
the praices to which Grant had so strongly objeed. 

Ironically, Grant's expulsion order was based on the same 
kinds of condu that led to the vast migration of Jews to 
America, exoitive aivities of the tribe in European nations that 
also led to previous expulsions. 

Sephardic Period 

Since colonial America was still a pioneer country, there were 
almost no Jews here before the American Revolution. In  
there were certainly no more than a few score of Sephardic Jews 
in the entire country. 

Modern Jewish historians have tried to prove the existence of 
two Jewish privates in Washington's armies, but the question is 
of no consequence either way. By  years after the 
Declaration of Independence, and  years after the founding of 
Jamestown there were an estimated , Jews in the U.S., 
comprising perhaps l/th of  percent of the total pulation. 



 Jews in America 


German Period 

During this period a fairly steady trickle of German Jews 
came to the U.S. mainly from Germany, so that by  they 
numbered about ,, out of a total pulation of  million  
about / of  percent. 

Russian-Polish Period 

Following the assassination of Tsar Alexander II in , vast 
numbers of Russian Jews inundated America; between  and 
, the Jewish pulation increased by % to more than 
three millions! 

World War I and the Russian Revolution added to this influx. 
Many Jews left Poland when as a result of the Versailles Treaty, it 
was made independent of Soviet Russia; others fled Russia 
during the counterrevolution and civil war which raged in - 
-. 

The White Russian Armies, regarding Bolshevism as a Jewish 
movement, showed little mercy to those Jewish communities 
falling o their hands. Many Jews, fleeing these anti-Communist 
armies, eventually made their way to the U.S. 

This flood of immigration continued until , when the 
Johnson-Lodge bill temrarily brought it to a halt. However, 
when the Roosevelt administration came to were in , the 
baers were once again lowered, so that in the calendar year of 
, .% of all immigrants admitted to the U.S. were Jewish. 

After , this influx has continued under so-called 
"Disaced Persons" (DP) legislation, with the result that 
approximately half of the world's Jewish pulation has now 
congregated here. 

In , official Jewish sources estimated America's Jewish 
pulation to be ,, - only , greater than the same 
estimate in  (when it was claimed that there were ,, 
Jews in America). This figure is clearly incorre and a realistic 
estimate will be at least two to three million more than that, 
anywhere between seven and nine million. 



The Secret Behind Communism  


New York: Second Largest Jewish City in the World 

The newly aved Jews settled in the metrolitan centers. 
New York alone absorbing approximately half of the total Jewish 
immigration. But the "ghettoization" of the East-European Jews 
in the United States was the result not of objeive forces only: it 
was as much the result of the immigrant's desire to retain all they 
could of their old way of life" Page , The Jewish Peoe, Past 
and Present, Central Yiddish Culture Organization (CYCO) New 
York.  

New York City has been the staging ground for the Jewish 
invasion of the U.S. Here the Jewish immigrant found a ghetto- 
like environment similar to the one he left in east-Europe. There 
he learned the language and customs of the country and gathered 
the know-how and capital to buy up business on the Main Street 
of Los Angeles, or Dallas, or Chicago. 

Many lowere class Jews, unable to learn the language or raise 
