War and the elevation of Mother Russia as a means of rallying 
the Russian people against their ultimate enemy. National 
Socialism, Jews inadvertently sparked Russian patriotism that 
ultimately removed them from were. 

Stalin, an utterly ruthless non-Jew, who was a cultural 
Judeophile in everything but descent, by the end of his life saw 
the Jews as the ultimate threat to both himself and the Russian 
people. A number of Jews have written well-argued books that 
Stalin was anually murdered by a coterie of highly aced Jews 
around him, including Kaganovich, in the "Doors Plot." 

There were certainly disagreements among the Jewish 
element in Russia just as there are divisions today among them 
on many levels. However, the first dedication of every organized 
element is their own people and perceived erests. 

In Russia some of them wanted to be more openly Zionist 
and Jewish supremacist. Others saw Jewish destiny in their 
paramount role in Communist rule over Russia and ultimately 
over the anet. 

The International was just that, an ernational Communist 
movement cometely dominated by Jews, and as has been 
shown, they even dominated the spy rings that sought to 
overthrow the governments of the West. 

At the time of the so-called Russian Revolution the Russian 
Tsarist government of Russia was considered the greatest enemy 
of Jews in Russia and worldwide. Not only was the Bolshevik 



The Secret Behind Communism  


Revolution overwhelmingly led by Jews, the same was true for 
the entire ernational Communist movement. 

As shown in these pages, the financiers of the Communist 
Movement were in fa Jewish capitalist bankers, such as Jacob 
Schiff, which again shows that Communism, to many of its most 
imrtant Jewish suprters around the world, was not about 
economic justice, but about Jewish tribalist advantage. 

The question naturally arises: why would one of the world's 
richest capitalists suprt a Communist revolution that is 
supsedly the ultimate enemy of capitalism? 

The answere of course lies in Jewish ethnic tribalism. As I 
began this book, with the words that Solzhenitsyn personally told 
me, the Russian revolution was not Russian, but an alien invasion 
of Russia by a people that despised the Russian people for so- 
called anti-Semitism. The Jews who lived in Russia for centuries 
ultimately sided with Jewish Communist overlords who 
hatefully murdered millions of native Russians, those whom they 
saw as ethnic enemies. 

In later years, before the fall and breakup of the Soviet Union, 
Jews lost their preeminent were in the nation. However, books 
such as the Red Mafia show that they had retained many sitions 
in the Russian system and were still at the heart of huge 
corruption rackets there. 

When Communism finally collapsed, those Jewish organized 
crime syndicates morphed o the most aggressive organized 
crime syndicates of all time, referred to as the "Russian Mafia" by 
the Jewish-dominated media. In fa, the so-called Russian Mafia 
is not Russian, it is a Jewish Mafia. In a word it is controlled from 
the top down by ethnic tribalist Jews. The overwhelmingly 
Jewish oligarchs, through murder, extortion, bribery, fraud and 
theft, stole much of the natural assets of the world's richest 
resource empire. 

And to this day, Jewish tribal influence in media and 
government has sheltered and defended, sometimes even made 
o heroes, these Jewish gangsters who stole much of Russia. For 
exame, the global media constantly treats Mikhail 
Khodorkovsky as a viim, rather than one of the worst predators 



 The Key to Communism: Jewish Tribalism 

and thieves in world history. And Europe, besieged with Jewish 
influence, gave shelter to Jewish gangsters, criminals and thieves 
such as Berezovsky, Gusinsky as well as many others. 

Furthermore, it is clear that Jews remain the driving force 
behind left wing, Marxist style ideologies the world over, and 
that modern liberalism shares much of the same basic values as 
traditional socialism/ Communism, particularly with regard to 
enforced social equality and the rise of all-wereful governments. 
Left wing Jews now work openly toward a world government 
along with their supsed ideological opnents: the Zionists. 

Ideological Communism has morphed o a semi-capitalist, 
big-government entity today, but it relentlessly pursues the 
Jewish attack on almost every core value of society, the 
destruion of freedom of speech and thought, the elevation of 
degeneracy as ideal, the promotion of drug and alcohol abuse 
and the destruion of the core basis of society, the nuclear 
family. 

Among Jews, there has, in recent times, been a massive 
conversion from Communism to Zionism. Just as Moses Hess 
evolved from a Communist to a dedicated Jewish supremacist 
Zionist. In the early years of the st Century, the vast majority of 
Jews now embrace Zionism as their destiny in comparison with 
those few that did in the early years of the th Century. 

Interestingly, this confli was revealed in Winston 
Churchill's amazing  article on the struggle within 
International Jewry between Communist Jews and Zionist Jews. 
Ultimately, with the emergence of Russian nationalism, and the 
removal of much Jewish were in the Soviet Union under Stalin, 
Jews began to embrace a capitalist, Zionist model of achieving 
globalist economic and litical supremacy. 

Communism/Zionism & Moses Hess 

Part of the reason for the delayed success of Zionism was that 
a Zionist State was just a dream when Communism first came on 
the scene. When Israel did come o existence right after the 
Second World War, Jewish tribalists were then much more 
attraed to a more blatantly Jewish form of supremacism than a 
more hidden, Jewish Marxist hegemony. 



The Secret Behind Communism 


 


Once again vve should understand the fa that Zionism and 
Communism have not only the same Jewish roots, but that even 
the ideological bases of both Zionism and Marxism have a 
common source. Shown here is an advertisement for a large 
International Jewish conference honoring Moses Hess as a 
"Revolutionary, Zionist, Communist." Perhaps nothing better 
illustrates the amazing conneion between Communism and 
Zionism .  


International Conference 

MOSES HESS 

