In oonpilanee with orders of the Commanding Gen era! 
(Secret) Ootober th* *  left Vladivostok on TJovesbor 
th*  and proceeded to Omsk which I reached on Secern* 

- - * * W * -** *Hat - J +w - '  - 
the n** a'c^aoic w.. xu w_ nsp #w .o *ii^ ov-ut uu*ox 
modern government o the country. These hopes were f ma- 
trated by the gradual gains in were of the more irreen* 
sible and socialistic elements of the pulation guided by 
the Jewa and other anti-Russian races, A table made in 
April  by Robert Virion* tho corresndent of the J.otfdon 
Times In Russia* shows that at that time there were  
"commissars* including  negroes,  Russians,  Chinamen* 
 Armenians and more than  Jews, Of the latter number 
 had come to Ruoela from the United States since tho 
downfall of the Impwlal Government, It is only since the 

A 

 # 



Chapter  

The London Times Unmasks Bolshevism 


THE most exhaustive description of the Jewish comsition 
of the Bolsheviks was made by Robert Wilton, a foreign 
corresndent for The Times of London, the world's most 
respeed newspaper. 



Robert Wilton, distinguished corresndent of the London Times 
published the most comete list of Jews in the Bolshevik 
Government. 

In  he published a book in French, Les Derniers Jours des 
Romanofs (The Last Days of the Romanovs), where he showed the 
ethnic comsition of the Bolshevik government in Moscow. 

The Central Committee was comsed the following way: 
Trotsky (Jew); Zinoviev (Jew); Larine (Jew); Juritsky (Jew); 




 The London Times Unmasks the Revolution 

Volodarsky (Jew); Kamenev (Jew); Smidovitj (Jew); Jankel (Jew); 
Steklov ew); Lenin (Russian, allegedly part-Jewish); Krylenko 
(Jew); Lunacharsky (Russian). 

The Council of Peoe's Commissars had a similar 
comsition: President: Lenin (Russian); Foreign Affairs: Tjitjerin 
(Russian); Nationalities: Stalin (Georgian); Agriculture: Protian 
(Armenian); Public Education: Lunacharsky (Russian); Financial 
Advisor: Larine (Jew); Food: Schlichter (Jew); Army and Navy: 
Trotsky (Jew); State Control: Lander (Jew); Public Land: 
Kauffman (Jew); Work: Schmidt (Jew); Social Aid: Lelina (Jew); 
Religion: Spitzberg ew); Interior Affairs: Zinoviev ew); 
Plygiene: Anvelt ew); Finance: Goukovsky ew); Press: 
Volodarsky ew); Eleions: Uritsky ew); Justice: Steinberg 
ew); Refugees: Fenigstein ew); Refugees (ass.): Savitj (Jew); 
Refugees (ass.): Zaslovsky (Jew). 

The Central Executive Committee looked the same: Sverdlov 
(chairman): Jew; Avanessov (secretary): Armenian; Lenin: 
Russian, allegedly partly-Jewish; Bruno: Lithuanian; Bukharin: 
Russian; Starck: German; Wolach: Czech; Encukidze: Georgian; 
Krylenko: Russian; Kaoul: Lithuanian; Lunacharsky: Russian; 
Peterson: Lithuanian; Peters: Lithuanian; Stoutchka: Lithuanian; 
Terian: Armenian; Souriupa: Ukrainian; Tjavtchevadze: 

Georgian; Achkinazi: Imeretian; Telechkine: Russian; Babtjinsky: 
Jew; Weinberg: Jew; Gailiss: Jew; Sachs: Jew; Ganzburg: Jew; 
Danichevsky: Jew; Scheinmann: Jew; Landauer: Jew; Erdling: 
Jew; Linder: Jew; Dimanstein: Jew; Krassikofsach: Jew; Ermann: 
Jew; Joffe: Jew; Karkline: Jew; Knigissen: Jew; Kamenev: Jew; 
Zinoviev: Jew; Kaprik: Jew; Latsis: Jew; Lander: Jew; Roudzoutas: 
Jew; Rosine: Jew; Smidovitch: Jew; Steklov: Jew; Sosnovsky: Jew; 
Skrytnik: Jew; Trotsky: Jew; Teodorovitj: Jew; Uritsky: Jew; 
Feldmann: Jew; Froumkine: Jew; Scheikmann: Jew; Rosental: Jew; 
Karakhane: Jew; Rose: Jew; Radek: Jew; Schlichter: Jew; 
Schikolini: Jew; Chkliansky: Jew; Pravdine: Jew. 

And finally, the Extraordinary Commission: Dzerjinsky 
(chairman): Pole; Peters (vice chairman): Lithuanian; Karlson: 
Lithuanian; Latzis: Lithuanian; Janson: Lithuanian; Daybol: 



The Secret Behind Communism  


Lithuanian; Antonof: Russian; Alexandrevitj: Russian; 
Saissounce: Armenian; Deylkenen: Lithuanian; Vogel: German; 
Zakiss: Lithuanian; Chklovsky: Jew; Kheifiss: Jew; Zeistine: Jew; 
Rasmirovitch: Jew; Kronberg: Jew; Khaikina: Jew; Schaumann: 
Jew; Leontovitch: Jew; Jacob Goldine: Jew; Glaperstein: Jew; 
Kniggisen: Jew; Schillenkuss: Jew; Rivkine: Jew; Delafabre: Jew; 
Tsitkine: Jew; Roskirovitch: Jew; Sverdlov: Jew; Biesensky: Jew; 
Blioumkine: Jew; Routenberg: Jew; Model: Jew; Pines: Jew; Sachs: 
Jew; Liebert: Jew. 



Above is a reproduion of a banner disayed by the Bolsheviks on the first 
anniversary of the Communist Revolution. After having butchered the royal 
family and a substantial part of the nation's ruling class, the Bolsheviks set 
out to "educate" the Russian people to the joys of proletarian life. The above 
ster, incidentally, again reveals the Jewishness of the Communist 
leadership: of the twelve shown, five are Jews and one (Lenin) is maed to a 
Jewess. To the right of Lenin: Pokrovsky, Kamenev, Sverdlov, Lunacharsky, 
Kollontai, Krylenko, Zinoviev, Bukharin, Trotsky, Rykov, Radek. 



Chapter  

The Executioners of the Red Terror 

SHORTLY after the March Revolution of , the Tsar had 
apied for permission for himself and his family to leave the 
country. Nicholas II was closely related to the royal families of 
England and Denmark, and he felt exile there was preferable to 
remaining a prisoner in his own land. 

The Provisional Government had been inclined to grant his 
request, but the St. Petersburg Soviet had blocked the move and 
the royal family had been transferred to Ekaterinburg, in south 
Russia. 



The Jew Yakov Mikhailovich Yurovsky, head of the Cheka secret lice in 
Ekaterinburg at the time when the Tsar and his family (below) were kept 
prisoners at the Ipatiev House in that town. After confeng direly in 
Moscow with the president of the Russian Soviet Republic (the Russian part 
of the USSR), a Jew by the name of Yakov Sverdlov, Yurovsky and a Cheka 
team murdered the entire Imperial family and their retainers by shooting 
them in a cellar of the Ipatiev House. The bodies were removed to the 
countryside, where they had initially been thrown o an abandoned mine 



The Secret Behind Communism  

