 

FAMINE 

RUSSIA 

The-yeur Plan 
Has Killed the 
Bread Supy 


Hu G Anr. ni jones 

Mr Jo*. . at Mr. !-!,.> d 

I... .ii..' pri.nlr .-ft I or to*. Ilf 



mi 



murdered  million Russians 
during his career, 
Kaganovich didn't even deny 
it. He only accused 
Khrushchev of being a 
murderer too. "Your hands 
are blood-stained too/' 
Kaganovich told him.  

Khrushchev ed out 
that the difference was that 



he, Khrushchev, had merely 
followed Kaganovich's 

orders, while it had been 
Kaganovich who had 
formulated the licies of 
mass murder and had given 
the orders for carrying out 
those licies. 


 Lazar Kagonovich: Mass Murder & the Holodomor 


Kaganovich was therefore one of the worst mass murderers 
in history. The Jewish association with the mass murder in the 
Ukraine was one of the primary reasons that the Nazis were 
greeted as liberators in World War II by the Ukrainians, and why 
so many of them joined up with the German forces to fight the 
Soviets. 

After Stalin's death and fall from grace. Kaganovich was 
expelled from the Communist Party, but lived quietly in Moscow 
until his own death from natural causes in . 

The Real Ethnic Hatred Behind the Holodomor 

Here is a quote from a Communist leader speaking in the 
Kharkiv region in : 

"Famine in Ukraine was brought on to decrease the number of 
Ukrainians, reace the dead with people from other parts of the 
USSR, and thereby to kill the slightest thought of any Ukrainian 
independence ."  



This is typical of the Jewish tribalist modus operandi. The 
supreme tribalists want to stop any nationalist, or patriotic 
movement based on heritage and relatedness. Destroy every 
other people's sense of heritage and solidarity while they 
themselves praice the most ense ethnocentrism on Earth. 




The Secret Behind Communism  


Raphael Lemkin, the father of the term genocide made the 
ethnic genocidal motivation of the Jewish Bolsheviks in Ukraine 
very clear: 

In a  leure in New York City, Lemkin described the 
"destruion of the Ukrainian nation" as the "classic exame of 
Soviet genocide," ...to eliminate (Ukrainian) nationalism...the 
Ukrainian peasantry was sacrificed...a famine was necessary for 
the Soviet and so they got one to order...if the Soviet program 
succeeds cometely, if the elligentsia, the priest, and the 
peasant can be eliminated [then] Ukraine will be as dead as if 
every Ukrainian were killed, for it will have lost that part of it 
which has kept and developed its culture, its beliefs, its common 
ideas, which have guided it and given it a soul, which, in short, 
made it a nation...This is not simy a case of mass minder. It is a 
case of genocide, of the destruion, not of individuals only, but 
of a culture and a nation."  

Lemkin also showed how the reduion of the Ukrainian 
pulation and the roduion of non-Ukrainian people would 
undermine Ukrainian aspirations for freedom. 

The fourth step in the process consisted in the fragmentation 
of the Ukrainian people at once by the addition to the Ukraine of 
foreign peoples and by the dispersion of the Ukrainians 
throughout Eastern Europe. In this way, ethnic unity would be 
destroyed and nationalities mixed. Between  and , the 
pulation of Ukraine changed from % Ukrainian to only %. 
In the face of famine and dertation, the Ukrainian pulation 
had declined absolutely from . million to . million, while 
the non-Ukrainian pulation had increased by . million. When 
we consider that Ukraine once had the highest rate of pulation 
increase in Europe, around , per year, it is easy to see that 
the Russian licy has been accomished.  

One can see the same process that was taking ace at the 
same time in Palestine with mass migrations of Jews o an area 
that had only a tiny percentage of Jews for two thousand years. 
And it is easy to see the Jewish tribalist role in similar licies to 
prevent any national sentiment and cohesion to resist Jewish 
tribalist were in European nations. 

Meanwhile, as will be seen, in Moscow Jewish officials busily 
set up a special Jewish State within the USSR. 



Chapter  
The "Soviet Zion" 
and Plans for a Jewish Homeland 

THE special status accorded to Jews under Stalin was 
underlined with the  announcement that a Jewish 
Autonomous Oblast situated in the Russian Far East, in 
Birobidzhan, was being set aside for Jews as a homeland, their 
own little Israel in the USSR, but like Israel most Jews around the 
world, they wanted a Jewish State, but did not go live there. 

The Jewish autonomous region was the result of 
Stalin's nationality licy, which allowed for the Jews of 
the Soviet Union to receive a tetory in which to pursue 
Yiddish cultural heritage within a socialist framework. According 
to the  pulation census, , Jews lived in the region 
(% of the total pulation). The Jewish pulation peaked in 
