
that they don't believe in God. 

The only thing imrtant to them is that they are fellow members 
of their tribe! Belief in God is secondary to them compared to 
Jewish tribalism . (from Kimberly Winston, Religion News 
Service, USA Today, //) 

The article highlights the fa that many outsken atheists 
are aive, even leaders, in synagogues. It shows that Judaism 
does not demand belief in God, only adherence to Jewish laws. It 
shows how one-half of all "religious" Jews don't believe in God. 
And, it shows that these atheist Jews take part in Judaism not 
because of any belief in God, but as a conneion to the Jewish 
people, one of blood rather than religious faith in God. Here are 
some quotes from the article: 

"Atheism and Judaism are not contradiory, so to have an 
atheist in a Jewish congregation isn't an issue or a challenge or a 
problem,. ..Unlike other religions, Judaism has often embraced its 
atheist strain." 



By Kanbrrty Wmuon. RjJjfltan News Service . r. i vstcr. < n x  

BERKELEY Calif - For an atheist. Maxim Schreqin talks about God a to) 

Over lunch at a Jev.tsn odi, he nders me mputee to 
believe  dees it come from '.vitfnn or v.tthour? Why does 
Go permit suffering"? Fina&y. he pulls out a flowchart he 
made showng degrees ot belief which ranges horn 
unquestioning faith to absolute atheism He stabs the 
paper w«h rus pen 

The rs where i <a* ‘ he saw ‘ero 



v. ' .." 

a (&ttl n Perl or. and ir. jIIc.H I VI 
, r.-„ }i ;-a-, ; ,,| t 


STORY: ' "T ,-c . ' 

San. Schrogm. , s a efues-payng member of 
Congregation Eeth El a Reform synagogue lK-ie si 



The Secret Behind Communism  


"Atheism is entrenched in American Judaism. In researching 
their book American Grace, authors Robert Putnam and David 
Campbell found that half [Approximately  Percent] of all 
American Jews doubt God's existence." 

"They go because they want some kind of ethnic identity," 
Magid said. "They don't care about the prayers. It allows them to 
feel a sense of Jewishness, but has little to do with religion..." 

That's what prompted Jennifer Cohen Oko, a Washington, 
D.C.-based writer, to join a Reform synagogue, her first. Neither 
Cohen nor her husband believe in God, but, like many Jews, they 
joined for their two children. 

"I want my kids to understand they are Jewish, to be proud of 
being Jewish and to understand their heritage," Cohen said... 

So we can say that the tribalist racism that has been the 
Jewish driving force behind Communism is a combination of 
elements. This racism includes social struure, workings of the 
Jewish religion, and psychology. These elements have an effe 
on Jewish reproduive seleion, affeing Jewish traits. It is a 
symbiotic relationship, as Jewish genetic relatedness affes the 
religious and psychological struure of the Jewish community. 

Unfortunately, all evidence s to steadily increasing 
Jewish extremism and racism in the modern world. Two faors 
are key in this radicalization: 

) In the modern world of eraion of Jews with the Gentile 
world, those Jews who find an inherent attraion to Gentile 
values, artistic and cultural expression, and aesthetics are far 
more likely to ermarry than the Jews in the closed, walled 
societies of the past. So those with more universalistic Gentile 
tendencies are removed from the Jewish gene ol. Their more 
moderate influence on licy and attitudes toward Gentiles are 
removed from the community. 

) The highest birthrates among Jews are found in the most 
radical, ethnocentric divisions of Judaism. For instance the 
Hasidic Jews have by far the highest birthrates and more "liberal" 
Jews have much lowere ones. 

The Jewish religion has elements within it which are driven 
by group genetics. These group genetics drive group psychology, 
which again in turn affes the Jewish gene ol. 



 The Key to Communism: Jewish Tribalism 

The Jews, with their group paranoia have therefore become a 
self-fulfilling prophecy. They are indeed persecuted, not, as they 
tell everyone, because of the apparently continuous and 
mysterious existence of irrational anti-Semites, but because of the 
cause and effe: inevitable reaions to their own behavior. And 
the persecutions in turn reinforce and fuel their own 
misanthropic behavior. 

All this being said, when one talks about a group, he is 
talking about common and prevailing tendencies and not 
charaeristics necessarily apicable to every member of the 
group. 

Individual genetic charaeristics are often described as the 
result of a genetic dice cup. Sometimes children can be born with 
certain charaeristics quite different from their parents. Certainly 
most Jews tend to naturally gravitate to rinsic Jewishness, 
although not all of them do so. Also, there are what is called 
epigenetic aspes. 

Many genes that affe psychology and even philological 
traits can be turned on or off by aions or a number of 
environmental faors. 

It can be compared with a person who has a genetic 
predissition to alcoholism. Usually it takes years for 
alcoholism to develop in even the predissed. So, even someone 
predissed to alcoholism will not develop it if he simy doesn't 
drink alcohol to begin with, the alcohol in effe turns on those 
genes resnsible for alcoholism. 

In truth, we should honor those Jews with both the 
inclination and courage to exse the tribalist racism so prevalent 
among Jews. One such person of Jewish heritage is Gilad 
Atzmon, who not only opses Zionism, he recognizes the 
Jewish tribalism and mindset that has so damaged the world. 

My book, Jewish Suprematism is dedicated to Israel Shahak, a 
Jewish human rights aivist who dedicated his life fighting 
Jewish tribalism and extremism. His words are valuable for both 
Gentiles and Jews. He said it with simicity and clearness: 

"Anti-Semitism and Jewish chauvinism can only be fought 

