
Kadish had furnished classified American secrets to Yosef 
Yagur, the same Israeli agent who had received secret documents 
from Jonathan Pollard. In his judgment, Judge William H. Pauley 
III asked "Why it took the government  years to charge Mr. 
Kadish is shrouded in mystery." Kadish was fined (!) $, and 
died a free man in . 

Jewish Extremist Pressure Groups I: AIPAC 

The American Israel Public Affairs Committee (AIPAC) is the 
most public Jewish lobby in Washington D.C.. It has become 
obligatory for any would-be congressman, senator or even 
president to have to appear before the organization in public and 
avow their suprt to Israel. AIPAC aively organizes against 
any congressman who deviates from a pro-Israel line, and uses 
Jewish money and media control to subvert any eleion 
campaigns of candidates who opse Zionist licies or Jewish 
control of the U.S. government. In this way, AIPAC has been able 
to ensure that all American governments and presidents are 
slavish suprters of Israel, even when that state as in the most 
racist or extremist manner with regard to the Palestinians or 
African asylum seekers. 

AIPAC is cometely Jewish, and, as mentioned above, has 
been caught managing Jewish spy rings in the American 
government in the ""Lawrence Franklin" spy case. The 
indiment of the two AIPAC Jews, Steve Rosen and Keith 
Weissman, filed in Alexandria, Virginia on August , , said 
that: "Between in or about April  and continuing until on or 
about August , , in the Eastern Distri of Virginia and 
elsewhere, defendants Lawrence Anthony Franklin, Steven J. 
Rosen, and Keith Weissman did unlawfully, knowingly and 
willfully conspire, confederate and agree together and with 
others, known and unknown to the Grand Jury, to commit the 
following offenses against the United States: 

) having lawful ssession of, access to, and control over 
information relating to the national defense, did willfully 
communicate, deliver and transmit that information direly and 



 The Tribal Shift: Spying Now for Israel 

indirely to a person or persons not entitled to receive it, having 
reason to believe that said information could be used to the injury 
of the United States and to the advantage of any foreign nation, a 
violation of Title , United States Code, Seion (d); and 

) having unauthorized ssession of, access to, and control 
over information relating to the national defense, did willfully 
communicate, deliver and transmit that information direly and 
indirely to a person or persons not entitled to receive it, having 
reason to believe that said information could be used to the injury 
of the United States and to the advantage of any foreign nation, a 
violation of Title , United States Code, Seion (e)." 

Franklin was convied while the two AIPAC Jews had the 
charges withdrawn against them because, Dana Boente, aing 
U.S. Attorney for the Eastern Distri of Virginia, announced in a 
statement that because of "the inevitable disclosure of classified 
information that would occur at any trial in this matter, we have 
asked the court to dismiss the indiment." 

In other words, the charges were withdrawn because even 
more embarrassing - for Israel and AIPAC  information would 
have had to be disclosed to the public. 

Jewish Extremist Pressure Groups II: The ADL 

The Anti-Defamation League (ADL) was founded in Oober 
 by the Jew Sigmund Livingston in honor of a Jewish 
murderer by the name of Leo Frank, who was convied of 
murdering a young Gentile girl in Marietta, Georgia. 

Having been created to defend the "honor" of a Jew 
murderer, the ADL then hycritically went on to claim to 
opse "all injustices" but remains a strong suprter of the 
Zionist state of Israel, which is without doubt one of the most 
prominent serial humans rights offenders in the modern world. 

The ADL has become so slavishly pro-Israel that even well- 
known leftist aivist Noam Chomsky has said that the 
organization has "lost entirely its focus on civil rights issues to 
become solely an advocate for Israeli licy" and that it "casts all 
left-wing opsition to Israeli erests as antisemitism."  The 
ADL has become little more than another underground Jewish 
spy network in the U.S., keeping track of and files on all those 



The Secret Behind Communism  


who it considers to be its enemies (all in breach of data proteion 
legislation). This "information" is then passed on to other Jewish 
erest groups for their ssible aion. 

Not all of the ADL's erventions have been successful. In 
, a jury in a federal court case in Denver, Colorado, ordered 
the ADL to pay $. million in damages to a local coue, 
William and Dorothy Quigley, whom it had publicly named as 
"vicious anti-Semites." In their lawsuit against the ADL and its 
local direor, the Quigleys charged not only that the ADL had 
defamed them, but that the Jewish group was suprtive of the 
illegal invasion of their privacy through its use of the improperly 
recorded telephone conversations. The payout was equivalent to 
a quarter of the ADL's annual budget. 

In , a Jew working undercover for the ADL, James 
Mitchell Rosenberg, was exsed as an agent provocateur, sing 
as a racist right wing paramilitary extremist. He appeared in this 
role as part of a TV documentary entitled "Armies of the Right" 
which premiered in . Rosenberg was arrested that same year 
in New York for carrying an unregistered firearm in public view. 
In , ADL fa-finding direor Irwin Suall identified 
Rosenberg as an ADL operative in a court desition. 

Jewish Pressure Groups III: 

The Southern Poverty Law Center 

The Southern Poverty Law Center (SPLC), which 
masquerades as a "civil rights" organization, is in fa just 
another Jewish front organization. It was founded in 
Montgomery, Alabama, by Mos Dees and Joseph J. Levin-the 
former accused by his ex-wife in court of child molestation and 
extended sexual deviancy, and the latter a Jew. 

In , the SPLC president was the Jew J. Richard Cohen, 
and its main media representative was the Jew Mark Potok. The 
SPLC's other main "writers" are the Jewesses Heidi Beirich and 
Sonia Scherr, (the latter also uses the Gentile-sounding name 
"Claire Rollins"). The Jew journalist Alexander Zaitchik is also a 
former SPLC staff member and infrequent contributor. The 
majority of its "board of direors" is Jewish. 



 The Tribal Shift: Spying Now for Israel 

In , the Montgomery Advertiser won a journalism award 
for a series of incisive and penetrating investigative articles 
exsing the unethical fundraising praices of the SPLC. A series 
of investigations by that newspaper revealed that with their 
made-up scare stories about "Ku Klux Klans" and other white 
demons about to unge America o a race war, the SPLC has 
managed to rake in millions - far more than what they spend. 

