BETWEEN SOCIALISM AND ZIONISM 

th Anniversary of his Birth () 

th Anniversary of his Book "Rome and Jerusalem" () 
Jerusalem, Sunday-Tuesday, March -,  



Advertisement for a very large conference in Israel in honor of 
Moses Hess. The lead leure as shown clearly is by Shlomo 
Avineri on "Moses Hess - Revolutionary, Communist, Zionist" 

Here is a description of Moses Hess in Wikipedia: 




 The Key to Communism: Jewish Tribalism 

Hess originally advocated Jewish egration o the 
universalist socialist movement, and was a friend and collaborator 
of Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels. Hess converted Engels to 
Communism, and roduced Marx to social and economic 
problems. 

He ayed an imrtant role in transforming the Hegelian 
dialeical idealism theory of history o the dialeical 
materialism of Marxism, by conceiving of man as the initiator of 
history through his aive consciousness. 

Hess was probably resnsible for several "Marxian" slogans 
and ideas, including religion as the "opiate of the people." Hess 
became reluant to base all history on economic causes and class 
struggle, and he came to see the struggle of races, or nationalities, 
as the prime faor of history. 

... From  to  he lived in Germany, where he became 
acquaed with the rising tide of German Anti-Semitism. It was 
then that he reverted to his Jewish name Moses in protest against 
assimilationism. He published Rome and Jerusalem in . Hess 
erprets history as a circle of race and 
national struggles.  

Interestingly, just as Hess morphed 
from Jewish Communist to Jewish 
Zionist, the same process was duicated 
throughout the Jewish world both in 
Israel and the Diasra. 

As Communism fell out of favor with 
most Jews, at least in its basic vocabulary 
and syntax, Marxist Jews began a 
transition as they continued to dominate 
the Democratic Left. But, what is quite 
astonishing, they have also invented neoconservatism and 
ultimately have taken over the primary organizations and 
struures of so-called traditional conservatism. 

Gentile conservatives for the most part are cometely 
oblivious to the idea that the controllers of their movement, aside 
from a few diehards like Patrick Buchanan, now have an 
ideological foundation created by a cabal of former long-time 
Trotskyites. The patron sa of neoconservatism is Leo Strauss, a 
hyper-racist Jew who was a dedicated followere of Leon Trotsky, 





The Secret Behind Communism  


the former head of the Bolshevik Red Army. The same is true for 
Irving Kristol, and the real founders of neoconservatism. 

Neoconservatism has essentially taken over traditional 
conservatism. Aside from some basic disagreements on certain 
tax issues, and on what Patrick Buchannan calls the culture war, 
both Jewish cohorts, on the older left and now on a new fake 
"right", have come down with an Israel-first commitment and a 
domestic licy that serves every aspe of the Jewish agenda. 

Another eresting phenomenon is the fa that a number of 
Jews in the Soviet State, after years of service, clearly revealed 
that their ultimate identification and loyalty was to the Jewish 
people and Israel rather than to Russia. 

As ed out, Ilya Ehrenburg who was the chief 
propagandist of the Red army, a man who urged the mass 
murder of German and Eastern Europeans during the Second 
World War, ended up leaving his papers to the Yad Vashem 
museum in Israel, not to Mother Russia that gave him his fame 
and fortune. 

Are All Jews Communists? 

The answere to that question is obvious: no. While there is no 
doubt that the leading role ayers in Communist and far leftist 
organizations are Jews, it would be incorre to claim that all Jews 
are Communists. Although the great mass of organized world 
Jewry suprted the Jewish-led revolution in Russia, and gave 
their suprt to many Marxist-style movements, not all Jews did 
so. Today, Jews overwhelmingly embrace Zionism. The Council 
of Presidents of Major Jewish Organizations illustrates that fa. 

However, there can be no doubt that broadly speaking, 
Jewish communities have disayed a far larger degree of 
sympathy for far leftist causes than any other ethnic group. 

At the same time, Jews disay a very high degree of ethno- 
centrism and desire to maain Jewish identity (as exemified in 
the state of Israel) which, if duicated by any other nation or 
people, would be attacked by those same Jews as being "racist." 

For exame, in Israel it is illegal for a Jew to marry a non- 
Jew, and immigration is strily restried to those people who 
can prove racial Jewish descent. Any European nation attempting 



 The Key to Communism: Jewish Tribalism 

to adopt similar licies would be condemned outright by the 
Jewish-controlled media and by the Israeli government. 

This staggering hycrisy of demanding ethno-nationalism 
for Jews but denying that right to everyone else  is part of the 
psychological underpinning which created Zionism and Marxism 
in the first ace. 

It is imrtant to clearly understand that Jews dominate 
praically all movements against European peoples across the 
world. It is vital to understand why. 

Why Do Jews Lead most anti-European Movements? 

Answereing the question is comicated. It is easy to make a 
list of Jews involved in Communism and subversion, but it is not 
so sime to exain why this phenomenon occurs. 

America, in particular, opened its doors to Jews, allowing 
them to flee persecution for their behavior from many European 
countries. They were allowed to settle, flourish, and gain 
sitions of great influence. 

Yet American Jews are aive in almost every single 
movement that seeks to destroy the foundations of the very same 
America that gave them sanuary. From immigration issues 
through attempts to suppress freedom of speech, "hate crime 
