USA, and he's listed in the Who's Who in World Jewry:  Leon 
Trotsky, the Communist who took over Russia with Lenin, was in 
Who's Who in American Jewry. io His real name is Lev Bronstein. 
Both are atheist Communists, and both are proudly listed as great 
Jews in these books published by the leading rabbinical 
organizations in the world." 



The Secret Behind Communism  

Meekly, I offered, "Maybe they were listed because they were 
once Jews." 

"You have so much to learn," she said with a sigh. "Under 
Israel's Law of Return, you can be an atheist Communist and still 
immigrate to Israel. There are enty of them, too. You only 
qualify to immigrate if you are a Jew, and a Jew is described 
simy as being of Jewish descent. So, you see, you can be Jewish 
and still be an atheist and still be a Communist  and I tell. 
Communism is Jewish!" 

"All Jews are Communists?" I retorted sarcastically. 

"No, no, no," she emphatically reied, with much patience in 
the way she paced her words. "All Jews are not Communists, any 
more than all snakes are isonous. But most leading 
Communists in America are Jews, as well as most of the 
convied Russian spies in America, as well as the leaders of the 
New Left. And historically, most of the leading Commie 
revolutionaries in the first few decades of the Russian Revolution 
were Jewish as well!" 

What Mrs. Smith said made me very uncomfortable. 
Although it was not yet time to leave, I claimed that I had to 
catch my bus back home. I left the office huedly. Mrs. Smith 
had to be wrong, but I just did not have the information I needed 
to refute her statements. I resolved to research the issue so that I 
could show her why she was wrong. Something else bothered me 
as well, for I felt a little guilty for even talking with someone who 
said such teble things about Jews. 

I was staunchly anti-Communist, and to suggest that Jews 
were behind the horrors of Communism was to me such a 
teble allegation that my heart told me that it just could not be 
true. It was the first time I had been face to face with a person I 
presumed was an anti-Semite. I was soon running to catch my 
streetcar. 

During the next coue of days I avoided even thinking about 
the issue, and I stayed away from the Citizens Council office. 
Finally I picked up and read the two copies of Common Sense  
had taken home. One copy maained that the NAACP was a 
Communist front organization dedicated to the eventual 
overthrow of our way of life. It purrted that  Jews and one 



 Communism with the Mask Off 

African American had founded the NAACP, and that all of the 
founders were dedicated Marxists with decades of documented 
Communist affiliations. 

The article asserted that the only major Black founder of the 
NAACP, W. E. B. Dubois, was an avowed member of the 
Communist Party who emigrated to Communist Ghana (where 
he eventually was buried). Furthermore, the scandalous 
publication purrted that the NAACP was financed by Jewish 
money and always had a Jewish president. It said that a Jew, 
Kivie Kaan, was the current NAACP president and that he was 
the real leader of the organization rather than its African 
American "front man," Roy Wilkins. Although the public 
perceived Wilkins as the NAACP leader, the paper asserted that 
he anually had the lowere rank of national secretary. 

The argument of Common Sense was that the Jews led and 
suprted the egrationist NAACP because they were opsed 
to and demonized wereful African American nationalist leaders 
such as Marcus Garvey and later those who led the Nation of 
Islam. It said that they really had no erest in African 
Americans becoming self-reliant or self-suprtive. It maained 
that the Jewish leadership had an erest in racial uralism, 
diversity and confli only because it would offer certain 
advantages to the Jews as a group. 

In addition Common Sense suggested that the real goal of 
organized Jewry was to take over the United States, and to do 
that they had to weaken, divide and disssess the elite of the 
American European majority who made up ninety percent of the 
nation's pulation, and from which the American elite of 
academia, media, business and litics were drawn. Common 
Sense said that the ans were already in the works to see to it 
that Europeans became a minority in an America ruled by Jews. 

How could that be I thought, that's crazy. America was soon 
to go to the moon, and NASA from top to bottom was European 
American. "We become a minority I thought. Crazy! Just Crazy!" 
Much later I discovered that Jewish extremists hated African 
American nationalist groups as much as they hated their 
European American enemies that they sought to supant in 
America's elite. They sought to bend African American groups to 



The Secret Behind Communism  


the erests of Jewry rather than the true liberation of their own 
people. They demonized Black leaders like Minister Farrakhan 
who saw the paramount Jewish role in the historical slave trade 
and saw Jewish exoitation of the Black community. 



terhood: chmn You nr Folks Teme Learuc> 
Address. IS Hollywood Ave. Toledo. O. 

TROTSKY. Leon D*vlilovleb. Born Yar.ovka 
Khersonsky. Buul*. Nov . IS . David Dear.- 
tovlch .ana Anna LtonUivni (Spencer) Bror,
aleln. Ed. H.-alnayrt Shka. CMRu` 
Organised workmen** circle in Nikolaev  /, 

oxlled lo Siberia. I> bt encaped to London; 
collaborated on Jk ra. Ruaalan newspaper II- 
foraliy d Btrlbuied In Ruaala. S-: delaaa 
fill-,. r) Jr. Union lo nd Conarreeo of Bolehcvlk 
Oui?i v S ondon ; prounded thuory of r- 
revolution (defended theory In , Wo: halo, 
l(uri.‘tl In St ivcernburg in aJlliuuo with 
rf.nahe^kB in JlToBi: eleed proa, let I-eiora. 
iur* h Sovlat of Workers' Doputbm l'M. was 
treated and exiled to Obderaic hut cncaped on 

* ,.?„ ! r , In Vienna; pub. pravda. work- 

 r? oaSer for distribution In RuaHa, H-Ofc-H; 

Tilted own paper, Naahe Slovo. Paris. H-S; 
*vpcned from Franco and Spain;.. to NY 

,'irV ml from Jan. to March ? edited It um - 
dan revolutionary daily. N . OVi ' .;V* r i f ro J f , ' <J , lt ? 
;i Petcraburfr anrl worked with M*:*hni> n.m ni 
rrn to effe Its fusion with BoInhevlU Parly 
, ,- th CDnirn-M July S; arrest ert for htivlnp 


WHO’S WHO 
