
On the one hand, the hard core of Judaism believes that they 
alone are God's chosen people and this closeness is based on 
blood rather than any particular belief, other than one: their own 
chosenness. On the other hand, their whole religious history is 
one of being persecuted, which can be seen even in their 
questionably historically accurate biblical stories. Passover, 
Purim, Chanukah, all are steeped in persecution myths, and in 
revenge and violence against their enemies. 

Jews are a group that has made a religion out of paranoia, out 
of delusions of grandeur, and delusions of persecution. This 
group paranoia was probably started by a group of Jews in 
Palestine who suffered from this genetic proclivity. Those Jews 
who did not have this genetic tendency, who were not attraed 
to the belief system, and who found themselves more attraed to 
European aesthetics and behavior left the Jewish community, and 
the Jewish community scorned them. Jewish literature is full of 
the prevailing praice of devout Jews considering their own sons 
and daughters who ermaed as dead. They even do a 
ceremony called sitting "shiva." 



 The Key to Communism: Jewish Tribalism 

"Shiva (Hebrew: ttsiw ) 

(literally "seven") is the week- 
long mourning period in Judaism 
for first-degree relatives: father, 
mother, son, daughter, brother, 
sister, and suse. The ritual is 
referred to as "sitting shiva." 

As a result of the Jewish 
laws of biological descent 
"Sitting Shiva" (remember they still today 

believe that only someone born of a Jewish mother is anually a 
Jew), this Jewish group which had already excluded Jewish 
tribesmen who did not have these group genetic tendencies, 
became a closed gene ol. 

This has led to what is known in genetics as a "founder gene" 
effe amongst Jews. 

The "founder gene" effe is best demonstrated by a non- 
Jewish exame. The disease known as "variegate rphyria," 
which is very common amongst white Afrikaners, for exame, 
has been traced to a single Dutch person who settled in that 
country in . 

Despite being caused by one single person, variegate 
rphyria is the single most common genetic disorder amongst 
modern Afrikaners, and causes skin disorders and ernal organ 
failure, which can include heart disease. 

There are many other exames of founder gene effes, 
which direly cause a certain trait to become common amongst 
identifiable ethnic groups. Even facial shape can be affeed by 
this founder gene effe, as anyone traveling in parts of Europe 
will be able to confirm. 

This founder gene effe amongst Jews, confirmed by way of 
the discovery of a single founder gene for the Cohen subgroup of 
priestly-class Jews, combined with the "dropping out" of Jews 
who did not have this paranoia-gene, has created a self-feeding, 
closed genetic ol of people who, quite literally, suffer from a 
group paranoia, unseen and incomparable in history. 

This closed gene ol and extensive inbreeding amongst Jews 
has some serious genetic side effes as well. It is well known that 



The Secret Behind Communism  


Jews are one of the most inbred of all ethnic groups and manifest 
a large assortment of ailments attributable to that inbreeding. 

A famous exame is Tay-Sachs disease, and unusually high 
levels of imbecility among Jews, to the  where you will even 
find exclusively Jewish mental asylums. 

Jewish Behavior the Result of Group Behavioral Psychology 

This provides the best exanation for Jewish behavior. We 
are dealing with a group who, firstly, genuinely believe that they 
are chosen by God to be superior to everyone else hence they 
call non-Jews cattle, or goyim, to be herded along like inferior 
creatures, and who, secondly, continually fear persecution which 
they know and understand, even if subconsciously, to be the 
inevitable result of their scandalous behavior toward the goyim, 
should their viims ever attain a degree of racial consciousness 
and understanding of what the Jews are doing. 

This also exains Jewish consistency in their behavior, 
something that previously was thought to be the result of some 
grand conspiracy. There is no tightly direed conspiracy going 
back hundreds of thousands of years, it is a loose conspiracy in 
the classic sense of a group banding together for its own 
perceived erests. 

An imrtant thing to consider is the fa that Jews 
themselves are often divided as to their best strategy in 
advancing their ethnic supremacy. Hence, we had two different 
seors of Jews sometimes working together and sometimes 
fighting: the Communists and the Zionists. 

Both of these groups are extremely damaging to Gentiles 
among whom they live, and often to great numbers of Jews 
themselves. Because these erests may be detrimental to the 
majority of the pulation among whom they live, they must 
develop deceptive strategies for maaining their influence and 
were. 

Judaism is an ense racist philosophy that is far more than 
simy a religious view of God or even worshipping God. It is at 
heart the view that the Jewish people are God and that their 
ultimate loyalty is to the Jewish people itself. 



 The Key to Communism: J ewish Tribalism 

A major syndicated article written by Jews revealed 
startlingly that about fifty-percent of Jews who are members of 
synagogues, and who are often even leaders in the synagogue 
who lead Jewish prayers, are in fa atheists. 

Judaism without God? Yes, say American atheists 

The USA Today article shown here appeared in the Jewish 
Newhouse-owned The Times-Picayune newspaper in New Orleans 

with the title: "Atheist 
and Jewish? For many, 
it's fine." 

So fifty percent of 
religious Jews don't 
believe in God. The 
other fifty percent who 
do believe in God, don't 
mind that half of their 
fellow Jews in the 
synagogue are atheists 
who openly proclaim 
