Communists but tries to downay it, as it was becoming a 
problem for the ruling element of Communism. 

Solzhenitsyn recalls that immediately before the Revolution, 
the Bolshevistic Jews Trotsky and Kamenev concluded a military 



 Final Words from Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn 

alliance with three Jewish Social-Revolutionaries - Natanson, 
Steinberg, and Kamkov. 

What Solzhenitsyn said is that Lenin's military putsch, from 
the purely military  of view, relied on a Jewish network. The 
collaboration between Trotsky and his coreligionists in the Left 
Social-Revolutionary parties assured Lenin's success in the Palace 
Revolt of Oober . 

Solzhenitsyn cites the Israeli historian Aron Abramovitch 
who in  in Tel Aviv wrote: 

"In Oober  the Jewish contingent of soldiers ayed a 
decisive role in the preparation and execution of the armed 
Bolshevik uprising in Petrograd and other cities as well as in the 
following battles in the course of suppressing rebellions against 
the new Soviet were." 

The famed Latvian Rifle Regiment of the th Army, Lenin's 
praetorian guard, had a Jewish commissar, Nachimson, in 
charge. 

In  the Jewish historian, Pasmanik, wrote: 

"The emergence of Bolshevism was the result of special aspes of 
Russian history. However, Soviet Russia can thank the work of the 
Jewish commissars for the organization of Bolshevism." 

Solzhenitsyn cites this key passage in his book, and puts the 
word "organization" in quotes in the book text. 

The large number of eyewitness rerts from the early period 
of Soviet rule is astounding. In the Council of Peoe's 
Commissars, the writer Nashivin simy notes: "Jews, Jews, 
Jews." Nashivin avers that he was never an anti-Semite, but "the 
mass of Jews in the Kremlin literally knocks your eyes out." 

In  the famous writer Vladimir Korolenko, who was close 
to the Social Democrats and who had protested against the 
groms in Tsarist Russia, made the following entry in his diary: 

"There are many Jews and Jewesses among the Bolsheviks. 
Their main charaeristics - self-righteousness, aggressive 
talessness and presumptive arrogance - are painfully evident. 
Bolshevism is found contemptible in the Ukraine. The 
prenderance of Jewish physiognomies, especially in the Cheka, 



The Secret Behind Communism  

evokes an extremely virulent hatred of Jews among the 

people. " 

Chapter  of Solzhenitsyn's book opens with the words: 
"Jews among the Bolsheviks is nothing new. Much has already 
been written about it." 

This for Solzhenitsyn is further suprt for his cardinal thesis, 
namely, that Bolshevik Jews were the indispensable were 
brokers in the viory of Bolshevism, in the Russian Civil War, 
and in the early Soviet Regime. 

"Whoever holds the opinion that the revolution was not a 
Russian, but an alien-led revolution s to the Yiddish family 
names or pseudonyms to exonerate the Russian people for the 
revolution. On the other hand, those who try to minimize the 
over-prortional representation of Jews in the Bolshevik seizure 
of were may sometimes claim that they were not religious Jews, 
but rather, astates, renegades, and atheists." 

According to rabbinical law, whoever was born of a Jewish 
mother is a Jew. Orthodox Judaism requires more, i.e., 
recognition of the Hebraic Halacha scriptural laws and the 
observance of the religious laws of the Mishna, which form the 
basis of the Talmud. Solzhenitsyn then asks: 

"How strong were the influence, were, fascination, and 
adherence of secular Jews among the religious Jews and how 
many atheists were aive among the Bolsheviks? Can a people 
really just renounce its renegades? Does such a renunciation 
make any sense?" 

Solzhenitsyn' s attempt to answere these questions on the basis of 
historical fas concentrates on several faors, namely, the behavior 
of Orthodox Jews after Oober , the relative numbers of 
Bolshevik Jews before and after Oober, the ascendance of 
Bolshevistic Jews in the cadres of the Red Army and the Cheka, 
Lenin's Jewish strategy, and finally, Lenin's own heritage. 

"The Bolsheviks appealed to the Jews immediately after the 
seizure of were. And they came; they came in masses. Some 
served in the executive branch, others in the various 
governmental organs. They came primarily from among secular 
young Jews who in no way could be classified as atheists or even 
as enemies of God. This phenomenon bore a mass charaer." 



 Final Words from Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn 

By the end of  Lenin had not yet left Smolny, when a 
Jewish Commissariat for Nationality Questions was already at 
work in Petrograd. In March  the VIII Party Congress of the 
Communist Party (Bolsheviks) undertook to establish a "Jewish 
Soviet Russian Communist Bund." 

In this matter Solzhenitsyn again relies on Jewish historians. 
Leonard Schapiro, living in London in , wrote: 

"Thousands of Jews streamed to the Bolsheviks whom they 

saw as the proteors of the ernational revolution."^ 

M. Chaifetz also commented on the Jewish suprt of 
Bolshevism: "For a Jew, who came neither from among the 
aristocrats nor the clergy, Bolshevism represented a successful 
and promising new prospe to belong to a new clan." The 
Chaifetz article appeared in  in an Israeli journal for the 
Jewish elligentsia aving from the USSR. 

The influx of Jewish youths o the Bolshevik Party at first 
was a consequence of the groms in the tetory held by the 
White Army in , argues David Schub. Solzhenitsyn rejes 
Schub's argument as a myth: "Schub' s argument is not valid 
because the massive entry of Jews o the Soviet apparatus 
occurred as early as  and throughout all of . 
Unquestionably, the Civil War situation in  did hasten the 
amalgamation of Jewish cadres with the Bolsheviks." 

Solzhenitsyn traces the rise in Judeophobia, among other 
things, back to the brutal Bolshevik suppression of peasant and 
citizen uprisings, the slaughter of priests and bishops, especially 
the village clergy, and finally, the extermination of the nobility, 
culminating in the murder of the Tsar and his family. 

During the decisive years of the Civil War (-) the 
secret lice (Cheka) was controlled by Bolshevik Jews. The 
commandants of the various prisons were usually Jews from 
