Alworth Ross, whose prose is almost as or as his judgment: 
"The bewildered leaderless Russian masses are thrilled and 
captivated by these ready, self-confident men who tell them just 
what they must do in order to garner for themselves the fruits of 
the revolution. 

This is why refugees, obscure to us although not to Russians, 
who in exile had been obliged to work in our steel mills and tailor 
shops for a living, former residents of New York's "Eastside", 
who lived precariously from some Russian newspapers we 
Americans never heard of, will rise to be the heads of soviets and, 
later, cabinet ministers of a government ruling a tenth of the 
human race. In all modem history there is no romance like it ."  
When the Bolsheviks came to were, they systematically 



The Secret Behind Communism  


undertook to destroy every vestige of opsition by 
exterminating the upper classes of Russian society. 

Soon these hordes of returning Jews would exercise the 
were of life and death over . million Russians. Soon every 
faory, every government bureau, every school distri, and 
every army unit would funion under the gimlet eye of a Jewish 
Commissar. Soon the blood of human beings would be oozing 

from under the doors of 
Communist execu tion 

chambers as tens of 
thousands of men and 
women were butchered like 
cattle in a slaughterhouse. 

Soon five million 
landowners would be 
deliberately starved to death 
as part of a premeditated 
an. Soon a move would be 
under way to exterminate the 
Gentile leader class of the 
entire nation by murdering 
every Gentile faory owner, 
and lawyer, and government 
leader, and army officer, and 
every other person who had 
been, or might be, a tential 
leader. 

Soon the standing pulation of the slave labor camps would 
exceed  million. Soon every church and cathedral would be 
gutted and every priest and preacher would become a criminal in 
his own community. 

Soon Russia would have a zombie-proletariat docile, willing 
to work, easily controlled, incapable of revolt ... Such was the 
"romance" of the Bolshevik revolution. 

Constituent Assembly Eleions 

A second imrtant a of the Provisional Government was to 
create the machinery for the eleion of a Constituent Assembly. 



The Jew Fyodor Ilyich Dan (Real 
name Gurvitch) was one of the 
leading Mensheviks on the presidium 
of the Petrograd Soviet. He went to 
live in New York after the revolution 
where he died in . 



 The Ground is Prepared 

It was provided that delegates from all of Russia should be 
chosen in free eleions, and these were to meet in a Constituent 
Assembly for the purse of writing a constitution for Russia. 

It was to be, as one writer puts it  : "a body encompassing 
the purses of both the Continental Congress and the 
Constitutional Convention of the American Revolution." 

When the Constituent Assembly did meet, in January of , 
the Bolsheviks had already been in were a month. 

"It met at the Tauride Palace in Petrograd and lasted less than 
 hours; from four in the afternoon of Jan. , to  minutes past 
four of Jan. , when it was dispersed by Bolshevik troops, 
chiefly soldiers of Lettish regiments." 

One of the faors which precipitated the Oober Revolution 
was the forthcoming eleions for the Constituent Assembly. 

All-Russian Congress of Soviets 

One other event occurred which was to affe the outcome of 
the revolution. This was the convening of the First All-Russian 
Congress of Soviets in St. Petersburg on June rd, . 

It should be exained that the word "soviet" means 
"council", or "committee". Following the March Revolution, 
literally hundreds of local revolutionary Soviets were organized 
all over Russia by the various Marxist parties. 

It was decided that a congress of these soviets should meet 
for the purse of unifying the forces of the revolution. 

This first Congress of Soviets was dominated by the 
Mensheviks and Essars. (Essars = Social Revolutionary 
Party). The Bolsheviks had fewere than  delegates out of several 
hundred attending. 

Before disbanding, the Congress of Soviets set Oober th 
(later changed to Nov. th) as the date for the convening of the 
next Congress. This date is extremely imrtant because it marks 
the date of the Bolshevik Revolution. 

When the Second Congress of Soviets did convene, on the 
evening of November th, the Bolsheviks had already gained 
control of the St. Petersburg Soviet and had overthrown the 
Provisional Government a few hours earlier. 



The Secret Behind Communism  


The Bolsheviks were thus able to present the Second All- 
Russian Congress of Soviets with a "fait accomi". This Second 
Congress of Soviets became the official government of 
Communist Russia on that same evening of November th, . 

Lenin Returns 

But now we must turn our attention back to Lenin and his 
party at the time of their aval from abroad. When Lenin 
aved in St. Petersburg in April of , he found the St. 
Petersburg Soviet dominated by the Mensheviks, with the Essars 
(Social Revolutionaries) second in membership, and the 
Bolsheviks in the minority. 

President of the Soviet was the Menshevik, Tcheidze, a 
"defensist" who strongly suprted the war effort. Of the two 
vice-presidents, one was Skobelev, also a Menshevik, and the 
other was Kerensky, the only member of the  man Provisional 
