said to have influenced Lenin to take up the career of a 
professional revolutionary. In any event the year of  finds 
young Lenin then  meeting in Switzerland with the leaders 
of the "Group for the Emancipation of Labor". 

Shortly thereafter he returned to Russia in the company of 
young Julius Margo (Tsederbaum), a Jew who had already 
become prominent as an agitator in the Pale of Settlement, and 
who was one day to become the leader of the Menshevik faion. 
Their purse was to raise funds for revolutionary aivity. In St. 
Petersburg they became involved in a series of strikes which 
swept the city in , and in the autumn of the same year Lenin, 
Martov, and a number of others were convied and sent to 
prison for revolutionary aivity. 



The Secret Behind Communism  


In February of  Lenin cometed his prison term and 
began his period of exile in Siberia. He was permitted to travel to 
Siberia at his own expense and he took with him his Jewish wife, 
Krupskaya and her Yiddish speaking mother. 

It should be exained that, contrary to pular belief, 
litical exiles  unless convied of a criminal a  were not 
imprisoned in Siberia; rather they were paroled there. In exile, 
the government provided a pension, sufficient usually to 
maain an existence. To supement this, the exile sometimes 
sought local emoyment (Trotsky worked as a bookkeeper) or 
they got funds from friends and family. Lenin received a 
government allowance of  rubles  kopeks monthly, "'enough 
to pay for room, board and laundry." [Lenin (abridgement by 
Donald P. Geddes)] 

While in Siberian exile Lenin, Martov, and an accomice 
Potresov, formulated the idea of an "All Russian Newspaper" 
which would serve to combine the thought and energies of the 
entire revolutionary movement. 

The Marxists in , as at all times in the future, were 
divided and subdivided o a great many faions. Lenin's idea 
was to weld these various faions o a single organization. 

Iskra 

Communism as an organized movement began with the 
publishing of Iskra ("The Spark") in December of . Three 
years later, in , the "Iskrists" joined with the Polish Social 
Democrats, the Jewish Bund, and others, to form the Russian 
Social-Democratic Labor Party (which later changed its name to 
the Communist Party). 

Iskra, like every other Communist publication which 
followed, was mainly edited and controlled by Jews. 

In February of  Lenin was released from exile and 
apied for, and got, permission to go to Switzerland. In Geneva 
he joined the "Group for the Emancipation of Labor", and in 
December the Group began the publication of Iskra. The 
establishment of Iskra marked the beginning of Russian Marxism 



 The Origin of the Bolshevists 

as an organized movement, and the beginning of Lenin's role as a 
party leader. 

The editorial board consisted of the "oldsters", Plekhanov, 
Zasulich, Axelrod, and their discies, Lenin, Potresov, and 
Martov. Lenin's Jewish wife, Krupskaya, was the board's 
secretary. Later, in , young Trotsky (Bronstein) joined the 
editorial board, but without voting privileges. 

Four of the above Martov, Axelrod, Zasulich, and Trotsky 
were Jews, while Plekhanov and Potresov were Gentiles. 

It is eresting to note the editorial contributions of the first 
 issues of Iskra. The largest number of articles was written by 
Martov, who contributed . Next was Lenin, who wrote  
articles, followed by Plekhanov with , Petresov with , Zasulich 
with , and Axelrod with . In addition, articles were written by 
Parvus, Trotsky, and Rosa Luxemburg all of whom were Jewish. 

It is worth recording that the only other revolutionary paper 
in existence at this time was Rabochee Delo (Workers Cause), 
organ of the "Economist" faion, of which the Jew, Theodore 
Dan was the editor. 

Iskra was anually pred in Munich, Germany. For a time the 
editorial board met in London, but in  it was moved back to 
Geneva. From there copies of Iskra were smuggled o Russia by 
ship and courier. In this way Iskra built up an underground 
organization of professional revolutionaries, first known as 
"Iskrists", and later as Bolsheviks and Mensheviks. 

In Switzerland, Axelrod eked out an existence by peddling 
yogurt, and Plekhanov is said to have addressed letters for an 
income. But the founders and leaders of Communism were not 
proletarians. Almost without exception they were highly 
educated Jewish elleuals, few of whom had ever performed a 
useful day's labor. 

Unification Congress of  

In  a Unification Congress convened in Brussels, 
Belgium. Its purse was to unite the various Marxist groups o 



The Secret Behind Communism  


the Russian Social Democratic Labor Party, which technically had 
been formed in , but which had failed to bring unity. 

Altogether,  voting delegates attended, four of whom were, 
or had been, workers. The rest were mostly Jewish elleuals. 
Represented were the groups which had formed the party in 
: The Jewish Bund, the Georgian Social Democrats, Rosa 
Luxemburg's Polish Social Democrats, and the Group for the 
Emancipation of Labor, now identified as "Iskrists". 

The Maximalist's newspaper, Rabochee Delo, was also 
represented by  delegates. These groups, their leaders, and their 
discies, made the revolution of . Here, Communism as we 
know it, was born. 

In early August the Belgian Police derted a number of 
delegates and the Unification Congress moved en masse to 
England, where it convened from August th to the rd. One 
very imrtant outcome of the congress was the ideological sit 
which divided the Iskrists o two camps: The Bolsheviks 
(majority faion), headed by Lenin, and the Mensheviks 
(minority faion), headed by Martov. 

The final a of the congress was to ele Lenin, Plekhanov, 
and Martov to the editorial board oilskra. This new board of 
three never anually funioned, due to the hostility between 
Martov and Lenin. After issue No.  Lenin resigned leaving it in 
the hands of Martov, Plekhanov, Axelrod, Zasulich and Petresov, 
the latter three being admitted to the board following Lenin's 
resignation. 

Although Lenin's faion clung to the Bolshevik label, they 
did not at any time command a real majority in the party. Lenin 
had temrarily been able to dominate the Unification Congress 
when the Jewish Bund's delegation had walked out in a huff over 
