

AMERICAN JEWRY 


A biographical diionary of living 

JEWS OF THE UNITED STATES AND CANADA 




EZ*i 


NATIONAL NEWS ASSOCIATION. Inc. 

  FIFTH AVENUE 
Nc York, N, Y., U. S. A. 


lli bureau of Boluh. 


The other copy of Common Sense was no less startling. It had 
a long article asserting that ernational Communism was a 
Jewish creation and that the Russian Revolution had not really 
been Russian at all. Jews had supsedly financed and led 
Communism since its inception, and it alleged that they still 
thoroughly dominated the Communist movement in. the United 
States and around the world. 

This National Enquirer of the right quoted many names, dates 
and sources to suprt its incredible allegations. I was very 
skeptical of its assertions, but the information was too compelling 
to ignore. I had learned early on not to easily dismiss unpular 
opinions. 



 Communism with the Mask Off 

Despite the article's strong documentation, the allegations 
seemed too bizarre to be true. How could it be that the largest 
and most wereful African American organization in America 
had been founded, financed, and run by Jews - and Marxist Jews 
at that  instead of African Americans? 

How could something so incredibly amazing be kept so quiet 
that most people would not know about it? If the Russian 
Revolution was truly a revolution led by Jews rather than Marxist 
Russians, why was such an enormous historical fa ignored in 
our history books and in our pular media? Furthermore, I 
could not understand why wealthy and wereful capitalist Jews 
would foster race-mixing and Communism. 

Father had often talked to me about the evils of Communism, 
and I had been thoroughly anti-Communist since reading books 
such as The Conscience of a Conservative by Barry Goldwater,u 
None Dare Call It Treason by John A. Stormer,i and You Can Trust 
the Communists (To Be Communists )i by Frederick Charles 
Schwarz. These books and others impressed un me the 
penetration of Communist ideology throughout our society, 
media and government. 

The Cuban Missile Crisis had occurred just three years before, 
and father's ans to build a fallout shelter were still fresh in my 
mind. He had even purchased food and other survival supies 
for it. 

During that period, the idea of nuclear war grew from an 
abstra idea to concrete anticipation. In the early s, most 
communities tested the working order of air-raid sirens by 
sounding them daily at noon. Sometimes, when we lost track of 
time in school and the noon air-raid sirens went off, we 
wondered for a moment if the war was anually un us. 

During the Cuban crisis, most adults rationalized that 
thermonuclear war would not happen because it must not 
happen  because the very thought was too monstrous to 
contemate. An -year-old is much more prone to believe that 
someone might pull the switch. 

Years later, the world discovered that we had anually 
teetered much closer to nuclear war than most Americans had 



The Secret Behind Communism  


known at the time. The fa that I viewed Communists as putting 
my family in real danger of nuclear incineration contributed 
greatly to my visceral anti-Communist stance. 

One of the Common Sense issues mentioned a full-page 
newspaper article written by Winston Churchill called "Zionism 
versus Bolshevism: A Struggle for the Soul of the Jewish Peoe." 
The article had originally appeared in the Illustrated Sunday 

IU.UTRAT E D SU N DAY HERAL D. FERUAKV a. .*. p,-, s . 

ZIO N IS M versus BOLSHEVISM. ! 


A STRUGGLE FOR THE SOUL OF THE JEWISH PEOPLE. 



Herald on February , . Churchill had maained that the 
world's Jews were being torn between an allegiance to 

Communism on the one 
hand and Zionism on the 
other. 

Churchill hoped the 
Jews would adopt Zionism 
as an alternative to what he 
called "diabolical" and 
"sinister" Bolshevism, in 
his well-written article, 
contemrary with the early years of the Russian Revolution, 
Churchill described Communism as a "sinister confederacy" of 
"International Jews" who "have gripped the Russian people by 
the hair of their heads and have become praically the 
undisputed masters of that enormous empire."   


“There is no need to 
exaggerate the part ayed in 
the creation of Bolshevism and 
in the aual bringing about of 
the Russian Revolution by 
these ernational and for the 
most part atheistical Jews...” 

Winston S. Churchill 




 Communism with the Mask Off 



The article shocked me enough that I had to check its 
authenticity. It turned out to be genuine. In fa, I found some 
Jewish references to it bewailing the fa that Churchill's article 
gave fodder to the anti-Semites of the world. The following is an 
