
peasants to 'take the land/ they 
already owned more than, 
three-fourths of it." 

Russian Jewry wanted 
revolution, not reform. As early 
as , an attempt had been 
made to assassinate Prime 
Minister Stolypin when his 
country house was destroyed 
by a bomb. Finally in Sept, of 
 the best Prime Minister 
Russia ever had was shot down 
in cold blood while attending a 
gala affair at the Kiev theatre. 
The assassin was a Jewish 
lawyer named Mordekhai 


Bogrov. 


Gershkovich Bogrov. Thus it 


was that Russia had since  lost two Prime Ministers to Jewish 


assassins. 


Many of Stolypin's reforms were caed out after his death. 
In  an industrial insurance law was inaugurated which gave 
all industrial workmen sickness and accident compensation to 
the extent of two-thirds and three-fourths of their regular pay. 



 Bloody Sunday & the  Revolution 


For the first time the newspapers of the revolutionary parties 
were given legal status. Public schools were expanded and the 
eleion laws were revised. In  a general amnesty for all 
litical prisoners was given. Not even the severest critic of 
Tsarism can deny that these measures represented a sincere 
attempt on the part of the Imperial government to bring about 
reform. Why in spite of all this, was the Tsar overthrown? 



Chapter  

The First World War Weakens the Tsar 

ONE of the chief faors contributing to the destruion of the 
Imperial government was the onset of World War I. Before the 
war the Imperial military establishment had contained perhaps 
,, professional troops, well trained and loyal to the crown, 
"but by  the regular army was gone. Its losses for the first ten 
months of the war were reckoned as ,,, or, to take the 
reckoning of the Quartermaster-General, Danilov, , a 
month, and the officers, who went o aion standing, while 
commanding their men to crawl, were falling at twice the rate of 
the men."  

Altogether  million men were called to the colors, most of 
whom were conscripted from the peasantry. Although 
courageous in battle they proved litically unreliable and were 
easily incited by agitators. Large numbers of the industrial 
pulation were also drafted o the armies, and their aces 
were taken by peasants, fresh out of the country. 

As a result, Russia's principal cities came to be pulated by a 
working class which was peasant in origin and habit of thinking, 
but which lacked the conservatism and stability which seems to 
go with tenure of the land. This new proletariat was in reality an 
uprooted and landless peasantry, orly adjusted to city life, and 
easily stirred up by propagandists. 

Now it should be remembered that the Russian revolution 
was caed out by a handful of revolutionaries operating mainly 
in the larger cities. While something like % of Russia's gentile 
pulation was rural, these country people took virtually no part 
in the revolt. Conversely only .% of the Jewish pulation was 
anually situated on the farms; the great majority of the Jews were 
congregated in the cities. 

Says the Universal Jewish Encyclopedia  : "... it must be noted 
that the Jews lived almost exclusively in the cities and towns; in 
Russia's urban pulation the Jews constituted %. Two 



 First World War Weakens the Tsar 


additional faors are taken o consideration. The rural 
pulation took praically no part in litical aivity. 

As a matter of fa, the Jews represented a substantial rtion 
of Russia's educated class. Not only that, but the overwhelming 
majority of Russia's professional class were Jews. 

So comete was the Jewish domination of the professions 
that only one out of eight of Russia's professional people were 
Gentile. In other words, the Jews, who constituted .% of 
Russia's pre-war pulation comprised something like % of 
those who had critical sitions of control in Russia's 
infrastruure. 




the 


Just before the first World War the economic situa- 
tion of the Jews was as follows: in  the Jewish 
pulation of Russia amounted to ,,, or . 
per cent of the total. According to the census of , 
four out of every five Jews lived in cities and towns, 
and since then the crowding in the urban centers had 
increased. A small number gained a living from the 
iiijyceiiLigcuif ec onomically a rtive j lews, 
^in agriculture wasT ; later it fhcreaseu somewhat. In 
the professions the Jews were strongly represented. 
Seven times as many Jews as non-Jews were in that 
L field. T rans rt ation and communication, domestic 
^md rmscel la neons occ u p a   ofls” A  dfl IT? ! irt  flJl  
'some  per cent of those gainfully emoyed. Over 
onc-rhird (. per cent) of the pulation belonged 
class (including inn- and saloon- 

 

 


commercial 

* : . t 


The above excerpt is taken from the Universal Jewish 
Encyclopedia  . 

The Evacuations 

