 at around ,, about one-quarter of the region's 

pulation. 

A giant menorah still dominates the 
main square in Birobidzhan. L’Chayim, 
Comrade Stalin! ("To Life, Comrade 
Stalin") a documentary on Stalin's 
creation of the Jewish Autonomous 
Region and its settlement, was released 
by The Cinema Guild in . 

On March , , the 
Presidium of the General 
Executive Committee of the USSR 
passed the decree "On the 
attaching for Komzetof free 
tetory near the Amur River in 
the Far East for settlement of the 
working Jews." 

The decree meant "a 
ssibility of establishment of a 




The Secret Behind Communism  

Jewish administrative tetorial unit on the tetory of the called 
region". 

On August ,  the General Executive Committee of 
RSFSR accepted the decree "On formation of the Birobidzhan 
national region in the struure of the Far Eastern Tetory". 

The State Planning Committee considered the Birobidzhan 
national region as a separate economic unit. In  the first 
scheduled figures of the region development were considered 
and authorized. 

The Organization for Jewish Colonization in the Soviet 
Union, a Jewish Communist organization in North America, 
successfully encouraged the immigration of some U.S. residents, 
such as the family of George Koval (later recruited as a Soviet spy 
in America). 

The Jewish Autonomous Oblast 

On May , , the Presidium of the General Executive 
Committee accepted the decree on its transformation o the 
Jewish Autonomous Region within the Russian Federation. In 
, with formation of the Khabarovsk Tetory, the Jewish 
Autonomous Region (JAR) was included in its struure. 

The Jewish oblast an was a Soviet attempt to reconcile the 
Jewish Communists and the Zionists. It dealt with two thorny 
issues: Judaism, which ran counter to official state licy of 
atheism; and Zionism  the advocacy of a Jewish national state 
in Palestine  which contradied Soviet views of nationalism. 

Stalin's theory on the National Question regarded a group as 
a nation only if it had a tetory, and since there was no Jewish 
tetory, per se, the Jews were not a nation and did not have 
national rights. 

Jewish Communists argued that the way to solve this 
ideological dilemma was by creating a Jewish tetory, hence the 
ideological motivation for the Jewish Autonomous Oblast. 
Politically, it was also considered desirable to create a Soviet 
Jewish homeland as an ideological alternative to Zionism and the 
theory put forward by Socialist Zionists such as Bert 



 Soviet Zionism: A Special Homeland for J ews 

Borochov that the Jewish Question could be resolved by creating 
a Jewish tetory in Palestine. 

Thus Birobidzhan was imrtant for propaganda purses as 
an argument against Zionism which was a rival ideology to 
Marxism among left-wing Jews. 

The Jewish Anti-Fascist Committee 

The Jewish Anti-Fascist Committee (JAC) was founded in 
 on Stalin's order. It was headed by the Jew Solomon 
Mikhoels, the direor of the Moscow State Jewish Theater. The 
JAC spread Communist propaganda throughout Eastern Europe 
and elsewhere, assuring Jewish audiences that the Soviet Union 
was pro-Jewish. 



Ilya Ehrenburg 

Ilya Grigoryevich Ehrenburg was one of the most prominent 
Jewish members of JAC, and he was among the most prolific and 
notable authors of the Soviet Union. He was one of the co-authors 
of the "Black Book," which was a Soviet propaganda piece on 
alleged German atrocities. Ehrenburg's lies reached new heights 
with the "Black Book" which claimed that the Nazis killed Jews 
with "vacuum chambers," "steam chambers" and "mass 
elerocution" in swimming ol-sized chambers with movable 
floors. 

Ehrenburg was the chief propagandists for the Red Army. He 
brutally urged on the genocidal mass murder of all Germans. 



The Secret Behind Communism  


Ehrenburg is perhaps most infamous for his viciously anti- 
German wartime propaganda, In the words of the Canadian 
Jewish News: "As the leading Soviet journalist during World War 
II, Ehrenburg's writings against the German invaders were 
circulated among millions of Soviet soldiers." His articles 
appeared regularly in Pravda, Izvestia, the Soviet military daily 
Krasnaya Zvezda ("Red Star"), and In numerous leaflets 

distributed to troops at the front. 

In one leaflet headlined "Kill," 
Ehrenburg incited Soviet soldiers to treat 
Germans as sub-human. The final, 
paragraph concludes: 

"The Germans are not human beings. 
From now on the word German means to 
use the most teble oath. From now on the 
word German strikes us to the quick. We 
shall not speak any more. We shall not get 
excited. We shall kill. If you have not killed 
at least one German a day, you have wasted 
that day ... If you cannot kill your German 
with a bullet, kill him with your bayonet. If 
there is calm on your part of the front, or if 
you are waiting for the fighting, kill a German in the meantime. If 
you leave a German alive, the German will hang a Russian and 
rape a Russian woman. If you kill one German, kill another -- 
there is nothing more amusing for us than a heap of German 
corpses. Do not count days, do not count kilometers. Count only 
the number of Germans killed by you. Kill the German  that is 
your grandmother's request. Kill the German ~ that is your child's 
prayer. Kill the German  that is your motherland's loud request. 
Do not miss. Do not let through. Kill/' 

