
they themselves succumbed in 
the chambers of Lubyanka: 
pistol-flaunting Matvey 

Berman, Josef Blatt, Abraham 
Belenki, Isaak Shapiro, Serge 
Shpigelglas, Israel Leblevski, 


Dr. David Duke leures at the Pinkus Simanovski, Abraham 


Mayakovsky Museum next to the Slutski, Benjamin Gerson, 


infamous Lubyanka Prison Zinovi Katsnelson, Natan 


Margolin - an almost endless list of 'Jew Bolsheviks.' 

Solzhenitsyn asks who were their viims? The overwhelming 
majority were Russians. Those shot in cellars, those burnt to 
death in the cloisters, those drowned in river boats, those hanged 
in the forest; officers, peasants, aristocrats, proletariats, the anti- 
anti-Semitic bourgeois elleuals - Russians mostly, but others 
as well. The "hangmen of the Revolution," guilty of crimes they 
try to justify with ernationalism, transformed their "dirty 
revolution" o what Solzhenitsyn calls an "antislav" revolution. 
The Nobel Laureate Solzhenitsyn emphasizes that the Cheka- 
Lubyanka-Gulag holocaustic perpetrators could not ssibly be a 
Slavic people (The people of Russia and Eastern Europe) (p. ) 



The Secret Behind Communism  


Solzhenitsyn in Two Hundred Years Together and the massive 
work of scholarship The Gulag Archipelago volumes l, II, and III 
begs the question of why the greatest crime against humanity in 
all history is unimrtant to ninety-nine percent of global media. 
By contrast, the Jewish suffering in the Second World War is 
saturated by media and thus something felt emotionally by the 
vast majority of the modern world. 

Truly moral people opse the murder, or any kind of harm 
against a pulation. Jewish people suffered tebly during the 
war, and the cause of their suffering is rightfully condemned. Yet, 
giving our hearts to Jewish viims does not absolve us to ignore 
non-Jewish ones, including those of far greater numbers. 

Blame must fall on the perpetrators of the Red Terror just as 
the Ziomedia heaps blame on those accused of crimes against 
Jews, for if we don't identify the malevolent force that committed 
the biggest slaughter in history, we are in danger of reliving it. 

In fa, the supremacist, tribalist forces that created The Red 
Terror's annihilation of human life and freedom, has more were 
in the globalist world now than it did then. 

There is no more imrtant task for everyone who suprts 
human life and rights than to learn The Secret Behind Communism. 

In doing so, we can help prevent a tribalist world tyranny 
that will eclipse the horrors of even Soviet Bolshevism. 

This is surely vital for us, but another purely human 
motivation must be to answere our hearts. We must safeguard the 
memory of the millions of men, women and children who 
suffered this evil horror, but who are tragically forgotten. 

We must share The Secret Behind Communism for their sake, as 
well as for the sake of our children. 

Every people on Earth is haunted by its colleive memory. 

We must remember. If we forget, we will lose our way. 

In our remembrance of those who suffered, and in defense of 
all that is just and noble, we must prevail. 

We must defend the viims, as well as defend ourselves, our 
children and our yet unborn. 

To this task we commit our lives, inspired by the eternal spirit 
of Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn. 