diverse data, made an analysis of it, and aced it here in a 
cohesive format along with my own editing and commentary. 

The book seeks to answere crucial questions. Why has there 
been such a close relationship between Jewish tribalism and 
Communism all over the world? At first glance the two 
movements would seem to be incompatible. 

How does one exain rich capitalist Zionist bankers such as 
Jacob Schiff, suprting Communist atheist movements? 

How and why did Communist Jews who worshipped Trotsky 
transform o neo-conservatives who aren't very conservative? 

Israel is an ethnic supremacist state. Israel promotes Jewish-only 
immigration, and segregated schools and housing of Jews and non- 

Jews. Israel does not even 
allow a Jewish/ Gentile 
maage performed. It 
allows its Jewish citizens to 
own and to cany machine 
guns on the street. 

Yet, those same 
Zionist Israel suprters 
overwhelmingly suprt 
the very opsite litical 
agenda in every nation in 
which they dwell. 

They predominantly 
suprt leftist and Marxist movements and ideologies in the 
Gentile nations in which they live, still today, decades after losing 
control of Communist Russia, but also embrace Zionism. Why? 

Zionist influence over American and EU licy direly led 
to the Zionist ethnic cleansing of Palestinians, and the death and 
suffering of millions of innocents in by Zionist, tribalist-driven 
wars in the Mideast. What do these events and the Communist 
genocides have in common? 

Racial hatred is shown as a clear motivation in the genocides 
of the Jewish Bolsheviks. Their motivation must be examined and 



Deir Yassin (above) and the ethnic cleans- 
ing of , Palestinians were born from 
the same misanthropic tribalism which 
drove the ethnic genocide of Russians, 
Ukrainians and other European peoples 


The Secret Behind Communism  


fully understood. Can one understand the crimes of Zionism 
without seeing their relationship to the crimes of Communism? 

The Bolshevik Holocaust is an hofic story that all people 
who love life and freedom should learn the truth about if they are 
not to be doomed to repeat such horrors. 

If the world had been aware of the Jewish tribalism behind 
Communism and the most massive violation of human rights in 
all of history, certainly the world would have averted crimes such 
as the hofic Iraq War, motivated by the Zionist agenda, and 
based entirely on lies. It was emwered by their symbiosis of 
media and government influence. Preventing the wars they have 
created in the Mideast would have saved millions of lives. 


Many of the Zionist techniques of terrorism, ethnic cleansing, 
torture and murder in Palestine and across the region were 
learned long ago in their Bolshevik revolt against civilization. 

Unmasking the ethnic tribalism and ethnic hatred behind The 
Red Terror is critical to preventing a globalist tyranny and future 
genocides. You may ask, how so? 

The ethnic tribalist takeover and The Red Terror thankfully 
has been ended in Russia, after half-a-century of genocide against 
ethnic Russians and other captive European peoples. However, 
since then, that same racist tribalism has gained a remarkable 
degree of global supremacy today. Indeed, were-mad Zionists 
dominate the world's only Superwere, to the detriment of its 
own people and the world. So, exsing them and desing 
them is crucial to every person on earth who loves freedom. 

They are the ethnically driven source of Zionist were and its 
crimes, and they still, for the most part, control the leftist 
remnants of Communism. They also dominate the right through 
neo-conservativism. They are at the nexus of global media, 
government, and finance. Their pervading influence enables 
Israel to literally get away with murder. 

Exsing their hofic crimes against humanity will help 
prevent their repetition. The perpetrators must not be allowed to 
repeat their crimes un we the living and our children. 

In the next few pages you will delve deep o The Secret 


Behind Communism. 


Dr. David Duke 



Chapter  

Communism with the Mask Off 

The old yellow newspr screamed: "Communism Is 
JEWISH!" Another issue of the newspaper called Common Sense 
trumpeted, "NAACP PART OF RED MASTER PLAN!" In one of the 
older issues a huge headline predied, "Red DICTATORSHIP BY 
!" 

However, such a warning did not seem too credible when 
looked at in  by a young man of fifteen. I found the National 
Enquirer-type headlines ludicrous, but it was hard to resist 
reading something that scandalous, even if just to laugh at it. 

The Sharp Words of Mattie Smith 

One of the regular volunteers at the Citizen's Council in New 
Orleans, Mattie Smith, an elderly lady in a flowere-pr dress and 
outlandish hat, saw me snickering at the lurid headlines and said 
quietly, "You know, it's true." 

"Red Diatorship by ?" I reied with a smile. 

"No," she said, "Communism is Jewish. They are the ones 
behind it." 

I thought I would humor the little old lady by litely 
arguing a bit with her. "Ma'am. How could that be?" I asked. 
"Communists are atheists; they don't believe in God. Jews believe 
in God, so how could they be Communists?" 

"Do you know who Herbert Aptheker is?" she said, 
answereing my question with one of her own. 

"No," I reied, affeing nonchalance. 

She was like a tightly coiled spring waiting for release. "He 
has the official role of chief theoretician of the Communist Party, 
