
shaft. The following morning, when rumors spread in Ekaterinburg 
regarding the dissal site, Yurovsky removed the bodies and buried them in 
a pit on Koptyaki Road, a since-abandoned cart track  miles north of the 
city. Yurovsky was rewarded for his murderous work: in  he was 
promoted and became Chief of the Gold Department of the Soviet State 
Treasury. He died of natural causes in . 



Jewish Cheka Agents Murder the Tsar 

There, in , they were housed in 
the home of a local merchant named 
Ipatiev. On July th anti-Bolshevik 
troops advanced on Ekaterinburg and 
the local commissar, a Jew by the name 
of Yorovsky, ordered the family  and 
their household servants  executed. 

Yorovsky personally dispatched 
Nicholas with a pistol shot in the head. 
The rest of the family was executed by a 
firing squad. Their bodies were then 
soaked in oil and burned. 

Above: The Jew Yakov Mikhaylovich Sverdlov, 
first president of the Russian Soviet Republic. He died in  of influenza. 







 The Executioners of the Red Terror 


and is buried in the Kremlin Wall Necrolis, in Moscow, along with other 
high-ranking Bolsheviks. In , the town of Ekaterinburg, where the Jew 
Yurovsky (who was personal friend with Sverdlov) had murdered the Tsar, 
was renamed Sverdlovsk in honor of the murder and Sverdlov. It retained 
this name until , when it was changed back to Ekaterinburg (also called 
Yekaterinburg). A statue of Sverdlov in the town, as can be seen below. 
Sverdlov's son Andrei had a long career as an officer for the Soviet security 
organs (NKVD, OGPU). His niece Ida maed the NKVD chief, the Jew 
Genrikh Yagoda. 

Ekaterinburg was renamed // Sverdlovsk ,, / in honor of the Jew, 
Yakov Sverdlov, president of the "Soviet Republic" at the time of 
the Tsar's execution. It was only renamed Ekaterinburg in , 
following the fall of the Soviet Union. 



The infamous Jewish Bolshevik murderer, Yakov Sverdlov 

On August , , the Jew, Uritzky  then head of the 
"Cheka" was assassinated. On the same day, Lenin was 
seriously wounded in an assassination attempt. The assassins 
(Fanny Kaan and Leonid Kannegisser) were both Jewish, and 
both members of the Jewish-led Social Revolutionary Party who 
had turned on the Bolsheviks for smashing up the Constituent 
Assembly. 

The Bolsheviks used these as as an excuse for instituting the 
Red Terror, which began the following day, and which in a sense 


The Secret Behind Communism  


has continued to the present. Space simy does not permit us to 
give an adequate description of what followed. The entire 
membership of the Communist Party, which in  numbered 
perhaps no more than ,, was turned o an instrument of 
murder. Its aims were two-fold; to inspire dread and horror 
among the Russian masses, and to exterminate the middle and 
upper classes i.e., the "bourgeoisie". 

Men and women were executed or imprisoned not because of 
any offense, but simy because they belonged to the "enemy 
class". And this definition eventually included every merchant, 
professional person and landowner. Not only were these "class 
enemies" exterminated, but members of their families fell viim 
as well. The Bolsheviks cleverly adopted the praice of making 
hostages of the families of those who resisted the new order. 

David Shub in his slavishly pro-Marxist book, Lenin, gives the 
following description of the Red Terror in St. Petersburg  : "Little 
time was wasted sifting evidence and classifying people rounded 
up in these night raids. Woe to him who did not disarm all 
suspicion at once. The prisoners were generally hustled to the old 
lice station not far from the Wer Palace. Here, with or 
without perfunory errogation, they were stood up against 
the courtyard wall and shot. The staccato sounds of death were 
muffled by the roar of truck motors kept going for the purse." 
This was the Red Terror in aion. 

The tragedy of all this cannot be measured by numbers alone; 
these people were the best that Russia had. They were the leader 
class. They were the priests, and lawyers, and merchants, and 
army officers, and university professors. They were the cream of 
Russian civilization. 

The total effe was much the same as it would be in any 
country. With its small middle and upper class exterminated, 
Russia's peasant and worker pulation accepted Jewish 
Bolshevism without protest. 

The Russian masses, deprived of their skesmen and leaders 
were simy incapable of counter-revolution. That was what the 
Red Terror set out to accomish. 



Chapter  

Exrting the Revolution 

A basic tenet of Marxist ideology was, and is, the promotion 
of world revolution. The Bolshevik leadership undertook in  
to further this aim by establishing the Third International, which 
convened in March of . Its presiding officer was Lenin, and 
its first president was the Jew, Zinoviev, who remained its head 
until . 

The prime objeive of the Third International was to 
establish Communist parties in the various countries of the 
world, and to lend them aid and assistance in overthrowing their 
respeive governments. Prospes of success were bright in the 
spring of . 

The Jewess Rosa Luxemburg's Revolution in Germany 

The first country to experience a Communist revolution 
outside of Russia was Germany. The German government, which 
had abetted the Bolshevik coup in  by facilitating Lenin's 
return to Russia via the sealed railway car, was in  faced with 
a revolution of its own. 

Rosa Luxemburg 

In many respes the German 
Revolution paralleled the one in 
Russia. As World War I reached 
the climaic year of , and as 
German manwere losses 
mounted, the Jew-dominated 
German Social Democratic Party 
