Poland or Latvia. 

Jews occupied the Party, Army, and Cheka command 
sitions in Odessa. Jews constituted the majority in the 
Presidium of the Petrograd City Soviet. Lazar Kaganovich 
direed the Civil War terror in Nizhny Novgorod, while Rosalia 



The Secret Behind Communism  

Salkind-Semlyachka commanded the mass executions by firing 
squads in the Kremlin. 

In  the farming areas of West Siberia were turned o a 
Vendee when Jewish grain-commissar Indenbaum through his 
confiscation campaigns caused mass starvation. 

During the wer in the steppes, rebellious farmers were 
forced to dig their own graves. The Chekists doused the naked 
bodies with water; those that tried to flee were machine-gunned. 
The peasant uprising in Tyumen entered the history books as the 
"Iskhimski Rebellion". 

By virtue of the sheer numbers liquidated and the radicalism 
and motivation of the perpetrators, the mass executions of 
Russian Orthodox priests assumed a genocidal charaer. The 
elleual elite of Eastern Christendom in Russia was 
slaughtered. 

In this destruion and extermination, Sverdlov, Dzerzhinski, 
and Trotsky were the most wereful executors. None of them 
were Russian. The executioners in Yekaterinburg and the Ural 
governments were not Russians. 

The bloody careers of Goloshekin and Beloborodov, the Party 
terrorists and Ural mafia killers, are described in Solzhenitsyn's 
work. 

On the eve of the XII Party Day , the Politburo consisted 
of three Jews and three non-Jews. The ratio in the Komsomol 
Presidium was three to four. In the XI Party Day, 'Jew Bolsheviks' 
constituted % of the Central Committee membership. Because 
of this foreign invasion and anti-Slavic trends, prominent Russian 
Leninists decided un an "anti-Jewish rebellion." 

Solzhenitsyn's book dealt not only with Russia: in the period 
-, he s out, a large percentage of Jewry in eastern 
Poland, Galicia, and in the Baltic States collaborated with the Red 
Army, Stalin's secret lice, and Bolshevism in general. He 
writes: 

"In eastern Poland, which had been incorrated in the Soviet 
Union in September , the Jews, especially the younger 
generation, welcomed the invading Red Army with frenetic 
jubilation. Whether in Poland, Bessarabia, Lithuania, or 



 Final Words from Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn 

Bukowina, the Jews were the main suprt of Soviet were. The 
newspapers rert that the Jews are enthusiastically suprting 
the establishment of Communist rule. " 

Shortly before the opening of the XIII Party Day, veteran 
Russian revolutionaries Frunze, Nogin, and Troyanovsky called 
for the expulsion of the 'Jewish leaders' from the Politburo. The 
opnents of the purge reaed quickly. In no time, Nogin died 
after an operation on his esophagus, after which Frunze went 
under the knife. 

In Solzhenitsyn's opinion, the main reason for this outbreak 
of new anti-Semitism was to be found in the hostility towards 
Russians inherent in the extreme Jewish ernationalism. 

Unlike the Jewish elligentsia who greeted the revolution of 
 with great passion, the Russian proletariat was not 
fascinated by the idea of a Russian-led ernationalism. After 
 the Jews ske consistently of "their country." 

To suprt his thesis Solzhenitsyn cites the most imrtant 
Russian, non-Jewish Bolshevik leader, Nikolai Bukharin. He was 
crucial in the early days in getting the suprt of Russians to the 
new regime. Ultimately, after courageously exsing Jewish 
tribalism in the Communist leadership, he was executed after the 
last Moscow show trial in . 

In the second half of the s a 
debate raged between the right wing 
and left wing of the Communist Party. 
"Right wing Communists" may sound 
oxymoronic to American ears, but these 
were the labels used. The right wanted 
to continue licies favoring agriculture 
and light industry, while the left wanted 
to extra as much as ssible from the 
peasants in order to build the heavy 
industries necessary for war. Tellingly, 
the sides in the debate were drawn 
largely along ethnic lines. 

Former Princeton Professor Stephen 
F. Cohen is an American Jewish academic who specializes in this 



REVOLUTION 


A Fblhcol Biogophy.  
STEPHEN? COHEN 

VtooNawIrrocutonfey ew A Jta 



The Secret Behind Communism  


period of Russian history. This is how he described the opsing 
sides in his biography of non-Jewish Bolshevik revolutionary 
Nikolai Bukharin: 

"Three other features distinguished the Politburo Right. In 
contrast to the predominantly Jewish Left and the increasingly 
Transcaucasian comexion of Stalin's group, all of its major and 
second-rank leaders were Russians.... But the seemingly probable 
was not always the case. During the ascendancy of the Politburo 
Right, for exame, non-Russian nationalities enjoyed their 
greatest freedom under Soviet rule. The second feature was 
particularly striking in contrast to Stalin: Bukharin, Rykov, and 
Tomskii had reputations as pular Bolshevik leaders." 

"[T]he Politburo Right's third litical distinion: the great 
suprt their leadership obtained in Commissariats (particularly 
Agriculture, Finance, Labor, and Trade) and other state organs 
(the Supreme Economic Council, the State Bank, and Gosan [the 
state economic anning agency]) resnsible for preparing and 

administering economic licy. 
These institutions, by nature 
sympathetic to the return to orthodox 
economic praices, and with their 
imrtance revived by NEP, were 
staffed largely by former anti- 
Bolshevik elleuals, so called 
nonparty specialists. In particular, 
both former Mensheviks working in 
the Supreme Economic Council and 
