generation of Jewish women conneed with the CP included a 
large number of college students, schoolteachers, office workers, 
and social service professionals. 

There was also a small but significant cadre of artists and 
elleuals, such as aywright Lillian Heilman and 
anthrologist Eslanda Robeson, a Sephardic Jew who wrote and 
leured on "African affairs." 

Jewish Communists did much of their organizing among 
Jews, often through multiethnic movements, Jewish fraternal 
networks, coalitions of women's clubs, and the Yidischer Kultur 
Farband, founded in . 

This work refleed the ethnic consciousness among Jewish 
Communists and heightened their attention to the party's 
sition on Jewish issues. For exame, both the older Yiddishists 
and the younger, Americanized generation were especially proud 
of the Soviet Union's laws against anti-Semitism. 

Thousands of Communist Jews Derted from the U.S. 

There were so many Jewish immigrants from eastern Europe 
and Russia in the party that U.S. Attorney General A. Mitchell 
Palmer, aing under the Sedition A of , began arresting 
these thousands of foreign-born party members and derting 
them. The Communist Party was forced underground and took 
to the use of pseudonyms and secret meetings in an effort to 
evade the authorities. 

The CPA re-emerged in  using the legal front 
organization called the "Workers Party of America." An element 
of the party, however, remained permanently underground and 
came to be known as the "CPUSA secret apparatus." 

Jay Lovestone/Liebstein 

Faions quickly emerged once again, with the most 
prominent being led by the Jew Jay Lovestone (real name Jacob 
Liebstein), a Lithuanian Jew. 

In , Lovestone became editor of the Communist Party 
newspaper. The Communist, and sat on the editorial board of The 



 The U.S. Communist Party 


Liberator, the arts and letters publication of the Workers Party of 
America. 

In , Lovestone/Liebstein became the party's national 
secretary. He was eventually forced out of the Communist party 
in another faional dispute, and died in . 



The Jew Jay Liebstein (used the name Lovestone), just one of the thousands 
of Jews involved in the early U.S. Communist party. 


Chapter  

A Communist Defeor 
in America Spills the Beans 

ONE of the major defeors from the Communist Party USA 
was the former editor of the Daily Worker and Politburo member 

Louis Budenz. Of Hungarian and Irish 
origin, Budenz defeed after the defeat 
of fascism. Budenz was a star witness 
on the organization and attitude of the 
Communist Party USA as well as its 
underground organization (the secret 
apparatus) and the illicit funding that it 
received from the USSR through the 
medium of the Comern to enable its 
attempted conquest of North America. 
Budenz published four books on the 
basis of his Communist experiences: This is My Story;  Men 
without Faces: The Communist Conspiracy in the li.S.A.   ; Tire Cry is 
Peacc }  ; and The Techniques of Communism *  . 

It is from these works that the following list of Jewish 
Communist aivists from the early years of the Communist 
Party of America is drawn: 

. Solomon Adler: Soviet agent in the US Treasury 
Department (Budenz, Techniques, p. ).  

. Israel Amter: Communist leader (Budenz, Story, p. )  ; 
In charge of 'national groups'; i.e. 'civil rights', pro-negro and 
pro-Jewish, propaganda and organization (Budenz, Story, p. 
);  Leader of the Communist Party USA in New York State 
(Budenz, Men, p. ). 

. John Arnold: Chief Editor of the Communist Party USA's 
Yiddish newspaper: Daily Freiheit (Budenz, Cry, p. ).  

. Sol Auerbach (better known as James Allen): Comern 
representative in the Philippines (Budenz, Cry, p. );  Foreign 
Affairs editor of the Sunday edition of the Daily Worker (Budenz, 



 A Communist Defeor Spills the Beans 


Story, p. ; Cry, p. );  Condued espionage against the US 
military (Budenz, Story., p. ).  

. Rudy Baker (nee Rudolph Blum): Writer for the New 
Masses (Budenz, Men, p. );  Caed out espionage aivities 
against US and Canadian governments (Budenz, Men, p. ) .  

. Leonard Berkowitz: Communist Hollywood Film Script 
Writer (Budenz, Cry, p. );  Soviet agent in US Office of War 
Information (Budenz, Cry, p. ; Techniques, p. ).  

. Lionel Berman: Writer for the Daily Worker (Budenz, Men, 
p. ; Techniques, pp. -).  

. Alexander Bittelman: Long-time Communist leader and 
representative of the Comern in North America (Budenz, Men, 
pp. ; );  Chief Theoretician of the Communist Party USA 
(Budenz, Cry, p. ; Techniques, p. ) .  

. Alfred Blumberg: Former Professor at Johns Hopkins 
University (Budenz, Cry, p. );  Communist leader in 
Washington D.C. (Budenz, Men, pp. ; )  and Maryland 
areas (Budenz, Cry, p. ).  

. David Bohm: Soviet agent inside the United States' atomic 
program (Budenz, Cry, p.  ).  

. Joseph Brodsky: Communist Party USA's legal advisor 
and lawyer (Budenz, Men, pp. ; );  Facilitated the 
Comern's funding of the Communist Party USA (Budenz, 
Men, p. ).  

. Boris Bykov: Head of the GRU (Soviet Military 
Intelligence) in North America (till ) (Budenz, Cry, p. ).  

. Esther Cantor: Writer for the Daily Worker (Budenz, Cry, p. 
); In charge of distributing Communist propaganda to negroes; 
and inciting them against the government, in the US (Budenz, 
Cry, p. ).  

