
"Whole pulation strata were eliminated: Independent 
farmers, ethnic minorities, members of the bourgeoisie, senior 
officers, elleuals, artists, labor movement aivists. 


Onetlopinionnijn 



Stalin’s Jews 

^ ' j We mustn't forget that some of greatest murderers 
of modem times were Jewish 

PvChrwj    H / Hnti Ccrcn 

Here's a particularly forlorn historical dale Almost SO yeas 
ago. between the th and lh of December . in the 
midst of the Bolshevik revolution and cmI war. Lenin signed a 
decree catting for the establishment rf The All-Russian 
Extraordinary Commission for Combating Counter-Revolution 
nd Sabotage, also known S Cheka. 

Within a short period o! time. Cheka became the largest and 



The Secret Behind Communism  

"opsition members" who were defined cometely randomly, 
and countless members of the Communist party itself. 

"In his new, highly praised book The War of the World, 
Historian Niall Ferguson writes that no revolution in the history 
of mankind devoured its children with the same unrestrained 
appetite as did the Soviet revolution. In his book on the Stalinist 
purges, Tel Aviv University's Dr. Igal Halfin writes that Stalinist 
violence was unique in that it was direed ernally. 

"Lenin, Stalin, and their successors could not have caed out 
their deeds without wide-scale cooperation of disciined 'terror 
officials/ cruel errogators, snitches, executioners, guards, 
judges, perverts, and many bleeding hearts who were members of 
the progressive Western Left and were deceived by the Soviet 
regime of horror and even provided it with a kosher certificate. 

"And us, the Jews? An Israeli student finishes high school 
without ever hearing the name Genrikh Yagoda, the greatest 
Jewish murderer of the th Century, the GPU's deputy 
commander and the founder and commander of the NKVD. 

"Yagoda diligently imemented Stalin's colleivization 
orders and is resnsible for the deaths of at least  million 
people. 

"His Jewish deputies established and managed the Gulag 
system. 

The Jew Genrikh Yagoda, direor 
of the NKVD, the Soviet Union's Stalin- 
era security and elligence agency. 

After Stalin no longer viewed him 
favorably, Yagoda was demoted and 
executed, and was reaced as chief 
hangman in  by Yezhov, the 
"bloodthirsty dwarf." 

"Yezhov was not Jewish but was 
blessed with an aive Jewish wife. In 
his book Stalin: Court of the Red Star, Jewish historian Debag 
Montefiore writes that during the darkest period of terror, when 
the Communist killing machine worked in full force, Stalin was 
surrounded by beautiful, young Jewish women. 

"Stalin's close associates and loyalists included member of 
the Central Committee and Politburo Lazar Kaganovich. 
Montefiore charaerizes him as the "first Stalinist" and adds that 
those starving to death in Ukraine, an unparalleled tragedy in the 
history of human kind, did not move Kaganovich. 



 The Greatest Mass Murderers in all History 



"Many Jews sold their soul to the devil of the Communist 
revolution and have blood on their hands for eternity. We'll 
mention just one more: Leonid Reichman, head of the NKVD's 
special department and the organization's chief errogator, who 
was a particularly cruel sadist." 


Yagoda (center) inspeing the construion of the 
Moscow-Volga canal, built by slave labor from the Gulags. 

"In , according to published statistics, . percent of those 
holding the most senior sts in the Soviet security apparatuses 
were of Jewish origin. Even if we deny it, we cannot escape the 
Jewishness of 'our hangmen/ who served the Red Terror with 
loyalty and dedication from its establishment. After all, others 
will always remind us of their origin. "  



The Secret Behind Communism  


The Gulags: Jewish-Run Concentration Camps 

As mentioned above, the infamous Soviet Gulags were under 
the dire control of the Jew Yagoda. He was not the only such 
Jew involved in the running of these camps, in which millions 
died. In fa Solzhenitsyn and many Jewish writers noted this. 

The most famous revelation about the Jewish nature of the 
Gulags was that of famous dissident Alexander Solzhenitsyn. 
Speaking from personal experience as a Gulag prisoner, 
Solzhenitsyn gave a candid account of Jews in charge of the 
Soviet prison camps in his book. Two Hundred Years Together. 

According to his observations, Jews made up a clear 
prenderance in the Gulag administration and in the early 
Bolshevik government, saying that of the  ministers in the first 
Soviet government, three were Russian, one Georgian, 
one Armenian and  were Jews. In addition, he s out, from 
personal experience once again, that "two thirds of the Kiev 
Cheka" (secret lice) were Jews. 

In , another book appeared in Germany called Jewish- 
Run Concentration Camps in the Soviet Union,  which revealed that 

Communist Jews were the 
commandants of  out of the  
main Gulags. 

Another prominent Jewish 
writer, Yuri Slezkine in his 
Judeocentric book, The Jewish 
Century, agrees with Leonard 
Schapiro's comment that "anyone 
who had the misfortune to fall o 
the hands of the Cheka stood a very 
good chance of finding himself 
confronted with and ssibly shot 
by a Jewish investigator" (p. ) 
During the s the secret lice, then known as the NKVD, 
"was one of the most Jewish of all Soviet institutions" (p. ).i 
