The  revolution, like that of , caught the top leaders 
of the party unprepared. Lenin and Martov were in Switzerland, 
and Trotsky was eking out an existence in New York's East Side. 

Shortly after the March revolution, the German government 
arranged to ship Lenin, Martov, Radek, and  members of the 
party across Germany to Russia. The German strategy seemed to 
be based on the assumption which later proved corre that 
the Communists would work to sabotage the Russian war effort, 
now being prosecuted by the Provisional Government. 

Perhaps the Lenin group had some such agreement with the 
Germans, no one knows. But one thing is certain:  hours after 
the Bolsheviks came to were, Trotsky began negotiations for an 
armistice. But that story comes later. 

On April rd, just  days after the provisional government 
had been formed, Lenin and his party aved in St. Petersburg. 
Within  months he and his faion would be the supreme 
diators of all Russia. 



Chapter  

The Ground is Prepared 

A description of the March Revolution which overthrew the 
Tsar has already been presented, and the process by which the 
establishment of the two governing bodies which came o 
existence on March th. They were named the Provisional 
Government and the St. Petersburg Soviet. 

The St. Petersburg Soviet, although it controlled the mob, was 
reluant to assume the resnsibility of governing  at least in 
the beginning. The Soviet was originally organized by second- 
string leaders who were quite capable of sting up trouble, but 
who had little capacity for leading a revolutionary government. 
Furthermore, it was not clear in the early days of the revolution 
as to what the final outcome would be. 

St. Petersburg was, after all, only one city in the empire, and 
the attitude of the country as a whole, and of the soldiers at the 
front, was unknown. For this reason the Soviet preferred that the 
Provisional Government which had some semblance of 
legitimacy  should temrarily rule. 



The Petersburg Soviet, formed on March th was dominated by the 
Mensheviks under the leadership of the Jews Lieber, Dan and Martov. Later 
(in Oober) the Bolsheviks gained control when Trotsky became president 
and they immediately precipitated the Oober Revolution. 



The Secret Behind Communism  


The Provisional Government 

The Provisional Government was not a revolutionary body. 
Of its  members, only one, Kerensky, was a "Socialist." The 
others were typical upper-middle class members of the Duma, 
with ssibly mild leanings to the left. 

Head of the Provisional Government was Prince Lvov, whose 
reputation as a liberal may have qualified him for that sition 
more than some of the others. This  man government had 
sprung o being simy because no other semblance of a 
government existed in St. Petersburg on March th  it did not 

in any way participate in the 
revolution. 

In the months following the 
overthrow of the Tsar, however, its 
were grew considerably, so that by 
July when an abortive Bolshevik 
uprising occurred, the Provisional 
Government was able to quell the 
affair and arrest or force o hiding 
the Bolshevik leaders. 

The Provisional Government 
undertook to continue the war 
against Germany. The great mass of 
people were, of course, patriotic 
Russians, and Germany was looked 
on as a dangerous threat to Russian 
sovereignty. The Provisional 
Government, during its entire tenure, 
was primarily occupied with the 
prosecution of the war. 

The Provisional Government 
took two steps, however, which were to profoundly affe the 
revolution. The first, and most fateful, was the decision to permit 
the return of all exiled litical prisoners from Siberia and 
abroad. By doing so it sealed the fate of Russia. 

Here is the way one American writer, Edward Alsworth Ross, 
has described it  : "One of the first as of the Provisional 



The Jew Karl Radek, born 
Karol Sobelsohn, took part in 
the failed  revolution in 
Poland, and then moved to 
Germany and finally to the 
Soviet Union. After the 
Oober Revolution, Radek 
became Vice-Commissar for 
Foreign Affairs. 



 The Ground is Prepared 


government, however, is to bring back to Russia the litical 
viims of the autocracy. From Siberia about eighty thousand are 
brought out. 

From Switzerland, France, Scandinavia, the United States, 
even from Argentina and other remote countries, come perhaps 
ten thousand who have been refugees from the tsar's vengeance. 
In all ninety thousand at least, virtually all of them of socialist 
sympathies, stream o European Russia in late April, May, 
June, and July. Honored by a grateful people for their voluntary 
sacrifices and sufferings they quickly rise to a commanding 
influence in the local soviets and carry them irresistibly toward 
the litical left." 

These ninety thousand exiles constituted the heart of the 
approaching Bolshevik revolution. They were almost to the last 
man professional revolutionaries, and with few exceptions they 
were Jewish. 

Stalin, Sverdlov, and Zinoviev were among the exiles who 
returned from Siberia. Lenin, Martov, Radek, and Kamenev as 
we have seen returned from Switzerland. Trotsky returned, 
with hundreds of his Yiddish brethren, from New York's East 
Side. 


The Coming Genocide of the Russian Gentile Elite 

Let us take another quotation from the starry-eyed Edward 
