Hollywood and the media 
have done nothing to 
instill any concern for 
them, in contrast to their 
unending dirge of "The 
"Holocaust. " 

In the Hollywood 
media of movies and 
television, in broadcasting 
and major publishing, 
every adult has absorbed 
thousands of hours of 
what is called "The 
Holocaust." It is the 
trademarked, jealous god 
which demands no other 
gods before it. 

When I met Aleksandr 
Solzhenitsyn (-), 
he had just published his 
last work, called Two 
Hundred Years Together 
(). It was about the Jewish experience in Russia, and 
contained three chapters devoted to discussing the Jewish role in 
the revolutionary genocide and secret lice purges of Soviet 
Russia after the Bolshevik Revolution of Oober . 

I waited for ten years in vain for the book to be published in 
English. It remains unpublished to this day. Of course. The secret 
behind Communism must remain a secret to most of the public. 

Solzhenitsyn knew that he would be condemned for daring to 
 out the secret, but he went ahead nonetheless, telling me 
that it was his duty to tell the truth so that the world would 
know. He paid the price. Although his book was a runaway 



This little girl was starved to death 

IN THE INTENTIONAL ETHNIC GENOCIDE OF 

the Ukrainian Peoe... 

YOU DON’T KNOW HER NAME. 
YOU DON'T KNOW HER STORY. 

The same Hollywood that brings 
you the "Holocaust" almost 

EVERY DAY OF YOUR LIFE - SHOWS 
YOU NOTHING ABOUT THE LARGEST 
GENOCIDE IN THE 
HISTORY OF MANKIND. 

Why? 



The Secret Behind Communism  


bestseller in Russia, this last imrtant book by the Nobel 
Prize-winning author has never been published in English. So the 
largest audience in the world has been denied the truth. The 
controlled media had to mute the great man's voice. 

However, this book, The Secret Behind Communism will 
somewhat remedy that suppression, for it contains many 
imrtant and relevant quotations from Two Hundred Years 
Together , including many of the revealing quotes that were the 
reason why the book was not published in English. 

It wasn't the first time that Solzhenitsyn had raised the 
subje of the Jewish ethnic driving force behind Communism 
and its slaughters. In his famous The Gulag Archipelago books, in 

which he described his imprisonment by 
the Soviets, he ed out that almost all 
the commanders of the Gulag camps were 
Jews, by famously including piures 
(shown on the left) of six Jewish Chekist 
Gulag bosses of the s. 

In Two Hundred Years Together , 
Solzhenitsyn wrote that he had taken their 
piures from an official Soviet-era 
publication that boasted about the Gulags. 

Despite Solzhenitsyn's efforts  and 
those of many others, including Frank 
Britton (some of his excellent work and 
research is included in this volume), the truth about the Jewish 
supremacist role in the creation, execution and maenance of 
world Communism, and the "Russian" Revolution in particular, 
remains little-known. The reason for this is sime: The Jewish 
supremacist tribalists who influence major media in the West 
make sure that almost nothing is said about the fa that Jews, 
along with organized Jewish suprt worldwide, not only 
created Communism, but were the leaders who brought it o 
such grim reality. They were at the nexus of the greatest 
slaughter and mass human suffering in history. 

This is the core of the secret behind Communism, exsed 
and overwhelmingly documented in this book. 




 Introduion 

The Paramount Jewish Role 
in Communism: No Secret in Israeli Media 

Ironically, Jewish historians are quite happy to discuss the 
leading Jewish role among themselves  although any Gentile 
who dares to raise the topic is immediately decried as an "anti- 
Semite." The Jewish role is written about only in the Jewish press. 

A good exame came with the article that appeared in the 
pular Israeli online Jewish Zionist news source, YnetNeios.com. 

Oaet|opinionmy 


Sever Plocker 


Stalin's Jews 

We mustn't forget that some of greatest murderers 
of modem times were Jewish 

Published: ,., :S / Israel Opinion 

Here's a particularly forlorn historical date: Almost  years 
ago, between the th and th of December , in the 
midst of the Bolshevik revolution and civil war, Lenin signed a 
decree calling for the establishment of The All-Russian 
Extraordinary Commission for Combating Counter-Revolution 
and Sabotage, also known as Cheka. 

Within a short period of time, Cheka became the largest and 

Jewish historians and publications have no reluance to  out in 
Jewish publications, in Israel and to Jewish readers around the world, 
the dominant role of Jews in the Bolshevik revolution in Russia. 

