
Leo Strauss - the ardent 
Communist followere of Trotsky 
who was the ideological 
founder of neoconservatism. 



 The Communist Origins of NeoConservatism 

early time the main theme of my refleions has been what is 

called the 'Jewish 'Question'."  

The Iraq War of : A Jewish Neocon Conspiracy 

The neocon's greatest coup to date has been the  Iraq 
war. The Jewish neocons in the Bush administration who 
orchestrated that event show just how clearly the American 
government has fallen under the control of the Jewish elite. 

Leading government 
personalities included 
Depu ty Secretary of 
Defense Paul 

Wolfowitz; Defense 
Policy Board Advisory 
Committee Chairman 
Richard Perle; Under 
Secretary of Defense for 
The two Jewish former Trotskyites who Policy Douglas Feith; 
orchestrated the catastrophic Iraq War for Assistant to the Vice 
Israel's , not America's strategic erests President for National 
Security Affairs and Chief of Staff to the Vice President of the 
United States Lewis "Scooter" Libby; Special Assistant to the 
President and Senior Direor on the National Security 
Council for Near East and North African Affairs and Deputy 
National Security Advisor for Global Democracy Strategy Elliott 
Abrams; Middle East Adviser to the US Vice President and 
special assistant to John Bolton at the State Department David 
Wurmser; Undersecretary of State for arms control and 
ernational security John Bolton; and man}' others. All of these 
sitions were instrumental in creating the tissue of lies about 
Iraqi "weans of mass destruion" and bogus links to the 
attacks of September , , which were used as justifications 
for the war. 

Perle and Wursmer were also the authors of the strategy 
paper, A Clean Break: A New Strategy for Securing the 
Realm (commonly known as the "Clean Break" rert), a licy 
document that was prepared in  for the Israeli government 
which advocated a war against Iraq to prote Israel  this 




The Secret Behind Communism  


rert's bluepr was used, almost to the letter, by the neocons 
in generating the war against Saddam Hussein. 

The effes which these Trotskyite-origin "neocons" have had 

on America  and indeed the world, 
through their criminal wars in the 
Middle East on behalf of the Zionist 
state  was summed up by famous 
Jewish journalist Carl Bernstein, in 
. 

Bernstein is perhaps the most 
respeed and honored journalist in 
the United States. He was one of 
two rerters resnsible for 
unearthing the Nixon Watergate 
scandal in . Speaking on NBC 
television's "Morning Jo" program,  Bernstein stated exicitly 
that Jewish neocons were behind the Iraq war. 

Bernstein's exa words were: 



"This was an insane war that brought us low economically, 
morally. We went to war against a guy who had absolutely 
nothing to do with /. 

"It was a total pretext! It's inexicable and there you go to 
Cheney, there you go to Bush, there you go to the Jewish neo-cons 
who wanted to remake the world. Maybe I can say that because 
I'm Jewish. ..." 


Carl Bernstein on Morning Joe 


"There you go, 
there you go to the M ^ 
Jewish neo-cons M p 
who wanted to ^ 
remake the world." 

"Maybe I can say that 
because I’m Jewish." 


It is good to know 
that there are indeed 
some honest Jews who 
dare to tell the truth 
about the real forces 
behind America's recent 
wars. However, he has 
not yet dared to speak 
about the collaboration 
of the Jewish dominated media with the Jewish neocons in hiding 
the Jewish origins of Communism and their continued 
domination of the Marxist left and Zionist right. 





Chapter  

The Communist Movement in Britain 


THE Communist Party of Great Britain (CPGB) was founded 
in  and officially affiliated with the Communist ernational 
Comern. It was only dissolved in  with the collapse of 
the Soviet Union. Several ser groups have emerged in its 
wake. 

British Jews "Disprortionately Represented 
in Communist Parties" Says Jewish Historian 



Monty Goldman, veteran Communist Jew leader in London who was the 
British Communist party's candidate for Mayor in . 

According to the book by Jewish author Jonathan Prankel, 
Studies in Contemrary Jezury , Volume XX: Dark Times , Dire 
Decisions: Jews and Communism [Jonathan Frankel, (), Oxford 
University Press]: "Throughout the era of Communism, Jews 
were both influential and disprortionately represented in 
Communist parties. The Communist Party of Great Britain (CP) 
