Board of Economic Warfare; Assistant Administrator, Foreign 
Economic Administration. 



Silvermaster. 



The Secret Behind Communism  


. Lauchlin Cue, Administrative Assistant to President 
Roosevelt; Deputy Administrator of Foreign Economic 
Administration; Special Representative to China. 

. Bela Gold, Assistant Head of Program Surveys, Bureau of 
Agricultural Economics, United States Department of 
Agriculture; Senate Subcommittee on War Mobilization; Office of 
Economic Programs in Foreign Economic Administration. 

. Sonia Steinman Gold, Division of Monetary Research U.S. 
Treasury Department; U.S. House of Representatives Sele 
Committee on Interstate Migration; U.S. Bureau of Emoyment 
Security. 

. Irving Kaan, Foreign Funds Control and Division of 
Monetary Research, United States Department of the Treasury 
Foreign Economic Administration; chief advisor to the Military 
Government of Germany. 

. George Silverman, civilian Chief Produion Specialist, 
Material Division, Army Air Force Air Staff, War Department, 
Pentagon. 

. William Henry Taylor, Assistant Direor of the Middle 
East Division of Monetary Research, United States Department of 
Treasury. 

. William "Lud" Ullman, 

delegate to United Nations Charter 
meeting and Bretton Woods 
conference; Division of Monetary 
Research, Department of Treasury; 
Material and Services Division, Air 
Corps Headquarters, Pentagon. 

. Harry Dexter White 
(Weiss), Assistant Secretary of the 
Treasury; Head of the International 
Monetary Fund. 

The Perlo Group 

The Perlo group is the name 
given to a group of spies that 



Perlo. 



 Spies, Spies and more Spies in America 

provided information which was given to Soviet elligence 
agencies during World War II. It had sources on the War 
Produion Board, the Senate La Follette Subcommittee on Civil 
Liberties; and in the United States Department of Treasury. 

The entire group was exsed to the FBI by the defeion of 
the Gentile Communist Elizabeth Bentley. 

The group was named after the New York-born Jew Vior 
Perlo, a Marxist economist, government funionary, and a 
longtime member of the governing National Committee of 
the Communist Party USA. All but two of the Perlo Group were 
Jews: 

. Vior Perlo, Chief of the Aviation Seion of the War 
Produion Board; head of branch in Research Seion, Office of 
Price Administration Department of Commerce; Division of 
Monetary Research Department of Treasury; Brookings 
Institution. 

. Edward Fitzgerald, War Produion Board. 

. Harold Glasser, Deputy Direor, Division of Monetary 
Research, United States Department of the Treasury; United 
Nations Relief and Rehabilitation Administration; War 
Produion Board; Advisor on North African Affairs Committee; 
United States Treasury Representative to the Allied High 
Commission in Italy. 

. Charles Kramer, Senate Subcommittee on War 
Mobilization; Office of Price Administration; National Labor 
Relations Board; Senate Subcommittee on Wartime Health and 
Education; Agricultural Adjustment Administration; Senate 
Subcommittee on Civil Liberties; Senate Labor and Public 
Welfare Committee; Democratic National Committee. 

. Harry Magdoff, Statistical Division of War Produion 
Board and Office of Emergency Management; Bureau of Research 
and Statistics, WTB; Tools Division, War Produion Board; 
Bureau of Foreign and Domestic Commerce, United States 
Department of Commerce. 

. Allen Rosenberg, Board of Economic Warfare; Chief of the 
Economic Institution Staff, Foreign Economic Administration; 
Senate Subcommittee on Civil Liberties; Senate Committee on 



The Secret Behind Communism  


Education and Labor; Railroad Retirement Board; Counsel to the 
Secretary of the National Labor Relations Board. 

. Donald Wheeler, Office of Strategic Services Research and 
Analysis division. 

The Smith A Trials 

The Smith A trials of Communist Party leaders were a series 
of trials held from  to  in which leaders of the CPUSA 
were accused of violating the Smith A, a  statute that set 
penalties for advocating the violent overthrow of the 
government. The prosecution argued that the CPUSA's licies 
promoted violent revolution. 

The  prosecution followed the conviion of the "Eugene 
Dennis crew" of , and resulted in the bringing to trial of a 
"second-string litburo" scheduled to assume control of the 
party apparatus. This new litburo consisted of  members,  
of whom were Jewish. 

On June , , the Justice Department indied the entire 
group for conspiracy against the United States government. Most 
of the Jews were convied, but a number had their conviions 
squashed after lengthy appeals which resulted in a Supreme 
Court decision appeals and a ruling that membership of the 
Communist Party was not illegal. 

. Israel Amter, , a longtime party stalwart. He organized 

the "Friends of the Soviet Union in 
the U.S.", a front organization 
which numbers Albert Einstein 
