Although the Polish government suppressed the uprising, it 
flared up again in . As a result, non-Jewish Communists 
forced a large number of leading Jewish Communists to resign, 
as described in the Kracow Tygodnik Powszechnw of March , 
: 



The Secret Behind Communism  


"Between the second half of  and that of ,  officers 
of Jewish origin were dismissed from the army. They were also 
ousted from the Communist party ... 

"In Warsaw,  persons were removed from senior official 
sitions.  of them from the ministries and central agencies.  
from academic sts and  from the press and cultural 
institutions. ... 

"Six ministers and vice-ministers were removed from office, 
 direors and department heads ... about  professors and 
leurers ... by mid- over , Jews emigrated from 

Poland." 

Poland's Jewish bureaucracy was perhaps the largest of any 
Iron Curtain country outside of Russia proper. 

Hanah Rabinsohn, better 
known as Ana Pauker. 

Romania 

Anna Pauker (born 
Hannah Rabinsohn) 
was a Romanian 
Communist leader and 
served as the country's 
foreign minister in the 
late s and early 
s. She was the 
unofficial leader of the 
Romanian Communist 
Party after World War 
II. 

She was born in 
Bucharest of orthodox 
Jewish parents. Her 
father (who was a 
Kosher butcher) and a 
brother resided in 
Israel. When the Red Army entered Romania in , Pauker 
became a member of the stwar* government and in November 
, was aped Foreign Minister. But it was her sition in 




 Iron Curtain Diators 


the Communist Party leadership that was paramount: As a 
member of the -person Secretariat of the Central Committee and 
formally Number Two in the leadership, Pauker was widely 
believed to have been the aual leader of the Romanian 
Communists in all but name during the immediate stwar 
period. 

In , Time magazine featured her rtrait on its cover and 
described her as "the most wereful woman alive". 

Infamous as the "Iron Lady" of Romanian Communist 
litics, she was unreservedly Stalinist and served as Moscow's 
primary agent in Romania. Like so many Stalinists, once her idol 
had fallen from grace, she was sidelined and died in . 

Yugoslavia 



The only non-Jewish diator behind the Iron Curtain was 
Marshal Tito of Yugoslavia, which fa probably exains his later 

revolt against orthodox 
Communist rule from the Kremlin. 


But Tito was tutored by the 
Jew, Mosa Pijade. Says John 
Gunther of Pijade: "He is Tito's 
mentor ... Whatever ideological 
struure Tito may have, he got 
from this shrewd old man." 


Czechoslovakia 


The secretary-general of the 
Communist party in 

Czechoslovakia, whom John 
Gunther identified as a Jew 
diator, was Rudolph Slansky. 
Holding the st of the party's 
General Secretary after World War 
II, he was one of the leading creators and organizers of 
Communist rule in Czechoslovakia. After the leader of 
Yugoslavia, Josip Tito, broke away from the domination of the 
Soviet leader, Joseph Stalin instigated a wave of "purges" of the 


Markus Wolf, 
photographed in . 



The Secret Behind Communism  


respeive Communist Party leaderships, to prevent more 
defeions from among the Soviet Union's Central European 
"satellite" countries. 

In November  Sl&nsky and  other Communist Party 
funionaries (of who  were Jews) were arrested on charges of 
fomenting "Trotskyite-Titoist-Zionist aivities in the service of 
American imperialism." Slansky was found guilty and hanged 
in Pankrac Prison in . 

East Germany 

That part of Germany under Soviet rule at the end of the 
Second World War was reconstituted o a one-party state called 
the "German Democratic Republic" under Communist rule. 

Once again, Jews ayed a leading role in creating that state's 
infrastruure, but the most prominent Jew of all was Markus 
Wolf, who was head of the General Intelligence Administration 
(Hauptverwaltung Aufklarung), the foreign elligence division 
of East Germany's Ministry for State Security (MfS, commonly 
known as the Stasi). He was the MfS's number two for  years, 
which spanned most of the Cold War. The Stasi set up a spy 
apparatus, both domestically and foreign, to rival that of the 
KGB, and were known to be as brutal, if not more so. 

Shortly before German reunification Wolf fled Germany and 
sought litical asylum in Russia. It was denied, and when he 
