

 Atomic Treason 


Scientist X 

There have been other instances of Jewish treason in the US 
atomic energy program. Witness the case of the much publicized 
"Scientist X" who from  on passed vital atomic information 
to Soviet spy and Communist Party aivist "Steve Nelson." 

"Scientist X" proved to be a Jew by the name of Joseph W. 
Weinberg of the University of Minnesota. This fa was 
discovered when the Federal Bureau of Investigation had aced 
a listening device in Nelson's residence in Oober  and 
overheard a man referred to as "Joe", whom the FBI suspeed of 
being Joe Weinberg, describing to Nelson the significance and 
technical outlines of the secret nuclear research done at Berkeley. 
Future spying for the Soviet Union was imied. 

This news led the United States Government to push 
Weinberg, and fellow Jewish Communist David Bohm out of the 
program. 

"Steve Nelson" was not the agent's real name: he was a 
Belgrade-born Jew by the name of Stjepan Mesaros. His first 
arrest was for fraudulently having entered America by using the 
passrt of one Joseph Fleishinger, a cousin. In , by now 
using the Americanized name "Steve Nelson," he joined the 
youth seion of the American Communist Party, the Young 
Workers League. 

He went on to join the adult Workers (Communist) Party in 
. He met his wife, the Jewess Margaret Yaeger in the 
Pittsburgh office of the party where she worked as a typist. In 
, the Nelsons moved to New York City where Mesaros 
studied Marxism at the Jewish-run New York Workers 
School and then took full-time emoyment with the Communist 
Party. 

Mesaros and his wife were sent to Moscow in , he visited 
the International Lenin School for two years. He was a courier for 
the Communist International (Comern), delivering documents 
and funds to Germany, Switzerland and China. They returned to 
the United States in , but Mesaros then went to Spain to fight 
in the Abraham Lincoln Brigade on the side of the Communists. 



The Secret Behind Communism  


In August , after a raid on the Pittsburgh Party 
Headquarters, Mesaros and two local party leaders were arrested 
and charged under the  Pennsylvania Sedition A for 
attempting to overthrow the state and federal government. 

Mesaros initially received a -year prison sentence, $, 
in fines and $, in prosecution costs. He was jailed in 
Pittsburgh for seven months and then released on bail pending 

his appeal. In  he and five 
others were indied under the 
Federal Smith A. This time the 
fine was  years and $,. All six 
were granted bail. In  in 
Pennsylvania v. Nelson, the United 
States Supreme Court overturned 
the Pennsylvania Sedition A, 
saying that the Federal Smith A 
superseded this and all similar 
state laws. By  the government 
dropped all charges against the defendants and Mesaros died in 
. 

Theodore Hall-Holtzberg and the Manhattan Proje Spy Ring 

The damage inflied on America's nuclear secrets by the 
Rosenberg spy ring was significant. However, this paled in 
comparison to the pro-Communist treason committed by New 
York born-Jew Theodore Alvin Holtzberg (who changed his 
name to Theodore Hall). 

After graduating from Harvard University at the age of , 
Holtzberg was hired to work on the secret U.S. atom bomb 
program, the Manhattan Proje, where he was the youngest 
scientist at the Los Alamos base. While on a vacation in his 
hometown. New York, he entered the Soviet consulate and 
volunteered to pass information on the Manhattan Proje to the 
Soviet government. The Soviets, were long accustomed to 
recruiting Jews for espionage work in the West. They made 
Holtzberg an offer, and soon he was passing vast quantities of 
information to the Soviet Union at the height of World War Two. 



Hall-Holtzberg's photo-ID 


from Los Alamos. 



 Atomic Treason 

The information which Holtzberg passed on was of an 
extremely high level, and it is imssible that someone of his 
junior status could have had access to it. The only way he could 
have acquired the documents was if someone higher up was 
passing them to him. The Jew Oppenheimer was, as mentioned 
above, long suspeed of being the senior scientist involved, 
although this has never been proven. 

The full details of Holtzberg' s treason was uncovered by 
means of a secret U.S. and U.K. elligence proje known as 
"Venona" which involved cryptanalysis of messages sent 
by elligence agencies of the Soviet Union. It was not until  
that Venona proje materials were released by the US 
government and the full extent of Holtzberg' s treason became 
public knowledge. 

According to the Venona decrypts, Holtzberg handed a 
detailed sketch of the "Fat Man" atomic bomb (used to bomb 
Japan) to a Soviet agent in New York, who transmitted the 
information to the NKVD in Moscow using a one-time 
pad cipher. Holtzberg' s code-name was ML AD, a Slavic root 
meaning "young". 

Until the release of the Venona decrypts, nearly all of the 
espionage regarding the Los Alamos nuclear weans program 
was attributed to Klaus Fuchs. In reality, Holtzberg was 
questioned by the Federal Bureau of Investigation in March  
but wasn't charged. Alan H. Belmont, the number-three man in 
the FBI, decided that information coming out of the Venona 
proje would be inadmissible in court, as hearsay evidence, and 
so its value in the case was not worth compromising the 
program. 

Holtzberg was thus never prosecuted, and died in Britain in 
 after confessing that he had had conta with the Soviets 
during his Manhattan Proje time. 



Chapter  

The Tribal Shift: Spying Now for Israel 

As Russians began the long process of taking back their 
