bills", and control of American foreign licy (which makes 
America fight Israel's wars such as those in Iraq and their 
anned war against Iran), Jews and Jewish organizations have 
ayed a leading role behind the scenes  and sometimes at the 
front of them as well. 

In addition they have driven an entertainment and pr 
media that has demonized European Americans. It has 
encouraged non-Europeans to dire their anger at Europeans, 
and encouraged people of European descent to hate themselves. 

When one understands Jewish racism and tribalism, the 
rationale for such strategies becomes obvious. In order for Jewish 
extremists to take over America they had to weaken the 
American majority, divide it, and through mass immigration 
overwhelm it. 

Earl Raab, of the extremely Zionist Perlmutter Institute which 
is associated with the ADL, celebrates the coming minority status 



The Secret Behind Communism  


of European Americans in America. Once that has happened, he 
looks forward to "constitutional constras" (restriion of 
freedom of speech): 

The Census Bureau has just rerted that about half of the 
American pulation will soon be non-white or non-European. 
And they will all be American citizens. We have tipped beyond 
the  where a Nazi-Aryan party will be able to prevail in this 
country. 

We have been nourishing the American 
climate of opsition to ethnic bigotry for 
about half a century. That climate has not yet 
been perfeed, but the heterogeneous nature 
of our pulation tends to make it 
irreversible and makes our constitutional 
constras against bigotry more praical 
than ever.  

As Raab says, Zionist Jewish aivists who 
have suprted an exclusively Jewish-run 
national state have been nourishing 
massive nontraditional immigration o 
America, and they look forward to the time 
when the voting demographics of the United States refle that 
transformation. 

It seems that since Jews were accepted o the United States 
by the once-solid ninety-percent European American majority, it 
would be suicidal for them to attempt to weaken and harm such 
a group that had been so good to them. 

It seems suicidal. If America is finally overrun by Third 
World immigration and turns o a larger version of the 
economic and social problems faced by Mexico, it seems Jewish 
were would decline. Take France as an exame. After World 
War II, International Jewry has worked full time at suppressing 
any form of European nationalism, out of a fear that Hitler would 
again arise somewhere. This has led direly to the open borders 
immigration licy, which has dominated Europe since the 
s. 

Now that France has untold millions of non-White, North 
African Muslim immigrants, all there because of the Jewish- 
created hysteria of "non-racialism," the Jews in France are fleeing 



Earl Raab 


 The Key to Communism: Jewish Tribalism 

by the hundreds of thousands to aces like Florida  to 
escape what they call "anti-Semitism," but which is in fa a 
Muslim reaion to the excesses of the Zionist state of Israel. 

Jewish behavior in Europe has led direly to the growth of a 
non-White pulation there, and now that this new pulation 
has exhibited signs of hostility to Jews, those same Jews are busy 
fleeing their own creation, much as in Mary Shelley's novel, 
Frankenstein, where a mad door creates a monster (similar to the 
Jewish Golem story) only to be destroyed by his own creation. 

Judaism as an Evolutionary Strategy 

Professor Kevin MacDonald, from the Department of 
Psychology, California State University Long Beach, has an 
exanation as to why Jews behave the way they do. He is an 
advocate of "evolutionary psychology," which seeks to exain 
the human mind and human behavior by examining them 
through evolutionary theory. 

Professor MacDonald's theory is that evolutionary 
competition takes ace not just between individuals and their 
differences hewn by genetic and social distinions, but also 
between human groups. 

In the course of Jewish history, MacDonald says, Jews have 
developed predissitions to verbal elligence and ensity, 
altruism to kin, and a suit of other traits; and these traits further a 
"group evolutionary strategy," by which the Jewish pulation 
competes with non-Jewish pulations. 

This theory appears to be corre. The only element that is 
missing is the question of why Jews would develop such a 
specialized group evolutionary strategy in the first ace. Why 
them, and not any other of the considerably vast range of racial 
groups on earth, not to mention the greater Semitic nation of 
families? 

The answere lies in biology, and its dire offshoot, 
psychology. The study of psychology is, of course, anually just 
the study of the effes of biology associated with environment. 

The first thing to understand about Jews is that they are a 
distin biological entity to themselves. Genetic studies, some of 



The Secret Behind Communism  


which have been outlined earlier in this book, have demonstrated 
that Jews derive most of their ancestry from the Middle East and 
have little in common genetically with the Europeans among 
whom they live. 

In other words, the genetic studies show very clearly that 
Jews are a distin, largely homogenous, racially defined group, 
which has, despite great geographic dispersion, been able to 
maain its biological group identity to an extreme degree. 

This is a remarkable achievement. No other group has 
succeeded in retaining its unique identity in the face of 
geographic dispersion. However, in this ability to keep a distin 
identity lies the exanation of Jewry's behavior. 

Group Paranoia 

Anyone who has studied the science of psychology knows 
that there are two symptoms of paranoia: delusions of grandeur, 
and delusions of persecution. The Jews are the only people on 
Earth who have made a religion out of these paranoiac 
symptoms. 
