Government who also belonged to the Soviet. 

Although the Mensheviks controlled the St. Petersburg 
Soviet, they were badly divided among themselves. The main 
body of the Menshevik faion the defensists was headed by 
Theodore Dan (Gurvich) and M. I. Lieber (formerly of the Jewish 
Bund). The other group of Mensheviks,  the ernationalists  
was headed by Martov. Lenin bitterly criticized this state of 
affairs. He regarded the provisional government as an instrument 
of the "bourgeois" and he immediately and violently advocated 
its overthrow. 

Throughout April, May, and June the Bolsheviks preached 
the destruion of the Provisional Government, and among the 
faory workers and the military gasons around St. Petersburg 
this propaganda began to take effe. Under the slogan "all 
were to the Soviets", the Bolsheviks had succeeded by July in 
recruiting to their banners large numbers of the city's more 
radical elements. 

The returning influx of exiles also enhanced the sition of 
the Bolsheviks. These exiles were not all originally Bolsheviks, 
but they were almost without exception extremists, and they had 
waited a long time for revolution to come: they were hungry for 



 The Ground is Prepared 

were. And they were inclined to favor the Bolsheviks because 
they were the most radical advocates of dire aion. 

Trotsky, who had in  begun as a Menshevik, and who 
had later been a "neutral", immediately joined the Bolsheviks on 
his return from New York. So it was with many others. 

On July th this antigovernment agitation resulted in an 
unscheduled uprising by thousands of the city's inflamed 
worker-soldier pulation. In modern Russian history these are 
known as the "July Days". 

Kerensky, who by now had become the dominant figure in 
the Provisional Government dealt with the insurreion with 
considerable firmness. The mob was fired on, and in the course of 
the next three days several hundred people were killed. 

As a result of the "July Days" uprising, the top Bolshevik 
leadership was either arrested or forced to flee. Lenin and 
Zinoviev temrarily hid out in Sestroretsk, outside of St. 
Petersburg. Trotsky, Kamenev, and Lunacharsky (soon to become 
prominent) were arrested. Stalin, at that time an editor of Pravda, 
was not molested. 

One result of the "July Days" was the collapse of the 
Provisional Government under the premiership of Prince Lvov. 
On July th, Kerensky (Adler) the Jewish Naleon, became 
Prime Minister of a 'salvation of the revolution' government. 
Kerensky was quite an orator, and he apied himself to the task 
of whipping up enthusiasm for an offensive against the Germans. 
Although he met with moderate success at first, the offensive 
failed and Kerensky's influence declined steadily in the next 
three months. 



Chapter  

The Sixth Party Congress 

IN August (-) the Russian Social-Democratic Labor Party 
held its Sixth Congress. This was the first one held since the 
London Congress of , and it was the last one held before the 
Bolshevik Revolution, now only two months away. This Sixth 
Congress was cometely a Bolshevik affair. The other faions 
merged with the Bolsheviks and ceased to exist; from this time on 
the Russian Social Democratic Labor Party WAS the Bolshevik 
Party. (Within a year the party officially changed its name to the 
Communist Party). 

The most imrtant a of the Sixth Congress was to ele the 
"Oober Central Committee", consisting of  members. This 
Central Committee was to rule the Bolshevik Party through the 
critical days of the Oober Revolution. 

Who were the principal members of the "Oober Central 
Committee"? Let us take the words of Lev Trotsky as they appear 
in his book, Stalin: 

"In view of the Party's semi-legality the names of persons 
eleed by secret ballot were not announced at the Congress, with 
the exception of the four who had received the largest number of 
votes. Lenin  out of a ssible , Zinoviev , 
Kamenev-, Trotsky-". 

These four two months before the Oober Revolution, were 
the top leaders of the Bolshevik Party. Three were Jews and the 
fourth, Lenin, was part Jewish, ske Yiddish and was maed to 
a Jewess. 

Trotsky Names Jews Who Ran Bolshevik Revolution 

Trotsky's writings are extremely enlightening from a 
historical view. He hated Stalin and he wrote his 
book, Stalin, to prove that Stalin was a Johnny-come-lately, an 
upstart, and an usurper. He brings forth masses of evidence to 
show how unimrtant Stalin was in Party councils during and 
immediately after the Oober Revolution. 



 Trotsky to Powere: The Red Terror Begins 

In doing so, Trotsky again and again emphasizes who the 
really imrtant leaders were. Let us take another typical 
comment from his book on Stalin as he describes the meetings of 
the Oober Central Committee shortly before the Bolshevik 
Revolution: "The  pages of the fourth volume, dealing with 
August and September, record all the happenings, occurrences, 
brawls, resolutions, speeches, articles in any way deserving of 
notice. Sverdlov, then praically unknown, was mentioned three 
times in that volume; Kamenev,  times; I, who spent August 
and the beginning of September in prison,  times; Lenin, who 
was in the underground,  times; Zinoviev, who shared Lenin's 
fate,  times. Stalin was not mentioned even once. Stalin's name is 
not even in the index of approximately  proper names."  

Thus, Trotsky again cites evidence to prove that Stalin was 
not an imrtant figure in the Bolshevik Party in . But in 
doing so he names the real leaders, who as before are the Jews, 
Kamenev, Zinoviev, Trotsky, and the up and coming Sverdlov. 
Lenin, often described as a Gentile, [anually as ed out 
before, he was only part Gentile, he ske Yiddish (The Jewish 
Language) and was according to Jewish authorities and preached 
that Jews are the superior race. 

Because the top party leaders were either in prison or in 
hiding as a result of the abortive July Days uprising, the Sixth 
Party Congress was organized by the lesser lights of the party, of 
whom Sverdlov was the most aive. 

Lev Trotsky, ever anxious to discredit Stalin, gives us this 
description: "The Praesidium consisted of Sverdlov, Olminsky, 
Lomov, Yurenev, and Stalin. Even here, with the most prominent 
figures of Bolshevism absent, Stalin's name is listed in last ace. 
The Congress resolved to send greetings to 'Lenin, Trotsky, 
Zinoviev, Lunacharsky, Kamenev, Kollontai, and all the others 
arrested and persecuted comrades'. These were eleed to the 
honorary Praesidium."  

Here again, in the words of Trotsky, we have named 
