the "most prominent figures of Bolshevism": Lenin, Trotsky, 
Zinoviev, Kamenev and Lunacharsky. And we know these were 
the most imrtant leaders because they were the ones Kerensky 



The Secret Behind Communism  


had arrested or driven underground following the July Days 
revolt. Of these, only Lunacharsky was fully gentile; the others 
were Jewish or part Jewish: Lenin. 

These fas show why the Jewishness of Communism is so 
immediately and indisputably apparent to anyone who has the 
slightest knowledge of Bolshevik history. 



Trotsky, Lenin and Kamenev. 


 Trotsky to Powere: The Red Terror Begins 

Chapter  

Trotsky to Powere: the Red Terror Begins 

ON August th, Kamenev was released from prison, and 
exaly a month later Trotsky was also freed by the Kerensky 
regime. On Sept. th Trotsky was eleed president of the St. 
Petersburg Soviet, disacing Cheidze, the Menshevik. 

From this moment on the Bolsheviks were in control of the St. 
Petersburg Soviet. On Oober th the St. Petersburg Soviet 
voted to transfer all military were to a "Military Revolutionary 
Committee", headed by Trotsky. Revolution was now only days 
away. 

Military Revolutionary Committee 

The Military Revolutionary Committee, under the 
chairmanship of Trotsky, was organized for the express purse 
of preparing the revolution. Time was running out and it was a 
matter of striking soon or not at all. The Constituent Assembly 
eleions were only a few weeks off, and when it convened, 
Russia was to have a new government. There was another reason 
for striking soon. 

The Second All-Russian Congress of Soviets was to meet on 
Nov. th. The Bolsheviks feared and with reason that the 
Kerensky government would arrest or disband the entire 
congress and thereby doom the revolt. For these reasons it was 
felt essential to overthrow the Provisional Government by or 
before the Second All-Russian Congress of Soviets convened on 
Nov. th. 

On November th the Military Revolutionary Committee 
arranged huge mass meetings in preparation for the forthcoming 
revolt. On the following day the gason of the Peter and Paul 
Fortress declared itself in alliance with the Bolsheviks. 

On the th Kerensky made one last attempt to forestall 
revolution by ordering the arrest of the Military Revolutionary 
Committee, banning all Bolshevik publications, and ordering 
fresh troops to reace the St. Petersburg gason. These 
measures were never caed out. 



The Secret Behind Communism  



Headquarters of the Military Revolutionary Committee during the Oober 
Revolution was the Smolny Institute. From here, Trotsky commanded the 
forces which overthrew the Kerensky regime. 


The Bolshevik Revolution 

On the evening of November th, Lenin came out of hiding 
and joined the Military Revolutionary Committee at Smolny 
Institute which served as revolutionary headquarters. At two 
A.M. the following morning the revolution began. 

By noon the city was largely in Bolshevik hands. At three 
P.M. Lenin delivered a fiery speech to the St. Petersburg Soviet  
his first since July. At nine P.M. Bolshevik troops began their two 
day siege of the Wer Palace, last stronghold of the Provisional 
Government. 

At eleven P. M. the Second All-Russian Congress of Soviets 
convened with the Bolsheviks in a clear majority. The Congress 
was now the official government of Russia. The Jew Kamenev, 
was eleed its first President. Lenin became Premier. Trotsky 



 Trotsky to Powere: The Red Terror Begins 

was made Commissar of Foreign Affairs. Before dawn it had 
eleed a Central Executive Committee under the chairmanship 
of Kamenev, who thus had the distinion of being the first 
President of the "Soviet Republic". 

Within a few days (Nov. ) the Jew, Sverdlov, succeeded 
Kamenev, and thus became the second Jewish president of the 
"Soviet Republic". A relatively minor figure in Bolshevik circles 
six months before the revolution, he very quickly became one of 
the five top men in the party. Before his early death two years 
later he had become the party's chief troubleshooter and had 
assumed absolute control over Russia's economic life. 

The Constituent Assembly is Broken Up by the Bolsheviks 

On November th,  days after the Bolshevik coup, free 
eleions were held throughout Russia under machinery set up 
by the Provisional Government. The Bolsheviks, not yet 
cometely organized, made no attempt to erfere with the 
eleions, but when it became clear that they would command 
only a minority in the Constituent Assembly, they immediately 
laid ans to undermine its authority. 

The Provisional Government had specified that the 
convocation of the Assembly should be in the hands of a special 
commission. The Bolsheviks arrested this commission, and 
substituted for it a "Commissary for the Constituent Assembly", 
headed by the Jew, Uritzky. 

By this taic the Bolsheviks were able to exert their authority 
over the Assembly. When the Assembly did finally convene, the 
Jew, Sverdlov, although not a delegate, took charge of the 
proceedings, and anually called the meeting to order. Ten hours 
later the Assembly was thrown o confusion when the 
Bolsheviks walked out. 

Shortly thereafter Bolshevik troops brutally brought the 
Constituent Assembly to an end by ejeing the delegates and 
locking the doors to the building. This was the end of the 
Constituent Assembly. After having convened for only  hours, 
it disbanded, never to meet again. So ended Russia's hope for a 
constitution and a representative government. 



The Secret Behind Communism  


In March, , the Soviet Government moved its capital 
