party licy. 

Because Lenin had been temrarily able to marshal a 
majority of the remaining delegates to his suprt, his faion 
had been identified as the Bolshevik, or majority faion, and 
always thereafter Lenin and his followeres were known as 
Bolsheviks. 



 The Origin of the Bolshevists 


It is imrtant to note that this Bolshevik-Menshevik sit 
was among the Iskrists only. The two other major faions of the 
party  Rosa Luxemburg's Polish Social Democrats and the 
Jewish Bund  were neither Bolshevik nor Menshevik, although 
both faions usually teamed up with the Mensheviks on party 
licy. In , however, both the Polish party and the Bund 
merged o the Bolshevik faion. 



The Jewishness of the Mensheviks is obvious from this photograph of Avel 
Axelrod, Julius Martov and Alexander Martinov. Norm Bantorgel in 
Stockholm , Sweden , May . 

Revolution of  

The  revolution came unexpeedly. Jewish agitators, 
seizing un the discontent engendered by Russia's defeat by the 
Japanese, and capitalizing on the "Bloody Sunday" incident  
which we have already described  fanned the flames of 
insurreion o being what was to be a dress rehearsal of the 
 revolution. 

The revolt, coming so quickly on the heels of the Bloody 
Sunday incident, caught the party leadership by surprise. Lenin 


The Secret Behind Communism  


was in Geneva and he did not return to St. Petersburg until 
Oober shortly before the Petersburg Soviet was organized. 

Martov the Menshevik leader, returned at the same time. 
Rosa Luxemburg aved in December, by which time the 
insurreion had ended. Axelrod got only as far as Finland, and 
Plekhanov never returned at all. 

The  revolution was principally led by second-string 
leaders, virtually all of whom were identified with the 
Mensheviks. 

Trotsky, alone of the top leadership had sensed the 
significance of "Bloody Sunday," and at the first word of 
revolution he and a Jewish compatriot. Parvus, had struck out for 
St. Petersburg. 

Using the pseudonym Yanovsky, he very quickly became a 
leading member of the Soviet, and by the end of Oober was 
generally recognized as the most influential member of the 
Executive Committee. In addition, he edited (with Parvus) the 
Menshevik organ, Nachato. 

Later, under the pseudonym, "Peter Petrovich" he edited the 
Russkyaya Gazeta. On Dec. , as we have previously related, he 
was eleed president of the St. Petersburg Soviet, and following 
his arrest Parvus assumed leadership of the revolt. 

Although Lenin had been in St. Petersburg throughout the 
life of the St. Petersburg Soviet, neither he nor any member of his 
faion ayed a prominent part in its aivities. When the  
members of the Soviet were finally arrested, not a single 
prominent Bolshevik was among them. The revolution of  
was strily a Menshevik affair. 

The London Congress of  

In  (May  June ) a fifth Congress of the Russian 
Social Democratic Labor Party was held, this time in London. 
This was by all accounts the most impressive one of all, and it 
was the last one held before the  revolution. Represented at 
the Congress were: 

* The Bolsheviks, led by Lenin  delegates. 



 The Origin of the Bolshevists 


* The Mensheviks, led by Martov and Dan   delegates. 

* The Polish Social Democrats, led by Rosa Luxemburg  

delegates. 

* The Jewish Bund, led by Rafael Abramovitch and M. I. 

Lieber   delegates. 

* The Lettish Social Democrats, led by "Comrade Herman" 

(Danishevsky). 

Altogether there were  delegates to the Congress, of whom 
 were, or had been, workers. Dominating the Congress were 
the great names of the party: there were the founders of the 
movement, Plekhanov, Axelrod, Deutch, and Zasulich  who 
after  ayed roles of diminishing imrtance in party 
affairs  and their discies, Lenin, Martov, Dan (Gurvich), and 
Trotsky. 


There were Abramovich and 
Lieber (Goldman) of the Bund, and 
Rosa Luxemburg, the latter one 
day being destined to lead a 
revolution of her own in Germany. 

Present also were Zinoviev, 
Kamenev, and Stalin, none of 
whom were imrtant in , but 
who are listed here because one 
day they would be the three most 
wereful men in Russia. 
Significantly all of those named 
were Jewish, excepting part-Jewish 
Lenin, Plekhanov, and Stalin. 

Perhaps one of the most 
imrtant matters taken up by 
the London Congress was the 
bitterly controversial question of 
"expropriations." It should be 
exained that Lenin's Bolshevik 
faion had to an increasing degree 
resorted to outlawry to reenish 



Julius Martov, or L. Martov, the 
Jew whose real name Yuliy 
Osivich Zederbaum, was 
born in Istanbul in . He 
became the leader of the 
Mensheviks. 

