a world-wide social revolution.  David Francis, American 
Ambassador to Russia at the time of the Revolution. 

The National Archives also sent me copies from its files of 
communications from Scotland Yard and British Intelligence. The 
direorate of British Intelligence sent to America and other 



The Secret Behind Communism  


nations a lengthy rert dated July , , on Bolshevism 
abroad. It was called "A Monthly Review of the Progress of 
Revolutionary Movements Abroad." This lengthy rert lists the 

"There is now definite evidence that Bolshevism is 
an ernational movement controlled by Jews." 

 The Direor of British Intelligence to the U.S. Secretary of State 


Communist movements in the major nations of the world. The 
first sentence in the first paragraph on the first page of this British 
government rert bluntly states that Jews control ernational 

Communism. 

Years later, as a student at Louisiana State University, I took a 
course entirely devoted to the Russian Revolution. Neither my 
professor in his leures, nor my textbook ( The Soviet 
Achievement )i made any mention of the historical Jewish-Russian 
confli and the Jewish domination of the Communist Party. 

The Jewish role in the Communist Revolution was, however, 
mentioned in many major Jewish publications such as the Jewish 
Encyclopedia and the Universal Jewish Encyclopedia and 
Encyclopaedia Judaica. It astounded me to find them anually 
boasting about the pivotal role of Jews in the Russian Revolution. 
They even ed out the effort of the Communist Jews to 
disguise the Jewish role  a successful effort, for most Gentiles in 
America and Europe are still unaware of it. 

The Communist movement and ideology ayed an imrtant 
part in Jewish life, particularly in the s, s and during and 
after World War II.... Individual Jews ayed an imrtant role in 
the early stages of Bolshevism and the Soviet Regime.... The great 
attraion of Communism among Russian, and later also. Western 
Jewry, emerged only with the establishment of the Soviet Regime 
in Russia... 

Many Jews the world over therefore regarded the Soviet 
concept of the solution to the "Jewish question" as an rinsically 
sitive approach.... Communism became widespread in virtually 
all Jewish communities. In some countries Jews became the 
leading element in the legal and illegal Communist parties and in 
some cases were even instrued by the Communist International 






 Communism with the Mask Off 

to change their Jewish-sounding names and se as non-Jews, in 
order not to confirm right wing propaganda that presented 
Communism as an alien, Jewish conspiracy . 

Trotsky's book, Stalin, written in exile, attempted to show that 

Stalin had ayed only an 
insignificant role in the 
early days of the 
Communist takeover. 
Trotsky attempted to 
illustrate this  by 
reproducing a stcard 
widely circulated in the 
months following the 
revolution. The stcard 
depied the six leaders of 
the revolution. 

Shown are Lenin (who 
was at least one-quarter 
Jewish, ske Yiddish in 
his home, and was maed 
to a Jewess); Trotsky (real 
Jewish name: Lev 

Bronstein); Zinoviev (real 
Jewish name: Hirsch 

Apfelbaum); Lunacharsky 
(a Gentile); Kamenov (real 
Jewish name: Rosenfeld); and Sverdlov (Jewish).  Not only does 
the stcard show the Jewish domination of the revolution; it 
also illustrates the fa that the Jewish Communist leaders shown 
had changed their names, presumably to disguise the fa that 
they were Jews, just as rerted in the Encyclopaedia Judaica. 

Although the fa of Lenin's Jewish ancestry was kept quiet for 
many year's, Jewish writers are now taking note of it. David Shub, 
author of Lenin: A Biography, stated in a letter to the Russian 
emigre paper Novyi Zhumal  that Lenin's mother was Jewish at 
least on her father's side and probably so on her mother's side as 
well. In addition, a French Jewish periodical. Review de Fonds 




The Secret Behind Communism  


Social ]uif,  rerted that a Soviet 
novelist. Marietta Shaguinian, was 
prevented by Soviet censorship 
from publishing evidence of 
Lenin's Jewish ancestry. A number 
of Jewish publications in recent 
years have disclosed Lenin's 
Jewish heritage, including the 
Jewish Chronicle . 

The Cheka, or secret lice, had a Jew, Moses Uritzky, as its 
first chief. Most of the other subsequent leaders were also Jews, 
including Sverdlov and Genrikh Yagoda (which is Russian for 
"Yehuda," "the Jew") presided over the groms that killed 
millions. The Soviet propaganda minister during the war was a 
Jew, Ilya Ehrenburg, who notoriously distinguished himself by 

his exhortations of Soviet 
troops to rape and murder 
the women and children of 
Germany  Anatol Goldberg 
quoted Ehrenburg in his 
book, Ilya Ehrenburg as 
saying, "...the Germans are 
not human beings... nothing 
gives us so much joy as 
German corpses. " 

The Communist secret 
lice, which underwent 
many name changes, 
including Cheka, OGPU, 
GPU, NKVD, NKGB, MGB, 
and KGB, was the most 
feared lice agency in the 
