the capital, or being otherwise unequipped to go o business or 
the professions, settled in New York to become workers and 
craftsmen. Thus, after the war, we find Ben Gold's Communistic 
fur workers union, and David Dubinsky's "socialistic" garment 
workers union, which consisted almost entirely of Jews. This 
situation changed somewhat in the latter part of the twentieth 
century as manufauring moved increasingly to the Far East. 
Nonetheless, as would be expeed. New York City has been the 
seed-bed for Communism in the United States. 



Chapter  

The U.S. Communist Party 


THE American Communist Party has never been very large. 
In , it had an estimated , members; by the late s 
this had dwindled to less than ,. 

On first appearances this would seem to rule it out as a 
significant force in American litics. But appearances can be 



A stcard from the early th Century in New York 
showing the Jewish ghetto in the city. 


deceptive. Unlike the mass-recruited Communist parties of 
France and Italy, the American Communist party is small, 
carefully chosen, well disciined, and fanatical. 

Few  perhaps no one  of its membership has been recruited 
from the sweaty-shirt strata. 

Its members are college professors and union leaders, 
physicists and government workers, rerters, aywrights and 
business executives, aors and newspaper rerters. Some of its 
members are wealthy; almost all are well educated. 

The first Communist Party of America (CPA) was founded in 
September , after sits between the already existing Socialist 
Party movements  all of which were heavily Jewish-dominated. 


The Secret Behind Communism  


Benjamin "Ben" Gitlow, the son of Russian Jews, was one of 
the leading founder members. Gitlow was charged in  with 
attempting to incite the violent overthrow of the United States, 
and served two years in Sing Sing prison. 

According to page  of the Encyclopaedia Judaica, 

"the list of Jews who ayed a prominent role in the 
leadership and faional infighting of the American Communist 
Party is a long one . . . Many American Jewish authors and 
elleuals, some of whom later recanted, were aive in editing 
Communist publications and spreading party propaganda . . . 
among them Michael Gold, Howard Fast, and Bertram Wolfe. 

Jewish Communists in Labor Movement 

For the first half of the th century, the Communist Party 
ayed a very prominent role in the U.S. labor movement from 
the s through the s, having a major hand in founding 
most of the country's first industrial unions while also becoming 
known for fighting for egration in workaces and 
communities. 

Jewish historian Ellen Schrecker, in her article "Soviet 
Espionage in America: An Oft-Told tale"  said that the CPUSA 
was a "Stalinist se tied to a vicious regime and the most 
dynamic organization within the American Left during the s 
and 's." 

Jewish women, mostly Eastern European immigrants in New 
York City, helped to lead the Communist cause and were a vital 
comnent of its rank and file. Notable Jewish leaders 
included Rose Wortis, a legendary labor organizer in the needle 
trades. Rose Stokes, a radical journalist eleed to the Workers 
Party's central executive committee, and Betty Gannett, who 
joined the party as a teenager in  and was aped national 
education direor of its Young Communist League in . 

The majority of rank-and-file party members were garment 
workers or housewives. Many came to the party through the 
Jewish Federation, a Yiddish-language organization that 
originated in the Socialist Party and defeed to the Communists 
in . 



 The U.S. Communist Party 

The Jewish Federation's mission was to preserve and 
invigorate revolutionary "yiddishkeit" through community- 
based cultural projes, work that found a generally comfortable 
home in the Communist movement of the early s. 

Largest Communist Newspaper 
in U.S. was the Yiddish-language Morgen Freiheit 

The Yiddishists gave the party a vital link to, and influence 
among, the large Jewish immigrant Left. The Morgen Freiheit, the 
Communist Yiddish-language daily established in New York in 
 soon became the largest Communist newspaper in America. 

In Brooklyn's Brownsville distri. Communist Jewish 
aivists such as Clara Lemlich Shavleson and Kate Gitlow 
mobilized women in Jewish neighborhoods and gave birth to the 
United Council of Working Class Women (UCWW) in . 

Its membership was almost entirely Jewish until the mid- 
s. This departure from Yiddishist aivism refleed a 
growing trend in Jewish communities. Increasingly, older 
immigrant Yiddishists were being outnumbered by younger, 
native-born leftists. 

Many of these younger radicals aligned themselves with 
Communism during the Great Depression and World War II, the 
heyday of both the Communist Party and Jewish women's 
involvement in its work. The party swelled from just under ten 
thousand members in  to about forty thousand in  and to 
eighty-three thousand in . 

Female membership expanded from about  percent in the 
early s to  or  percent at the end of the decade and to 
about  percent in . 

CP historians estimate, moreover, that almost half of the 
party's membership was Jewish in the s and s, and that 
approximately , Jews passed through the party in those 
decades of high member turnover. 

It seems safe to say, then, that Jewish women were one of the 
CPs largest seors during the Depression and war years; and for 
each who was a "card-carrying" Communist, there were several 
who took part in party-led mass organizations but did not belong 
to the party itself. 



The Secret Behind Communism  


In addition to industrial workers and housewives, the new 
