Israel Steals Enriched Uranium from America 

: Israel illegally obtains enriched uranium from NUMEC 
Corration.  

The USS Liberty: A Terrorist Attack 

: Israel attacks the USS Liberty, an elligence gathering 
vessel flying a US flag, killing  and wounding  crew 
members. See Assault on the Liberty, by James M. Ennes, Jr. 
(Random House). In , Captain Ward Boston, Senior Legal 



The Secret Behind Communism  


Counsel for the Navy's Court of Inquiry o the attack swears 
under oath that President Lyndon Johnson ordered the 
investigation to conclude accident, even though the evidence 
indicates the attack was deliberate. 

Given the use by Israel of unmarked boats and anes, and 
the machine-gunning of USS Liberty's lifeboats, the most likely 
exanation is that USS Liberty was to be sunk with all hands, 
with evidence left to frame Egypt for the sinking. This would 
have dragged the US o the war on Israel's side. 



Chiefs of Staff were privy to classified information that shows 
Israel entionally attacked the USS Liberty. Only the courage of 
the Liberty's captain enabled the ship to survive and thus foiled 
the Israeli an. 

s Jewish Spies for Israel against America 

: While working for Senator Henry Jackson, the Israeli 
partisan, called "super Jew" by some, Richard Perle is caught by 
the FBI giving classified information to Israel. Nothing is done. 

: Stephen Bryen, then a Senate Foreign Relations 
Committee staffer, is overheard in a DC hotel offering 
confidential documents to top Israeli military officials. Bryen 
obtains a lawyer, Nathan Lewin, and the case heads for the grand 
jury, but is mysteriously dropped. Bryen later goes to work for 
Richard Perle. 



 The Tribal Shift: Spying Now for Israel 

: Shin Bet [the Israeli ernal security agency] tries to 
penetrate the US Consulate General in Jerusalem through a 
"Honey Trap", using a clerical emoyee who was having an 
affair with a Jerusalem girl. 

s Jewish Spies for Israel against America 

: The New York Times rerts the FBI is aware of at least a 
dozen incidents in which American officials transferred classified 
information to the Israelis, quoting [former Assistant Direor of 
the F.B.I.] Mr. [Raymond] Wannal. The Justice Department does 
not prosecute. 

: Richard Smyth, the owner of MILCO, is indied on 
charges of smuggling nuclear timing devices to Israel.  

: April  Wall Street Journal headline: "Role of Israel in 
Iran-Contra Scandal Won't be Exored in Detail by Panels." 

s Jewish Spies for Israel against America 

: The Wall Street Journal rerts that Israeli agents tried to 
steal Recon Optical Inc.'s top-secret airborne spy-camera system. 

: Stephen Bryen, caught offering confidential documents 
to Israel in , is serving on board of the pro-Israeli Jewish 
Institute for National Security Affairs while continuing as a paid 
consultant with security clearance on exrts of sensitive US 
technology. 

: "The Samson Option," by Seymour M. Hersh rerts, 
"Illicitly obtained elligence was flying so voluminously from 
LAKAM o Israeli elligence that a special code name, 
JUMBO, was added to the security markings already on the 
documents. There were stri orders, Ari Ben-Menashe recalled: 
"Anything marked JUMBO was not supsed to be discussed 
with your American counterparts." 

: The Jewish Supremacist Anti-Defamation League (ADL) 
is caught operating a massive spying operation on critics of 
Israel, Arab-Americans, the San Francisco Labor Council, ILWU 
Local , Oakland Educational Association, NAACP, Irish 
Northern Ad, International Indian Treaty Council, the Asian 
Law Caucus and the San Francisco lice. Data colleed was sent 
to Israel and in some cases to South Africa. Pressure from Jewish 



The Secret Behind Communism  


organizations forces the city to drop the criminal case, but the 
ADL settles a civil lawsuit for an undisclosed sum of cash. 

: The Defense Investigative Service circulates a memo 
warning US military contraors that "Israel aggressively colles 
[US] military and industrial technology." The rert stated that 
Israel obtains information using "ethnic targeting, financial 
aggrandizement, and identification and exoitation of individual 
frailties" of US citizens. 

: A General Accounting Office rert "Defense Industrial 
Security: Weaknesses in US Security Arrangements With Foreign- 
Owned Defense Contraors" found that according to elligence 
sources "Country A" (identified by elligence sources as Israel, 
Washington Times, //) "condus the most aggressive 
espionage operation against the United States of any US ally." 

The Jerusalem Post (//) quoted the rert: "Classified 
military information and sensitive military technologies are high- 
priority targets for the elligence agencies of this country." 

The rert described "An espionage operation run by the 
elligence organization resnsible for colleing scientific and 
technologic information for [Israel] paid a US government 
emoyee to obtain US classified military elligence 
documents." 

The Washington Rert on Middle East Affairs (Shawn L. Twing, 
April ) noted that this was "a reference to the  arrest of 
Jonathan Pollard, a civilian US naval elligence analyst who 
provided Israel's LAKAM [Office of Special Tasks] espionage 
agency an estimated , pages of classified US elligence 
information." The GAO rert also noted that "Several citizens of 
[Israel] were caught in the United States stealing sensitive 
technology used in manufauring artillery gun tubes." 

: An Office of Naval Intelligence document, "Worldwide 
Challenges to Naval Strike Warfare" rerted that "US 
technology has been acquired [by China] through Israel in the 
form of the Lavi fighter and ssibly SAM [surface-to-air] missile 
technology." Jane's Defense Weekly (//) noted that "until 
now, the elligence community has not openly confirmed the 
transfer of US technology [via Israel] to China." The rert noted 



 The Tribal Shift: Spying Now for Israel 
