history of the world. They 
imprisoned, tortured, or 
murdered more than  
million Russians and Eastern 
Europeans. 



Aron Solts Naftalv Frenkel 



Yakov Raprt Matvei Berman 



lazar Kogan Genrikh Yagoda 





 Communism with the Mask Off 

Even the more conservative Soviet historians of the s 
were acing the number of murdered at about  to  million  
figures that do not include the millions more who were 
disssessed, imprisoned, exiled, tortured, and disaced. 

Nobel Prizewinner Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn in his opus. The 
Gulag Archipelago, using the research of a Soviet statistician who 
had access to secret government files, I. A. Kurganov, estimated 
that between  and , at least  million died at the hands 
of the Communist rulers of Russia. 

Although that number may be far too high, in The Gulag 
Archipelago II, Solzhenitsyn affirms that Jews created and 
administered the organized Soviet concentration camp system in 
which tens of millions of Christians died. Piured on page  of 
The Gulag Archipelago II are the leading administrators of the 
greatest killing machine in the history of the world. They are 
Aron Solts, Yakov Raprt, Lazar Kogan, Matvei Berman, 
Genrikh Yagoda, and Naftaly Frenkel. All six are Jews. 

Interestingly, though, during this period of murder and 
mayhem, Jews were a proteed class, so much so that the 
Communist Party took the unprecedented step of making 
expressions of anti-Semitism a counter-revolutionary offense, and 
thus punishable by death . 

The Jewish Voice in January, , stated: "The Jewish people 
will never forget that the Soviet Union was the first country -- 
and as yet the only country in the world  in which anti- 
Semitism is a crime. " The Congress Bulletin (Publication of the 
American Jewish Congress) stated:    

Anti-Semitism was classed as counter-revolution and the 
severe punishments meted out for as of Anti-Semitism were the 
means by which the existing order proteed its own safety. 

The Russian Penal Codes of  and  even went so far as 
to make anti-Semitism punishable by death. The book Soviet 
Russia and the Jews by Gregor Aronson and published by the 
American Jewish League Against Communism, quotes Stalin 
remarking on the licy in an erview in  with the Jewish 
Telegraph Agency: 



The Secret Behind Communism  


...Communists cannot be anything but outsken enemies of 
Anti-Semitism. We fight anti-Semites by the strongest methods in 
the Soviet Union. Aive Anti-Semites are punished by death 
under law. 

The Beginning of an Ethnic War 

In school, I brought up these fascinating fas with some of 
my teachers. They in turn were as incredulous as I had been. One 
suggested that the Jewish involvement in the Communist 
Revolution might have been a result of the long-running 
historical persecution of Jews by the Tsars and, indeed, by much 
of the Russian elligentsia. For instance, Tolstoy, Dostoyevsky, 
and many other prominent Russian writers had criticized Jewish 
machinations in their books and articles. Russians didn't like the 
fa that the Jews used the Russian language for doing business 
among Gentiles but ske Yiddish among themselves. Jews were 
also accused of having an "us versus them" mentality rather than 
assimilating with the Christian majority. 

There had been a running feud between the Russians and the 
Jews for centuries and from these conflis arose "groms" to 
suppress the Jews. This war without borders can be illustrated by 
the Jewish reaion in the s to the anti-Semitic Russian May 
Laws. The May Laws of  attempted to restri Jews from 
some professions and mandate resettlement of most Jews to their 
original area of the empire, the Pale of Settlement (a huge area, 
originally set up in , encompassing an area about half the 
size of Western Europe, extending from the Crimea to the Baltic 
Sea, to which the Jews had been restried) 

In retaliation, Jewish ernational financiers did their best to 
destroy the Russian economy. Encyclopaedia Britannica describes 
what happened: 

The Russian May Laws were the most conspicuous 
legislative monument achieved by modern Anti-Semitism.... 
Their immediate result was a ruinous commercial depression 
which was felt all over the empire and which profoundly 
affeed the national credit. The Russian minister was at his 
wits end for money. Negotiations for a large loan were 
entered un with the house of Rothschild and a preliminary 
contra was signed, when...the finance minister was 



 Communism with the Mask Off 

informed that unless the persecutions of the Jews were 
stopped the great banking house would be compelled to 
withdraw from the operation.... 

In resnse to the economic and other pressures put un 
Russia, the Tsar issued an edi on September , . In it he 
stated: 

For some time the government has given its attention to the 
Jews and to their relations to the rest of the inhabitants of the 
empire, with a view of ascertaining the sad condition of the 
Christian inhabitants brought about by the condu of Jews in 
business matters.... 

With few exceptions, they have as a body devoted their 
attention, not to enriching or benefiting the country, but to 
defrauding by their wiles its inhabitants, and particularly its or 
inhabitants. This condu of theirs has called forth protests on the 
part of the people,... (the government) thought it a matter of 
urgency and justice to adopt stringent measures in order to put an 
end to the oppression praiced by the Jews on the inhabitants, 
and to free the country from their malpraices, which were, as is 
known, the cause of the agitations. 

So, Jews had ame reason to attempt to overturn the Tsarist 
government of Russia, and there is dire evidence they did just 
that. The Jewish Communal Register of New York City of -, 
edited and published by the Jewish community, profiles Jacob 
Schiff, who at that time was one of the wealthiest men in the 
world as head of the huge banking house of Kuhn, Loeb & 
