
As Slezkine exains, the resnse of the Russians was 
"massive affirmative aion"  aimed at giving greater 



The Secret Behind Communism  


representation to underrepresented ethnic groups. Jews were 
targets of suspicion because of their ethnic status, barred from 
some elite institutions, and limited in their oprtunities for 
advancement. 

The Russians were taking back their country, and it wasn't 
long before Jews became leaders of the dissident movement and 
began to seek to emigrate in droves to the United States, Western 
Europe, and Israel. Despite still ssessing elite social status and 
suffering far fewere disabilities than many groups (e.g., the 
overwhelming majority of the Soviet pulation was not allowed 
to live in cities and some Christian ses were banned), Jews 
perceived the situation as "anti-Semitic." 

Jewish dissidents whose parents had run the Gulags, the 
dertations, and the state-snsored famines, now led the 
"urgent call for social justice."  

Zionists Come to Dominate Russian Jewry 

Apications to leave the USSR increased dramatically after 
Israel's Six-Day War of , which, as in the United States and 
Eastern Europe, resulted in an upsurge of Jewish identification 
and ethnic pride. The floodgates were eventually opened by 
Gorbachev in the late s, and by , . million Soviet Jews 
had emigrated % of the total. 

By , there were only , Jews left in the Russian 
Federation, .% of the pulation. These remaining Jews 
nevertheless exhibit the typical Ashkenazi pattern of high 
achievement and overrepresentation among the elite, including 
six of the seven oligarchs who emerged in control of the Soviet 
economy and media in the period of de-nationalization.  

Perhaps unsurprisingly, this denouement did not result in 
any sense of colleive guilt among Soviet Jews i os or among their 
American alogists. Indeed, American Jewish media figures 
who were blacklisted because of Communist affiliations in the 
s are now heroes, honored by the film industry, praised in 
newspapers, their work exhibited in museums. 

At the same time, the cause of Soviet Jews and their ability to 
emigrate became a critical rallying  for American Jewish 
aivist organizations and a defining feature of neoconservatism 



 The Russians Rise & Jews Embrace Zionism 

as a Jewish elleual and litical movement. For exame, 
Richard Perle, a key neoconservative, was Senator Henry 
Jackson's most imrtant security advisor from  to  and 
organized Congressional suprt for the Jackson-Vanik 
Amendment linking U.S.-Soviet trade to the ability of Jews to 
emigrate from the Soviet Union. The bill was passed over 
strenuous opsition from the Nixon administration. Jewish 
aivist organizations and many Jewish historians rtray the 
Soviet Jewish experience as a sojourn in the land of the "Red 

Pharaohs."  

The viory over National Socialism set the stage for the 
tremendous increase in Jewish were in the st-World War II 
Western world, in the end more than compensating for the 
decline of Jews in the Soviet Union. 

As Slezkine shows, the children of Jewish immigrants 
assumed an elite sition in the United States, just as they had in 
the Soviet Union and throughout Eastern Europe and Germany 
prior to World War II. This were facilitated the establishment of 
Israel, the transformation of the United States and other Western 
nations in the direion of multiracial, multicultural societies via 
large-scale immigration, and the consequent decline in European 
demographic and cultural pre-eminence. 

Anti-Zionism versus Anti-Semitism 

In this way, the Soviet Union gradually became taed as 
"anti-Jewish" when in fa at worst it became anti-Zionist. 

The Western media, firmly under the control of Jewish 
Supremacists, helped propagate this idea and even coined the 
phrase "refuseniks" for those Zionist Jews who attempted to 
leave the Soviet Union for Israel in the s. 

Ironically, many of those who fought with the Zionists were 
Communist Jews. For exame, after Stalin's death the Jewish 
Organization B'nai B'rith in the United States wrote in its 
magazine, the B'nai B'rith Messenger: "To show that Russia treats 
its Jews well, Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev this week 
remarked at a reception at the Polish Embassy that not only he 
himself and Soviet President Klementi Voroshilov, but also half 
the members of the Presidium have Jewish wives. Mr. 



The Secret Behind Communism  


Khrushchev made this remark to Israeli Ambassador Joseph 
Avidar, who was amongst the guests/' 

According to a rert in The Canadian Jewish News , November 
', , the president of the Soviet Union at that time, Leonid 
Brezhnev, was maed to a Jewess, and his children were raised 
as Jews. Confirmed Jews in his government were: Leonid 
Kantorovitj, head of the economy; Dimitri Dymshits, head of the 
industry; and Lev Shapiro, regional secretary of Birobidjan. 

The Rise of the Jewish Oligarchs 


As time went on, fewere and fewere Jews occupied the top 
sitions in Soviet society, but retained then sitions in the 
lowere echelons. This became obvious when the Soviet Union 
collapsed in the early s. Jews who had faithfully served the 
Soviet state emerged, with mysteriously acquired wealth, to buy 
up large seors of Russia's denationalized infrastruure. 

In this way, most of the oil, gas and natural reserves of Russia 

were snapped up by now 
"reformed" ex-Communist Jews, 
and the list of Jewish oligarchs 
became legendary and well- 
known both inside and outside of 
Russia. In a short time, these 
oligarchs accumulated almost half 



Boris Berezovsky. the wealth in Russia. The most 

prominent oligarchs were Boris Berezovsky, Mikhail Friedman, 
Mikhail Khodorkovsky, Vladimir Potanin, Vladimir Gusinsky 
and Alexander Smolensky  and they were all Jews. 

Berezovsky also controlled the state television station and 
several newspapers, while Gusinsky's media empire controlled 
NTV, Russia's only national independent TV station, as well as 
major radio and pr outlets. 
