industrial pulation o the hands of the Jew-dominated 
revolutionary movement. 

A strike broke out in Lodz in late January, and by June nd 
this developed o an armed insurreion in which , were 
killed. 

Tsar Nicholas II aed at once to recover the situation. In early 
February he ordered an investigation (by the Shidlovsky 
Commission) o the causes of unrest among the St. Petersburg 



The Secret Behind Communism  


workers, and later in the year (August) he announced provisions 
for establishing a legislature which later came to be the Duma. 

He also offered amnesty to litical offenders, under which, 
incidentally, Lenin returned to Russia. But these attempts failed. 

On Oober th the Jewish Menshevik-led All-Russian 
Railway union went on strike. On the st a general strike was 
called in St. Petersburg, and on the th there were general 
strikes in Moscow, Smolensk, Kursk, and other cities. 

The St. Petersburg Soviet is Founded 

On Oober th the revolutionary St. Petersburg Soviet was 
founded. This St. Petersburg Soviet assumed the funions of a 
national government. It issued decrees, proclaimed an eight hour 
day, freedom of the press, and otherwise exercised the 
prerogatives of a government. 

From the very beginning the Soviet was dominated by the 
Menshevik faion of the Russian Social Democratic Labor Party, 
although the Social Revolutionary Party was also represented. 

Its first president was the Menshevik, Zborovski, who was 
succeeded by Georgii Nosar. He in turn was succeeded by Lev 
Trotsky, who chiefly as a result of the prestige gained in , 
became one of the guiding spirits of the Oober revolution in 
. 

Trotsky became president of the St. Petersburg Soviet on Dec. 
th, and a week later some  members of the Soviet, including 
Trotsky, were arrested. The revolution was almost, but not quite, 
over. 

Parvus 

On Dec. th the Jew, Alexander Lvovich Parvus (real name 
Israel Lazarevich Gelfand), assumed control of a new executive 
committee of the Soviet and organized a general strike in St. 
Petersburg which involved , workers. The next day , 
workers went on strike in Moscow, and there were insurreions 
in Chita, Kansk, and Rostov. But within a week the government 
had gained the upper hand and by the th of December the 
revolution was over. 



 Bloody Sunday & the  Revolution 


Stolypin Reforms 

As an outcome of the  
revolution. Tsar Nicholas II set 
about remedying the short- 
comings of his regime in a 
most commendable manner. 
At his decree, Russia was 
given representative 

government and a 

constitution. 

An eleive legislature  

the Duma  was established, 

Alexander Lvovich Parvus (real name an j f ree eleions were held. By 

Israel Lazarevich Gelfand). n t 

' these measures and others 

which followed, Russia seemed well on the way to becoming a 

constitutional monarchy patterned after the western European 

model, and as a  of fa it was only the outbreak of World 

War I which prevented this from becoming a reality. 

As would be expeed, the Jewish revolutionary parties 
bitterly opsed these reforms, looking on them as merely a 
device by which the forces of revolution would be dissipated. 

Aually these measures did succeed in pacifying the Russian 
masses, and the years between  and  were ones of 
comparative quiet and progress. No man deserves more credit 
for this state of affairs than Prime Minister Pyotr Arkadyevich 
Stolypin, who in the year following the  revolt emerged as 
the most impressive figure in Imperial Russia. 

From  to  it is no exaggeration to say that he 
dominated Russian litics. It was he who gave Russia the famed 
"Stolypin Constitution," which among other things undertook to 
guarantee the civil rights of the peasantry, which constituted % 
of Russia's pulation. His land reforms, for which he is most 
famous, not only gave the peasant the right to own land, but 
anually financed the purchase with government loans. Stolypin 
was determined to give the peasant a stake in capitalism, 
believing that "the natural counterweight of the communal 
principal is individual ownership." 




The Secret Behind Communism  


Were the Stolypin land reforms effeive? Bertram Wolfe, 
American Jewish Communist Party member and author, who is 
on all s anti-Tsarist and pro-revolutionary, had this to say  : 
"Betweeir  and , under the Stolypin land reform laws, 
,, peasant families seceded from the village mire and 
became individual proprietors. All through the war the 
movement continued, so that by Jan. , , ,, peasant 
families, out of approximately ,, eligible, had made 
apication for separation. Lenin saw the matter as a race with 
time between Stolypin's reforms and the next upheaval. Should 
an upheaval be stned for a coue of decades, the new land 
measures would so transform the countryside that it would no 
longer be a revolutionary force. How near Lenin came to losing 
the race is proved by the fa that in , when he called on the 



Premier Peter Arkadyevich Stolypin 
reformed Russia and would have 


brought peace had he not been 
assassinated by the Jew Mordekhai 

