The disorder now became general. The mobs turned their 
fury on the lice, who bacaded themselves for a desperate last 


The Secret Behind Communism  


stand in the lice stations. There they were slaughtered almost 
to the last man, and the prisons were emptied of their entire 
pulations, including desperate criminals of every category. 

March th: Widespread rioting continued on the th. 
Added to the terror of revolution were the degradations of the 
recently liberated criminal pulation. During the day the Duma 
sent the following urgent message to the Tsar, now entrained for 
St. Petersburg: "The situation is serious. There is anarchy in the 
capital. The government is paralyzed. The situation as regards 
transrtation, and supies, and fuel has reached a state of 
comete disorganization. Police dissatisfaion is growing. 
Disorderly shooting is taking ace in the streets. Different 
seions of the troops are shooting at each other. It is necessary 
immediately to entrust a person who has the confidence of the 
country with the creation of a new government." 

The Tsar's reaion was tragically out of keeping with the 
reality of the situation. It is doubtful that he even had an inkling 
of what was really transpiring. His reaion was to command the 
dissolution of the Duma. The overwhelming majority of the 
Duma's membership, loyal to the Tsar obeyed his command, 
with the result that the last vestige of governmental authority 
ceased to exist in the capital. 

March th: The president of the dissolved Duma sent this 
last despairing message to the Tsar: "The situation is becoming 
worse. Immediate means must be taken, for tomorrow it will be 
too late. The last hour has struck and the fate of the fatherland 
and the dynasty is being decided." 

Tsar Nicholas II may never have received the message: in any 
event he did not rey. And indeed, the hour was late. 

At : A.M. on the morning of the th one of the regiments 
(the Volynski) revolted, killing its officers. By  A.M. six 
regiments had revolted. At : A.M. the gason of the Peter 
and Paul fortress surrendered and joined the revolution. 

The only seion of the city which now remained under 
governmental control was the War Office, the Admiralty 
Building, and St. Isaac's Cathedral. The revolution was now an 
accomished fa. 



 The March  Revolution 

Tsar Nicholas II Abdicates 

Four days later, on the th, Tsar Nicholas II, whose train 
never reached St. Petersburg, abdicated. The closing words of his 
written abdication announcement were: "May God have mercy 
on Russia". 

The th of March marked the formation of two governing 
bodies which were to joly rule Russia for the next  months. 
The first of these was the Provisional Committee of the Duma, 
consisting of  members headed by Prince Lvov. 

This group served as the Provisional Government until 
overthrown in Oober by the Bolsheviks. At all times, however, 
it governed by the sufferance of the St. Petersburg Soviet, which 
was the second body organized on the th. 

This St. Petersburg Soviet was in reality dominated by the 
Menshevik and Bolshevik faions of the Russian Social 
Democratic Labor Party, of whom the Mensheviks were by far 
the most wereful. A second party, the Social Revolutionary 
Party, was a minority party. 

Eventually, as we shall see, the Bolshevik faion gained 
control over the St. Petersburg Soviet, and having done so, at 
once precipitated the Oober Revolution and established the 
regime which held were in Russia until the s. 

To better understand these events, it is necessary that we 
trace the history of these Mensheviks and Bolsheviks and their 
Russian Social Democratic Labor Party. 



Chapter  

The Origins of the Bolsheviks 


WE must for the moment turn our attention to a group of 
revolutionary exiles who are imrtant to this story because they 
and their discies eventually became the rulers of Communist 
Russia. Head of this group, and the man who is generally 
recognized as Lenin's teacher, was George Plekhanov, a Gentile. 

Plekhanov had fled Russia in the s and settled in 
Switzerland. There with the aid of Vera Zasulich, Leo Deutsch 
(real name Lev), and Pavel Axelrod (real name Pinches 
Borutsch)  all Jews  he had formed the Marxist "Group for the 
Emancipation of Labor", and until  was recognized as the 
leader of the group. 



Lenin 

Lenin (part Jewish) speaks - Trotsky and Lev Kamenev (both Jews) 
stand immediately to the right of the speaker's dium 

Although Plekhanov was himself a Gentile, those around him 
were, with a few exceptions, Jewish. One of the technical 
exceptions was Lenin, who first became a discie of Plekhanov, 
and later a competitor. Lenin was at least of partly Jewish 



 The Origin of the Bolshevists 

ancestry, ske Yiddish, was maed to a Jew, and identified 
himself with the Jewish community. He even ske frequently of 
the superiority of Jews over Gentiles. 

Lenin (real name Vladimir Ilyich Ulyanov) was born on the 
banks of the Volga in the provincial city of Simbirsk in . He 
was born to a station of comparative privilege, being the son of a 
government official whose title of "Aual State Counselor" 
caed with it the privilege of hereditary nobility. Lenin's father 
did not himself inherit the title, but acquired it as a reward of 
service as a school supervisor. 

According to KGB files declassified in , Lenin was part- 
Jewish, with his maternal grandfather being Jewish. This was too 
far back for Lenin to be classified as Jewish by either the orthodox 
Jewish community or society at large, but it may well have 
ayed a role in his fierce opsition to anti-Semitism. The first 
time his voice was recorded was a special message which 
outlawed anti-Semitism after the success of the Bolshevist seizure 
of were. 

By every rule, "Lenin" should have become a respeed 
member of Russian society. He was of middle class background, 
was university educated, and was admitted to the praice of law. 
That he did not do so can be ascribed in part to the fate of his 
older brother, Alexander, who in  was executed for 
participating in an attempt on the life of Tsar Alexander II. This is 
