
Other famous Jewish oligarchs included Roman Abramovich; 
Oleg Deripaska; Viktor Vekselberg; Leonid Nevzlin; Eugene 
Shvidler; Vladimir Dubov; German Khan and Alexander 
Abramov. 

According to the Jerusalem Postal, there is an "army of Jewish 
billionaires" in Russia, the Jewish Supremacist oligarchs who 



 The Russians Rise & Jews Embrace Zionism 

made their fortunes in that country after the collapse of 

Communism. 

Many of these Jewish 
oligarchs were prosecuted or 
had charges brought against 
them. Some managed to 
escape and flee to Israel (such 
as Boris Berezovsky who then 
went to Britain) Others, such 
as Mikhail Khodorkovsky, 
were unable to flee in time 
and sentenced to prison for 
their swindling and insider 
trading by which they had 
accumulated their wealth. 

The significant  
to be learned from the Jewish 
oligarchs is that they were all 
able to rise to significant 
sitions of influence in the 
later years of the Soviet 
Union, giving lie to the claim that the Soviets were anti-Jewish. 

The most that can be said, as mentioned above, was that the 
Soviet state officially became anti-Zionist, viewing Israeli 
nationalism as a threat to ernational socialism. Individual 
Communist Jews who disayed no overt loyalty to Zionism or 
Israel, still held significant sitions of were in the Soviet Union 
right to its end. 

In  Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn was erviewed by Nikolay 
Kazantsev, a monarchist Russo- Argentine journalist, for Nasha 
Strana, a Russian language newspaper based in Buenos Aires. In 
the erview he said: 

"We (Russia) are walking a narrow isthmus between Communists 
and the World Jewry. Neither is acceptable for us... And I mean this 
not in the racial sense, but in the sense of the Jewry as a certain world 
view. Jewry [today] is embodied in capitalist globalism. Neither side 
is acceptable to us..." He also described the United States as a 
"province of Israel."  



Mikhail Khodorkovsky photographed 
behind bars while on trial in Moscow. 
In , Khodorkovsky was one of the 
richest people in the world, ranked 
th on Forbes list of billionaires. He 
was arrested in  and charged with 
fraud, found guilty and sentenced to 
nine years in prison in May . 
While still serving his sentence, 
Khodorkovsky was charged and found 
guilty of embezzlement and money 
laundering in December , 
extending his prison sentence to . 



Chapter  

Jews Come to America 

JEWISH historians divide Jewish immigration o the U. S. 
o three phases: the Sephardic or Spanish Period, the German 
Period and the Russian-Polish Period. 

Jews Expelled from Southern U.S. States in  Because of 
Fraud and Exoitation dining Federal Occupation 

In , at the height of the American Civil War, Union Army 
general (and later president of America) Ulysses Grant expelled 
all Jews from the Southern U.S. states (the Confederacy) which 
were under his military control. 

The reason for this move was that unscrupulous Jews from 
the North had moved in on the prostrate southern states and 
were engaging in all manner of black market, smuggling and 
swindling aivities. The only way Grant thought he could stop 
this exoitation was to ban Jews from entering those tetories. 

On December , , Grant wrote to the Assistant Adjutant 
General of the US Army: 

"I have long since believed that in spite of all the vigilance 
that can be infused o st commanders, the specie regulations 
of the Treasury Department have been violated, and that mostly 
by the Jews and other unprincied traders. So well satisfied have 
I been of this that I instrued the commanding officer at 
Columbus to refuse all permits to Jews to come South, and I have 
frequently had them expelled from the department. But they come 
in with their carpet-sacks in spite of all that can be done to 
prevent it. The Jews seem to be a privileged class that can travel 
anywhere. 

"They will land at any wood yard on the river and make their 
way through the country. If not permitted to buy cotton 
themselves, they will a as agents for someone else, who will be 
at a military st with a Treasury permit to receive cotton and pay 
for it in Treasury notes which the Jew will buy at an agreed rate, 
paying gold." 



 Jews in America 


HEAD QUARTERS, !*n ARMY OORTS, 
PimTMiKt or thi 

Oxford. MU*., Dee.  th,  a. 

Qxnxral Oisibb, “I 

Ho. . J 

. Tho Jewr, as a olon. violating every regulation of trade established 
by the Treasury Department, and also Department orders, are hereby 
expelled from the Department 

. Within twenty -four hours from tho receipt of this oAlor by Post 
Commanders, they will see that alt of this clast of people are tarnished 
with passes and required to leave, and any one returning alter such 
notification, will he arrested and held In confinement until an oprtune 
ty oecura of sending thorn out aa prisoners unless tarnished with permits 
from these Head Quartern 

ft. Ho permits will he given these peeo to visit Head Quarters for 
the purse of making personal apication tar trade permits. 

Bk Own or Mas. Our. U. S. Quart. 

JHO. A. EAVUKBk 
