among its prominent members. 
Amter was later severed from the 
case due to illness and died in . 

. Marian Maxwell Abt 
Bachrach, , public relations 
direor and secretary of the party's 
"Defense Commission." She was a 
Chicago Jewess who wrote several 
tras including "Amnesty! Prosal 
of an amnesty program to release the 



Bachrach 



 Spies, Spies and more Spies in America 

members of the Communist Party imprisoned under the 
provisions of the Smith A." Conviion overturned on appeal. 

. Isidore Begun, , a Russian-Jew who formerly taught in 
New York City's public schools. He was a party writer and 
leurer. Conviion overturned on appeal. 

. Alexander Bittelman, , a Russian-Jew, and reputed to be 
"one of the foremost theoreticians and dialeicians of the party." 
A founding member of the CPUSA, Bittelman was a long-time 
editor of The Communist, the monthly magazine of that 
organization. Bittelman was aive in the Jewish Socialist 
Federation of the Socialist Party of America from . In , 
was editor of the Yiddish-language newspaper, Der Kampf ( The 
Struggle). At the convention in Chicago which founded the 
CPUSA, Bittelman was part of the -member committee which 
wrote the program for the organization. He was a member of the 
governing Central Executive Committee of the Jewish 
Communist Federation from - and was eleed a 
member of the Central Executive Committee of the CPUSA and 
its Executive Council in . In July  he was sent to Moscow 
as a representative of the CPUSA. He was convied and served a 
three-year prison term, being freed in . He died in April 
. 

. George B. Charney, , a Russian-Jew. He was the trade 
union secretary of the N.Y. state Communist party. He was 
convied and left the CPUSA after the fall of Stalin. 

. Elizabeth Gurley Flynn, , chairman of the party's 
"Women's Commission." A Gentile, she was born in Concord, N. 
H. 

. Betty Gannett, , national education direor for the party. 
She was a Polish-Jewess. Conviion overturned on appeal. 

. Simon W. Gerson, , chairman of the party's "N. Y. State 
Legislative Bureau." In the s, Gerson served as executive 
editor of the Daily Worker and in the s assumed the same st 
with its successor, the Daily World. He also edited the English 
pages of the Communist Yiddish newspaper. Morning Freiheit, 
under the pen name. Will Simon. 



The Secret Behind Communism 


 


While serving as legislative head of the New York 
Communist Parly, Gerson was convied but later acquitted 
under judicial order that membership in the Communist Party 
does not violate any laws. In , Gerson became campaign 
manager for the Communist presidential ticket of Gus Hall and 
Jarvis Tyner and continued to serve as chair of the Party's 
litical aion commission for many years. He died in , still 
a member of the national committee of the CPUSA. 

. Vior Jeremy Jerome, , chairman of the party's cultural 
commission. He was a Polish-Jew. Sentenced to three years at 
Lewisburg Penitentiary which he served between  and . 

. Arnold Samuel Johnson, temrary chairman of Distri 
 Western Pennsylvania. Born in Seattle, he was a gentile. 

. Claudia Jones, , secretary of the party's "National 
Women's Commission." 


. Albert Francis Lannon, , party's "National Maritime 

Coordinator" and president of the 
"Communist Political Association of 
Maryland and Washington, D. C." 
Nationality unknown. 

. Jacob Mindel, , an old-time 
party wheel horse. He was a Russian 
Jew. Conviion overturned on appeal. 

. Petty Perres, , national 
secretary of the party's Negro 
Commission. 

. Alexander Trachtenberg, head 
of International Publishers, Inc. 

Jew Communists Simon Conviion overturned on appeal. He 

Gerson (left] land Isadore djed in  but International 

Begun outside the Federal 

Court in New York where Publishers, Inc. still exists, is Still 

they faced charges of affiliated with the CPUSA and 

conspiracy to the violent maains an office in New York City. 

oveithiow of the U.S. jg. p olds vVeinstock, , member 
government. 

of the party's "National Review 
Commission." A Hungarian Jew, VVeinstock was imprisoned in 
 for  months and un his release in , he received a 




 Spies, Spies and more Spies in America 

hero's welcome at a Communist Party rally at Carnegie Hall. He 
died in . 

. William Wolf Weinstone, , a charter member of the 
party and a former secretary of its Michigan branch. A Russian- 
Jew, Weinstone served as Executive Secretary of the 
unified Communist Party of America, the forerunner of the 
CPUSA from Oober ,  to February ,  and was an 
imrtant figure in the party's aivities among the auto workers 
of Detroit during the s. 

When the Communist Party was forced underground in , 
Weinstone served as Executive Secretary of the secret party 
organization from Oober ,  to February , , under 
the pseudonym "G. Lewis." 

. Fred Fine, , secretary of the party's "Public Affairs 
