University He was a courier for the Soviet espionage chief, S. M. 
Semenov, who used the Amtorg Trading Corration as a base of 
operations. 

Gold traveled all over the country colleing information from 
ring members strategically aced in defense and atomic energy 
installations. Arrested in May of , he eaded guilty of 
espionage and received  years in prison. 

He was paroled in May , after serving just over half of his 
sentence. Gold died in  and is buried in the Har Nebo 
Cemetery Jewish cemetery in the Oxford Circle neighborhood of 
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. 

. David Greenglass, the son of a Russian-Jewish father and a 
Polish-Jewish mother, was one of those who passed atomic 
information to Gold. Between  and  he was emoyed at 
the vital atomic installation at Los Alamos, New Mexico. He also 
gave Julius Rosenberg vital information concerning the "fuse" 
used to detonate the A-bomb. Significantly, the chief of the Los 
Alamos proje at this time was the Jew, Robert Oppenheimer. 

Greenglass was sentenced to  years in prison, served  
years. After his release in , he took up residence in New York 
City under an assumed name, where he was still living in . In 
, when the government sought to release transcripts of the 
Rosenbergs' grand jury proceedings, Greenglass objeed to the 
release of his testimony. As a result, U.S. Distri Judge Alvin 
Hellerstein declined to release the testimony of Greenglass and 
other witnesses who declined to consent, or who could not be 
confirmed as dead, or located to obtain consent. 

. Abraham Brothman was another member of the ring. He 
headed the engineering firm of A. Brothman and Associates, 
Long Island, N.Y. 

He supied Gold with secret data on aviation gasoline, turbo 
aircraft engines, and synthetic rubber. So valuable was his 
contribution that a Russian official allegedly told him his efforts 
were worth two brigades to Soviet Russia. He was arrested on 
July th, , for conspiracy against the U.S. and was 
convied. He served two years in jail and died in . 



The Secret Behind Communism 


 


. Miriam Moskowitz was also caught in the spy net. A 
graduate of the City College of NYC, she was arrested August , 
 as part of the same apparatus. She was emoyed by the 
War Manwere Commission between -, and was later 
associated with the Brothman firm. She was convied of 
conspiracy to obstru justice and served two year's in prison. As 
of , she was still living in New Jersey. 

. Sidney Weinbaum, a produ of Russia's "Charkoff" 
Institute of Technology, came to the U.S. in . His real name 
was Israel Weinbaum. He was conneed with the radiation 
laboratory at CalTech for four years, during which time he 
furnished the Soviet government with atomic secrets. His 
attendance of "Communist club" meetings and association with 
known Communists during his days as a student were held 
against him as proof of his perjury. In September of  
however, at the Federal Distri Court in Los Angeles, Weinbaum 
was convied of perjury and sentenced to four' years 
imprisonment. 

. Alfred Dean Slack, was the only gentile besides Fuchs to 
be apprehended. While emoyed at the Oak Ridge establishment 
he gave atomic information to Harry Gold. He is also believed to 

have given Gold elligence 
about a new secret exosive 
while emoyed at the Holtson 
Ordnance Works at Kingsrt, 
Tennessee. 

Julius and Ethel Rosenberg 

Three other members of the 
Fuchs-Gold ring were also 
arrested. However, unlike the 
first seven  who eaded 

Communist Jew spies Ethel and guilty they chose to ead 
Julius Rosenberg, executed in  "not guilty." 

for conspiracy to commit espionage As a result two of them- 
during a time of war. Julius and Ethel Rosenberg - 

received the death penalty and the third, Morton Sobell, received 
 years in prison. 




 Atomic Treason 


. Julius Rosenberg was born of Russian-Jewish parents. An 
elerical engineer and a graduate of the City College of New 
York City, he was instrumental in recruiting Greenglass o the 
spy ring. While emoyed at the Emerson Eleric Company he 
stole the ans for the highly secret proximity fuse which was 
used against American anes in Korea. He also aided in the theft 
of atomic secrets: His job was to digest information from 
Greenglass, and then pass it on to Soviet agents. He was 
sentenced to death. 

. Ethel Rosenberg, wife of Julius, was convied of the same 
charges at the same time. She was a sister of David Greenglass. 
David Greenglass' s wife aed as a courier between Greenglass 
and the Rosenbergs, but for some reason was not put on trial. 
Ethel Rosenberg was sentenced to death and along with her 
husband, Julius, was executed on June ,  in Sing Sing 
prison  the first execution of civilians for espionage in United 
States history. 

. Morton Sobell was also a graduate of the City College of 

New York City. He and 
Rosenberg were classmates 
together. Sobell passed 
eleronic data to Rosenberg, 
including radar secrets. He 
fled to Mexico to escape 
arrest, was returned by 
Mexican authorities. He was 
convied for conspiracy to 

commit espionage and was 
sentenced to  years in 
prison. 

Other Jews in the Rosenberg Spy Ring 

The other Jews arrested in the "Rosenberg Spy Ring" were as 
follows: 

. Joel Barr, met Julius Rosenberg at City College of New 
York, then spied with him and A Sarantal Army Signal 
Corps lab in New Jersey; escaped prosecution by fleeing to Soviet 
bloc in . Died . 



