
that this "represents a dramatic step forward for Chinese military 
aviation." (Flight International, //) 

: An Army mechanical engineer, David A. Tenenbaum, 
"inadvertently" gives classified military information on missile 
systems and armored vehicles to Israeli officials (New York Times, 
//). 

: The Washington Post rerts US elligence has 
ercepted a conversation in which two Israeli officials had 
discussed the ssibility of getting a confidential letter that then- 
Secretary of State Warren Christopher had written to Palestinian 
leader Yasir Arafat. One of the Israelis, identified only as "Dov", 
had commented that they may get the letter from "Mega", the 
code name for Israel's top agent inside the United States. 

: US ambassador to Israel, Martin Indyk, comains 
privately to the Israeli government about heavy-handed 
surveillance by Israeli elligence agents. 

: Israeli agents ace a 
tap on Monica Lewinsky's 
phone at the Watergate and 
record phone sex sessions 
between her and President Bill 
Clon. The Ken Starr rert 
confirms that Clon warned 
Lewinsky their conversations 
were being taped and ended 
the affair. At the same time, the 
FBI's hunt for "Mega" is called off. 

Mass Arrests of Israeli Spies after - 

An investigation by the FBI in early  led to the exsure 
of the largest foreign spy ring ever uncovered inside the United 
States - operated by Israel. Half of the suspeed spies had been 
arrested before the events of September , . 

On -,  Israelis were arrested shortly after the World Trade 
Toweres in New York City collapsed. Supsedly emoyed by 
Urban Moving Systems, the Israelis were found with multie 
passrts and a lot of cash. At least two are sitively identified 
as Mossad. 




The Secret Behind Communism  


Witnesses testified that the Jews were seen at Liberty Park at 
the time of the first impa, and had set up a camera to film the 
events, which strongly suggested that they had foreknowledge of 
what was to come. They were errogated, and then eventually 
sent back to Israel. The owner of the moving company used as a 
cover by the Mossad agents, later abandoned his "business" and 
fled to Israel. 

The United States Government then classified all of the 
evidence related to the Israeli agents and their conneions to - 
. All of this was rerted to the public via a four part story on 
Fox News by Carl Cameron. Pressure from Jewish groups, 
primarily AIPAC, forced Fox News to remove the story from 
their website. 

Two hours prior to the - attacks, Odigo, an Israeli 
company with offices just a few blocks from the World Trade 
Center, received an advance warning via the ernet. The 
manager of the New York Office provided the FBI with the IP 
address of the sender of the message, but nothing public was 
ever announced of an investigation, even if one did take ace. 

s Jewish Treason for Israel Against America 

: It is discovered that US drug agents' communications 
have been penetrated. Suspicion falls on two companies, 
AMDOCS and Comverse Infosys, both owned by Israelis. 
AMDOCS generates billing data for most US phone companies 
and is able to provide detailed logs of who is talking to whom. 
Comverse Infosys builds the tapping equipment used by law 
enforcement to eavesdrop on all American telephone calls, but 
suspicion forms that Comverse, which gets half of its research 
and development budget from the Israeli government, has built a 
back door o the system that is being exoited by Israeli 
elligence and that the information gleaned on US drug 
erdiion efforts is finding its way to drug smugglers. 

: The FBI is investigating five Israeli moving companies 
as ssible fronts for Israeli elligence. 

: The Jewish Defense League's Irv Rubin arrested for 
anning to bomb a US Congressman. He is killed in jail before 
he can be brought to trial. 



 The Tribal Shift: Spying Now for Israel 

: The DEA issues a rert that Israeli spies, sing as art 
students, have been trying to penetrate US government offices. 

: Police near the Whidbey Island Naval Air Station in 
southern Washington State stop a suspicious truck and detain 
two Israelis, one of whom is illegally in the United States. The 
two men were driving at high speed in a Ryder rental truck, 
which they claimed had been used to "deliver furniture." The 
next day, lice discovered traces of TNT and RDX military- 
grade astic exosives inside the passenger cabin and on the 
steering wheel of the vehicle. The FBI then announces that the 
tests that showed exosives were "false sitives" by cigarette 
smoke, a claim test experts say is ridiculous. Based on an alibi 
provided by a woman, the case is closed and the Israelis are 
handed over to INS to be sent back to Israel. One week later, the 
woman who provided the alibi vanishes.  

: The Police Chief of Cloudcroft stops a truck speeding 
through a school zone. The drivers turn out to be Israelis with 
expired passrts. Claiming to be movers, the truck contains junk 
furniture and several boxes. The Israelis are handed over to 
immigration. The contents of the boxers are not revealed to the 
public.  

: Police near the Nuclear 
Fuel Services ant in Tennessee 
stop a truck after a three mile 
chase, during which the driver 
throws a bottle containing a 
strange liquid from the cab. The 
drivers turn out to be Israelis using 
fake identity documents. The FBI 
refuses to investigate and the 
Israelis are released.  

: Two Israelis try to enter 
Kings Bay Naval Submarine Base, 
home to eight Trident submarines. 
The truck tests sitive for exosives. 

: Ben-Ami Kadish, a former U.S. Army mechanical 
engineer, ed guilty to being an "unregistered agent for Israel," 




The Secret Behind Communism  

and admitted to disclosing classified U.S. documents to Israel in 
the s. 
