authorities had evidence that they were working for Soviet 
elligence. 

Ulanovsky was convied of espionage, sentenced to eighteen 
months in prison and then derted to the Soviet Union. 

The other two Jewish spies continued with their Communist 
aivities once released: Josephson returned to America and 
worked as a lawyer representing Communist party members. 


The Jew 



Ulanovsky 



The Secret Behind Communism  


while Mink went to Spain where he served as air NKVD assassin 
during the Civil War in that country. 

In , Ulanovsky's wife Nadezhda was arrested by the 
Soviets, and he was detained the following year following a 
falling out with their bosses. They were sent to the Gulag, and 
released in . Ulanovsky died in  and his wife died in 
Israel in . 

Elizabeth Zarubina/ Lisa Rozensweig 

The Jewess Elizaveta 'Zoya' Yulyevna Zarubina was 
born Lisa Rozensweig, and joined the Soviet 
spy network in , working in the Soviet 
embassy in Vienna. 

In , Rozensweig and fellow Jew 
agent Yakov Blumkinwere sted as 
"illegals" in Turkey, where he 
sold Hasidic manuscripts from the Central 
Library in Moscow to suprt illegal 
operations in Turkey and the Middle East. 

Soviet elligence officer Pavel 
Sudoatov, who later organized Leon 
Trotsky's murder, claimed in his autobiography that Blumkin 
gave part of the sale proceeds to Trotsky, who was then in exile 
in Turkey. According to his account, Rozensweig denounced 
Blumkin for this aivity, and that was the reason he was recalled 
to Moscow and executed. 

Shortly thereafter (), Rozensweig maed the Jew Vasily 
Zarubin, and they traveled and spied together for many years, 
using the cover of a Czechoslovakian and USA business coue 
for work in Denmark, Germany, France and the United States. 

According to the book Special Tasks: The Memoirs of an 
Unwanted Witness  A Soviet Spy master, by Pavel Sudoatov, 
Anatoli Sudoatov, Jerrold L. Scheer, Leona P. Scheer, (Little 
Brown, Boston, ), p. . Rozensweig was "one of the most 
successful operators in stealing atomic bomb secrets from the 
United States". 

Together with the chief Soviet spy in California and Jew 
Gregory Kheifetz (who served as the Soviet vice-consul in San 



Rosenzweig 



 Spies, Spies and more Spies in America 

Francisco from  to , see above), she set up a ring of 

young Communist physicists around the Jew Robert 

Oppenheimer at Los Alamos to 
transmit nuclear wean ans to 
Moscow. Rozenswieg avoided 
capture and died in Russia in . 

George Abramovich Koval 

George Abramovich Koval was 
born in Sioux City, Iowa, USA, of 
Russian Jewish parents. Shortly 
after reaching adulthood he 
traveled with his parents to the 
Soviet Union to settle in the Jewish 
Autonomous Region near the 
Chinese border. There, Koval was recruited by the Soviet Main 
Intelligence Direorate, trained, and assigned the code name 
DELMAR. 

He returned to the United States in  and was drafted o 
the US Army in early . Koval worked at atomic research 
laboratories and, according to the Russian government, relayed 
back to the Soviet Union information about the produion 
processes and volumes of the lonium, utonium, 
and uranium used in American atomic weanry, and 
descriptions of the wean produion sites. 

After the war, Koval left on a "European vacation" but went 
direly to the Soviet Union where he lived out the rest of his life, 
dying in Moscow in . 

His aivities as a spy only emerged after the publication of a 
 book. The GRU and the Atomic Bomb , which mentioned Koval 
by his code name and listed him as one of a handful of spies who 
evaded counter-elligence groups. 

On November , , he received the sthumous title 
of Hero of the Russian Federation bestowed by Russian 
President Vladimir Putin. 

When Koval was honored, the Russian presidential 
proclamation stated, "Mr. Koval, who operated under the 





The Secret Behind Communism  


pseudonym Delmar, provided information that helped speed up 
considerably the time it took for the Soviet Union to develop an 
atomic bomb of its own." 

The Treason Trials 

The U.S. Communist Party was involved in a series of highly 
publicized treason and conspiracy trials shortly after World War 
II, which were utterly without precedent in American history. 
These included: 

* The "Amerasia Case," 

* The "Gerhart Eisler Case," 

* The "Judith Coin Case," 

* The "Alger Hiss Case," 

* The "Hollywood Ten Case," 

