Does anyone else (who's not a bigot) see the irony of this? 

Let's be honest with ourselves, here, fellow Jews. We do 
control the media. We've got so many dudes up in the executive 
offices in all the big movie produion companies it's almost 
obscene. Just about every movie or TV show, whether it be 
"Tropic Thunder" or "Curb Your Enthusiasm," is rife with aors, 
direors, and writers who are Jewish. Did you know that all eight 
major film studios are run by Jews? 

But that's not all. We also control the ads that go on those TV 
shows. 

And let's not forget AIPAC, every anti-Semite's favorite 
punching bag. We're talking an organization that's praically the 
equivalent of the Elders of Zion. I'll never forget when I was 
involved in Israeli advocacy in college and being at one of the 
many AIPAC conventions. A man literally stood in front of us 
and told us that their whole goal was to only work with top- 
school graduate students because they would eventually be the 
people making changes in the government. Here I am, an 
idealistic little kid that goes to a bottom  school (ASU) who 
wants to do some grassroots advocacy, and these guys are literally 
talking about infiltrating the government. Intense. 

...That the Mel Gibsons of the world are right in saying we're 
deliberately using our were to take over the world. That we've 
got some crazy conspiracy going down... 

...The ADL chairman, Abe Foxman, was erviewed in a great 
article about the subje and he said that he "would prefer people 
say that many executives in the industry 'happen to be Jewish.'" 
This just about sums up the party line. 

The truth is, the anti-Semites got it right. We Jews have 
something anted in each one of us that makes us cometely 
different from every group in the world. 

Jewish journalists anually brag to themselves about the 
reason why The Secret Behind Communism is an unknown secret to 
most Americans and most of the world: their media control. 

The reason the secret is maained simy lies in the fa that 
Jews do dominate the media and believe that it is in their erest 
to keep general knowledge of their leading role in Communism 
covered up. Of course, there is tremendous pressure on any Jew 
or Gentile in the media who would exse the Jewish racism that 
enables their domination. 



Chapter : 

The Communist Origins of Neoconservatism 

The "neo-conservative" movement  the lobby group direly 
resnsible for the illegal, immoral and disastrous war in Iraq of 
  is entirely misnamed. They are not "conservatives" in any 
sense of the word, and the entire ideology is essentially an 
extension of Jewish Trotskyism  as evidenced in their own 
words. 

An article by the neoconservative "godfather" Irving Kristol in 
the Weekly Standard in  summed up the situational  

"The historical task and litical 
purse of neo-conservatism would 
seem to be this: to convert the 
Republican party, and American 
conservatism in general, against their 
respeive wills, o a new kind of 
conservative litics suitable to 
governing a modern democracy." 

Kristol eschewed any attempt to 
justify U.S. suprt for Israel in 
terms of American national erest: 

"Large nations, whose identity is 
ideological, like the Soviet Union of 
yesteryear and the United States of 

today, inevitably have ideological 
erests in addition to more 
material concerns... That is why we 
feel it necessary to defend Israel today, when its survival is 
threatened. No comicated geolitical calculations of national 
erest are necessary." 

Ideological Origins: Israel First 

Neoconservatism's key founders trace their elleual 
ancestry to the "New York Intelleuals," a group that originated 
as followeres of Trotskyite theoretician Max Schaman in the 
s and centered around influential journals like Partisan 



Irving Kristol, an open 
Trotskyite Communist , a 
founder of neoconservatism 


The Secret Behind Communism  

Review and Commentary (which is published by the American 
Jewish Committee). 

Key figures in leading the neocons away from calling 
themselves "leftists" and becoming "conservatives" were 
philosopher Sidney Hook and Elliot Cohen, editor of 
Commentary . The ideological kingpin of neoconservatism was 
Leo Strauss, a dedicated open Marxist devotee of Leon Trotsky 
(Lev Bronstein), the head of the Red Army who began the Red 
Terror in Russia. 

Many of the leading neocons worked closely with Jewish 
aivist organizations and it was only when the left began to be 
hostile towards the racist state of Israel, that these radical 
aivists "abandoned" their Communist sitions. 

By the s, the Jewish neocons had adopted an aggressive 
stance against the Soviet Union, whose anti-Zionist licy they 
erpreted as "anti-Semitism." 

Jewish neocon Richard Perle, for exame, later to become 
infamous as one of the major ayers in engineering the  war 
against Iraq, was the prime organizer of Congressional suprt 
for the  Jackson-Vanik Amendment. This legislation linked 
bilateral trade with the Soviet Union to special dispensation for 
Jews to emigrate from the USSR, primarily to America and Israel. 

As the neoconservatives lost 
faith in radical leftism, several key 
neocons became attraed to the 
writings of Leo Strauss, a classicist 
and litical philosopher at the 
University of Chicago. Strauss had 
a very strong Jewish identity and 
viewed his philosophy as a means 
of ensuring Jewish survival in the 
Diasra. As he put it in a  
Hillel House leure, later 
republished in Leo Strauss : Political 
Philosopher and Jewish Thinker: 

"I believe I can say, without any 
exaggeration, that since a very, very 


