Ehrenburg's incendiary writings certainly contributed in no 
small measure to the orgy of murder and rape by Soviet soldiers 
against German civilians. 

Until his death in , "his suprt for the Soviet state, and 
for Stalin, never wavered," the Canadian Jewish News notes. 

His loyalty and service were acknowledged in  when he 
received the Stalin Prize. In keeping with official Soviet licy, he 
publicly criticized Israel and Zionism. 



 ILYA '' 
E H R E M  UR G 


JAC member, Ilya 
Ehrenburg, ske in New 
York in . 



 Soviet Zionism: A Special Homeland for Jews 

The Canadian Jewish News further writes: 

" ... The recent disclosure that Ehrenburg arranged to transfer 
his private archives to Jerusalem's Yad Vashem library and 
archive, while still alive, comes as a stunning revelation. The 
reason this information has come to light only now is that 
Ehrenburg agreed to transfer his archive on condition that the 
transfer, and his will, remain secret for  years after his death. 
On Dec.  [], with the -year period expired, Israel's daily 
Maariv related Ehrenburg's story..." 

A supsed dedicated Bolshevik Soviet leader, it turned out 
that he secretly willed his private papers, not to the Soviet Union 
but to the Zionist State, where he is honored at Yad Vashem. 

JAC Visits America 

In , Mikhoels and the Jew Itzik Feffer became the first 
official representatives of Soviet Jewry to visit the West, where 
they went on a seven-month tour in the U.S., Mexico, Canada and 
Britain to meet with influential Jews. 

In the U.S., they were welcomed by the pro-Communist Jews 
Albert Einstein and B.Z. Goldberg, and the American Jewish Jo 
Distribution Committee. (B.Z. Goldberg was the son-in-law of 
Sholom Aleichem, who wrote Fiddler on the Roof, a much- 
publicized propaganda piece for theaters, glorifying Jewish life in 
Russia without mentioning any Communist conneions.) 

They also participated in the largest pro-Soviet rally ever held 
in the United States, on July ,  in New York. Another 
participant was Rabbi Stephen Wise, chairman of the World 
Jewish Congress. 

They met with Chaim Weizmann, head of the Zionist 
Organization, and first president of Israel; Charlie Chain, who 
had made the anti-German propaganda movie The Great Diator ; 
the Jew Marc Chagall, who was a much-praised Jewish artist and a 
leader of the "modern art" movement; the Black Paul Robeson, an 
aor and pro-Communist aivist in the Black "civil rights" 
movement; and the Jew Lion Feuchtwanger, a writer from 
Germany who wrote well-publicized anti-German books and 
praised the Soviet Union. 



The Secret Behind Communism  


A Soviet group formed in , the Jewish Anti-Fascist 
Committee (JAC) was hugely successful in its war propaganda, 
as its stories of German atrocities against civilians and in 
concentration camps were presented as fa in Western media. 
Many members of the JAC were also strong suprters of Israel, 
something that Stalin briefly suprted. Eventually however 
many of the members, including Mikhoel, were purged and 
killed by Stalin's secret lice. 

The JAC also propagated the idea of a Jewish homeland in the 
Soviet Union, and the organization received a letter from Stalin 
which read as follows: "The creation of a Jewish Soviet republic 
will once and forever, in a Bolshevik manner, within the spirit of 
Leninist-Stalinist national licy, settle the problem of the state 
legal sition of the Jewish people and further development of 
their multi-century culture. This is a problem that no one has 
been capable of settling in the course of many centuries. It can be 
solved only in our great socialist country." 

According to the Jew Grigory Kheifets, who was the Soviet 
vice-consul in San Francisco from  to  and also San 
Francisco KGB station chief, the letter went on to prose a an 
to make the Crimean Socialist Republic a homeland for Jewish 
people from all over the world. 

Coordination and execution of this an to lure investors was 
entrusted to Kheifets and became known as the "California in the 
Crimea" option. 

Ultimately all these ans for a "Soviet Zion" came to nothing 
as the world Zionist movement opted to seize Palestine as a 
Jewish homeland, even if it meant driving out the Arabs already 
living there. 



Chapter  

The Greatest Mass Murderers 
in all of Human History 

IN , a remarkable 
article  and admission  
appeared in the Israeli 
news source Ynet News. 
Titled "Stalin's Jews" and 
written by Jewish 
columnist Sever Plocker. 
His article confirmed the 
teble crimes which 
Jewish Communists had 
committed under Stalin.  
The article for its Israeli, Jewish audience starts out by saying: 

"We must not forget that some of greatest murderers of 
modern times were Jewish," 

He then goes on to make a number of startling confessions: 

"Here's a particularly forlorn historical date: Almost  years 
ago, between the th and th of December , in the midst of 
the Bolshevik revolution and civil war, Lenin signed a decree 
calling for the establishment of The All-Russian Extraordinary 
Commission for Combating Counter-Revolution and Sabotage, 
also known as Cheka. 

"Within a short period of time, Cheka became the largest and 
cruelest state security organization. Its organizational struure 
was changed every few years, as were its names: From Cheka to 
GPU, later to NKVD, and later to KGB. 

"We cannot know with certay the number of deaths Cheka 
was resnsible for in its various manifestations, but the number 
is surely at least  million, including viims of the forced 
colleivization, the hunger, large purges, expulsions, 
banishments, executions, and mass death at Gulags. 
