excerpt from his amazing article. 

In violent opsition to all 
this sphere of Jewish effort rise 
the schemes of the 
International Jews. The 
adherents of this sinister 
confederacy are mostly men 
reared up among the unhappy 
pulations of countries where 
the Jews are persecuted on 
account of their race. Most, if 
not all, of them have forsaken the faith of their forefathers and 
divorced from their minds all spiritual hopes of the next world. 
This movement among the Jews is not new. From the days of 
Spartacus-Weishaupt to those of Karl Marx, and down to Trotsky 
(Russia), Bela Kun (Hungary), Rosa Luxembourg (Germany), and 
Emma Goldman (United States), this world-wide conspiracy for 
the overthrow of civilisation and for the reconstitution of society 
on the basis of arrested development, of envious malevolence, 
and imssible equality, has been steadily growing. ..and now at 
last this band of extraordinary personalities from the underworld 
of the great cities of Europe and America have gripped the 
Russian people by the hair of their heads and have become 
praically the undisputed masters of that enormous empire. 

There is no need to exaggerate the part ayed in the creation 
of Bolshevism and in the aual bringing about of the Russian 
Revolution by these ernational and for the most part atheistical 

Jews.. . 


As imrtant an historical figure as Churchill was, he was 
still only one voice. I rationalized that he could simy be wrong 
about the nature of the Russian Revolution. One of the Common 
Sense articles I read referred to a series of exosive documents 
(comete with file numbers) from the National Archives of the 
United States. 

I wrote to my local Congressman, F. Edward Hebert, and 
asked if his office could obtain copies of the files for me. A coue 



The Secret Behind Communism  


of weeks later, on returning home from school, I found waiting 
for me a large manila envelope from the Congressman. 

Certified by the seal of the United States of America, the 
documents were from the National Archives. They concerned 
elligence rerts from foreign governments and extensive 
rerts from our chief elligence officers in Russia during the 
time of the early days of the Communist revolution and the 
Russian Civil War. 

The early s were long before the establishment of the OSS 
and the CIA. The U.S. Army ran our ernational elligence 
work at that time. One of our military elligence officers in 
Russia during its revolutionary period was Captain Montgomery 
Schuyler. 

He sent back regular rerts to the chief of staff of U.S. Army 
Intelligence, who then relayed them to the Secretary of War and 
the President of the United States. 

Reading through the lengthy rerts gave me a glimpse o 
an historical period of which few Americans are aware. They 
rerted hoble massacres of thousands of Russian aristocrats 
and elligentsia, murdered simy because they could provide 
effeive leadership in opsition to the Communists. 

Many Americans are at least somewhat aware of Stalin's 
murder of millions. However, many millions also died in the 
early days of Bolshevism under Lenin and Trotsky, for it was 
these men who initiated the first mass killings and the Gulags. 

equivocation, the Jewish 
nature of the revolution. 
In one of Schuyler's 
official, detailed rerts, 
declassified in , 
almost  years after he 
wrote and dispatched 
them, he states:   

In quoting the 
graphic language of this 
official rert, my 
ention is not to offend; but Schuyler's rert says what it says. 


The rerts also stated, without 


"It is probably unwise to say this 
loudly in the United States, but the 
Bolshevik movement is and has 
been since its beginning, guided 
and controlled by Russian Jews of 
the greasiest type..." 

Captain Schuyler, American 
army elligence officer in Russia 
during the Russian Revolution. (In 
his official rert) 




 Communism with the Mask Off 

whether we like it or not. In another rert, written four months 
later. Captain Schuyler goes on to quote the evidence of Robert 
Wilton, who was then the chief Russian corresndent of the 
authoritative London Times. Wilton later went on to pen a number 
of best-selling books about the revolution, including the widely 
acclaimed Russia's Agony and Last Days of the Romanovs. i? On 
June , , Schuyler cites Wilton as follows: 

A table made up in , by Robert Wilton, corresndent 
of the London Times in Russia, shows at that time there were 
 commissars including  Negroes,  Russians,  
Chinamen,  Armenians and more than  Jews. Of the 
latter number  had come from the United States since the 
downfall of the Imperial Government.  

There was, of course, no reason to impugn the rerting of 
the Times or of Captain Schuyler. I couldn't believe my eyes as I 
scanned the papers dispersed across the astic tablecloth on my 
dining room table. I wondered how it could ssibly be true that 
the "Russian Revolution" had had only  ethnic Russians out of 
the  members of its top governing body. Churchill's 
description of "gripping the Russian people by the hair of their 
heads" came to life in the pages I received from our own 
National Archives. 

Once I started checking out the leads I would glean from my 
reading, the National Archives kept providing me with the most 
incredible documents. Not only did our chief elligence officer 
write to the President of the United States about the Jewish 
nature of Communism, so did our U.S. ambassador to Russia, 
David R. Francis. In a January  cable to our government, he 
rerted: 

The Bolshevik leaders here, most of whom are Jews and  
percent of whom are returned exiles, care little for Russia or any 
other country but are ernationalists and they are trying to start 
