The Secret Behind Communism 



About The Author 

Former member of the House of Representatives in Louisiana, Dr. David Duke, 
is unique. He earned a PhD in history and is a world famous litical figure. 

"What is the  of studying and understanding 
history," he says, "if we don’t learn enough from it to 
prevent a repeat of its horrors." 

In Russia and Ukraine Dr. Duke researched the 
foundations of communism and its Red Terror. His 
book reveals the force behind them that still 
endangers the world, and it also throws light on the 
common origins of Communism and Zionism, and 
how many features of Communism now flourish in Zionism and Israel. 

Duke was a litically incorre young man. He says what he thinks, pular or 
not. His views have evolved, but the media never forgives criticism against the 
Zionist extremists who so werefully influence it. 

He opses any sort of racism or ethnic supremacism, including that of the 
hyper-racist tribalism that runs Zionist Israel, and that also influences global media, 
governments and finance. He believes that every people on Earth has the right to 
be free and independent; to preserve its heritage and diversity as a unique 
expression of humanity; that no people has the right to oppress or exoit others. 

It is ironic that the Ziomedia voices that excoriate this non-violent man are the 
same who revere people like Menachem Begin. Only in an upside down world could 
an unrepentant, Zionist terrorist who murdered and ethnically cleansed 
Palestinians, be honored with a Mobel Peace Prize. 

Dr. Duke, a courageous, non-violent voice for peace against the Zionist-driven 
wars of our time, finds no media redemption. He has, however, found redemption 
from voters and respe from millions of the truly open-minded. 

David Duke went on from his controversial younger days to win four eleions. 
He won the Mew Hampshire Democratic Primary for Vice President of the United 
States in  with over  percent of the vote (the same eleion A Gore won in 
). He won eleion to the House of Representatives in Louisiana in . In 
 Duke defeated the sitting Governor of Louisiana (Buddy Roemer) for the 
Republican nomination. Duke was eleed Chairman of the Republican Executive 
Committee (-) in the largest Republican distri of Louisiana. 

David Duke has a doorate in History and has leured at over two hundred 
universities on four continents. He has appeared in major televised debates and 
programs, including three appearances on the leading American litical program, 
Meet the Press . He has appeared on over , programs in America, Europe and 
 other nations. Dr. Duke’s videos earn a  percent sitive rating from tens of 
millions of vieweres. He has penned four books: My Awakening , Jewish 
Supremacism , The Secret Behind Communism and The Zionist Conspiracy . 



Dr. Duke leuring in the 
Mayakovsky Museum near 
infamous Lubayanka Prison 



Dr. David Duke 

Visiting a memorial commemorating the genocide in the nation of 
Ukraine. Dr. Duke has spent years in Russia and Eastern Europe 
researching the origins of Communism and The Red Terror. 




The Secret Behind Communism 


The Ethnic Origins of the Russian Revolution & 
the Greatest Holocaust in the History of Mankind 


The fa that the world is so ignorant amd uncaring about 

THIS ENORMOUS CRIME IS PROOF THAT THE GLOBAL MEDIA IS IN THE 
HANDS OF THE PERPETRATORS. 

-- Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn 


Dr. David Duke 

With research and writings also from 
Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn, Frank Britton and other scholars 



Dedication: 


TO THE MEMORY OF A MAH WHO COMBINED GENIUS WITH COURAGE. 
FOR HIM, THE STRUGGLE FOR HUMAN RIGHTS AND VALUES IS MORE THAN 
A MATTER OF PRINCIPLE, IT IS THE MEANING OF LIFE ITSELF. 

Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn 



Table of Contents 

Introduion  

 Communism with the Mask Off  

 The Ethnic War On the Russian Peoe  

 Born of the Same Roots: Communism & Zionism  

 Bloody Sunday & the  Revolution  

 The First World War Weakens the Tsar  

 The March  Revolution  

 The Origins of the Bolsheviks  

 The Ground is Prepared  

 The Sixth Party Congress  

 Trotsky to Powere: the Red Terror Begins  

  Encyclopedia Judaica on the "Russian Revolution"  

 Winston Churchill: the Truth about Bolshevism  

 American Intelligence on the "Russian Revolution"  

 The London Times Unmasks Bolshevism  

 The Executioners of the Red Terror  

 Exrting the Revolution  

 Trotsky in Decline  

 Lazar Kaganovich: Mass Murder & the Holodomor  

 The “Soviet Zion” and Plans for a Jewish Homeland  

 The Greatest Mass Murderers in all of Human History  

 Iron Curtain Diators  
