"Ioudean," or "Judean" as the proper term - never "Jew." (This W( had no religious connotation, but 
merely referred to people were inhabitants of Judea.) 

These are only a few of the reasons, my dear brother, MUST take a stand against these enemies of 
my Lord. You one day, I will stand before Him and answere for my faithfulness to Him. That will be the 
day when He states: "But those mine enemies, which would not that I should reign over them, t 
hither, and slay them before me," (Luke :). One day, I will have to answere for any errors I may 
have taught His people. So even though I may incur your diseasure, that is not imrtant in the face of 
Christ's easure. Before God, my friend, I cannot stand silent any longer and put my seal of approval on 
those who "say they are Jews and are not, but are of the synagogl.l Satan," (Rev. :; :). 

In Titus :, we are told: "Not giving heed to Jewish fables, and commandments of men, that 
turn from the truth." In Matthew :, Jesus tells us: "Woe to you scribes and Pharisees, hycrites! 
for ye compass sea and land to make one proselyte, and when he is made, ye make him twofold more a 
child of hell thanyours/f. " How much ainer could our Lord be? 

I pray that God will give you the wisdom, not only to see what you are doing to God's people, but 
what you are doing to yourself. Then I pray that He will give you the courage to admit you have made 
mistakes and take the proper steps to remedy them. Our people have become viims of "certain men 
crept in unawares, who were before of old ordained to this condemnation, " (Jude ). 

It is no wonder that Christ ske to the Pharisees of His day and said: "Ye are of your father the 
devil, and the lusts of your their ye will do. He was a murderer from the beginning and Abode not 
in the truth, because there was not truth in him..." 

Then in Jeremiah :,  - "A wonderful and hoble thing is committed in the land; the 
prophets (preachers) prophesy preach) falsely, and the priests bear rule by their means; and my people 
love to have it so: and what will ye do in the end thereof?" They WILL BE DESTROYED! Will you 
have part in this destmion process? 

For Christ, an Awakened and Militant Church, and a God honoring America, JACK MOHROHR 
U.S. Army Ret. 

To Concerned American Christians: The American Sunbeam Guest Editorial by Lt. Cot. Gordon 
"Jack" Mohr, 

During the past few months, I have received numerous requests for a "follow up" message on my 
Letter to the Pastor's, which was pred in the fall of .  have been led, after a great deal of prayerful 
thought, to make the further exanation, hoping that our Lord will use it to help other Christians who are 
trying, to make up their mind about the same question. 

As I ndered on the contents of this message, I came across these words in Proverbs : - "He 
that justifieth the wicked and he that condemneth the just, even they both are an abomination to the 
Lord. " 

In the fall of , after having been a member of the American Opinion Speaker's Bureau of the 
John Birch Society for twelve years, I resigned. At this time, I had been a fundamental evangelist for 
eighteen years. But I had come face to face with disturbing truth; I had to make a decision. It was not 
something I wanted to do, since I knew it would mean immediate alienated from many who had called 


Page  of  



me friend. It also meant doing a  degree reverse, in a thought process which had been built over many 
years. I 

One morning, as I read in my daily devotions, I came ac these familiar words from James : - 

"Therefore, to him, knoweth to do good, and doeth it not, to him it is sin. " This me very ainly, that if 
I did not share the truth with Christi was committing a deliberate sin. 

From the time when I had miraculously escaped a Communist firing squad in Korea in , one 
of my favorite Scripture found in Ezekiel :. I guess it was because it apied to  very special way: 

"...if the people of the land take a man  coasts, and set him for their watchmen: if when he see sword 
come un the land, he blows the trumpet, and warns people, then whosoever heareth the sound of the 
trumpet, and taketh not warning: if the sword come, and take him away, his blood will be un his 
own head... But, if the watchman see the sword come, and blow not the trumpet, and the people be not 
warned; if the sword come, and take away any person from among them ... his blood will I require at 
the watchman 's hand. " 

This was a ain message to me: "When you know the truth, you better warn the people, even if 
they don't like to hear it." 

For a number of years now, I have been disturbed by what has happened in Palestine, and with 
the Interference of Zionist influences in our own Government. I knew all the fundamental arguments 
about the Jews being God's Chosen Peoe. I had been told many times, that unless we helped the Jews, 
God would curse us. But the truth of the matter, was that God's wrath has fallen on America more 
severely since , when we recognized the Israeli Government in Palestine, than at any time our 
nation's history. Something must be wrong with this theory. 

So what I am going to try and do in this letter, is exain more All, what I tried to express in my 
letter of . 

One of the most disturbing things I had seen during my eighteen years as a fundamental 
evangelist (and I traveled the length breadth of America, speaking in every state except Maine) was their 
tendency towards an unbending prejudice towards who disagreed with them in the religious field. (I use 
this r want of a better one. The diionary defines "prejudice" Conceived judgment or opinion; an opinion 
made without sufficient knowledge.") This I found was almost universally true, lndamentalist camp. 

. . ..I was disturbed by what I saw happening many fundamentalist churches across America. 

I saw a people, who for the most part, had become so comacent about their freedom, they were 
perfely ready to hide in their spiritual foxholes, while the country literally went to hell. Oh they were 
willing to go out and knock on doors once in a while. They were willing to tell about the love of God. 
They were on getting up in some church service to tell what the Lord done for them, and they often 
prayed beautiful prayers, but proof of their Christianity often was missing in their everyday life. 

This "religious neutralism," and again I use this term for want of a better one one, can be 
illustrated by an incident which happened to me in a large Mid-Western church. After preaching one 
Sunday about the Communist threat to Christianity and the need of Christians to become involved in the 
defense of our religious freedom, a very nice lady came up to me and said: Brother Mohr. I liked your 
message, but it was not for me. You see, I`ve been born again, and that means that I don't have to worry 
about such things as the Communists. The Lord is going to come back and take me out of this mess 
before it gets too bad." You talk about being wrapped up in a sheet of self righteousness; that old sister 
was literally bound up in a shroud. 

My blood pressure went sky high. I asked her if she had ever thought of the Christians, by the 
tens of thousands, who had been persecuted in Russia and China, and the one's who were murdered 
during the Third Century persecution and during the inquisition you think they might have thought Jesus 
would come back and rescue them?.... 

I was disturbed by the apathy I saw. They would criticize when I told them, you better prepare for 
hard times ahead. They would criticize me when I told them to store food and ammunition, so they could 


Page  of  



prote their family during the troublesome times ahead. They would tell me: "God will take care of us, ii 
trust Him." But they still bought more life insurance, even w telling me they thought Jesus might be back 
this year. You see what they said about Christ's return, just didn't shape up what with what they were 
doing. There were a lot of preachers in this group 

I can`t make a living from telling the unpular truth.  have had most % blackout among 
fundamentalists, since my letter was sent to their leaders. They don't want their people to know what's 
going on. They told me in essence: "Either love the Jews or get out!" But then it wasn't easant for me to 
tell the American people that some of our leaders were traitors, and that for fifty years, our leaders 
have been selling us o slavery. I`ve been called all kinds of names, both within and without the 
church. Recently a TV moderator called me a "rnographer of paranoia," because I said we needed to 
take a close look at Zionist Influence in Washington. 

But as I studied, I learned some things I had never heard in any fundamental church. I learned that 
the people we now call Jews, are not now nor never have been the Chosen Peoe of the Bible, from 
Many Jewish sources, there is proof that a vast majority of the Jewish people have no relationship to 
Abraham and their ancestors never set foot in Palestine. When I began to speak about this the garbage 
"really hit the fan." .... 

We read in Luke ; verse three that He sat down with His discies, privately. This was 
not a message to Jews. He was speaking to Christians, even though they were not called by that name at 
this time. 

As He talked to His followeres in verse nine, He mention wars, rumors of wars, famines, 
pestilence, and earthquakes; all of which would come to this earth during the tribulation. He said "THEN 
(This means: "following next in order,") shall they deliver you up to be afflied, and shall kill you, and 
ye shall be hated of all nations for my name's sake." Who do you think that word "They" referred to? 
They were the enemies of Christ. He was telling them in essence: "The Jews will deliver you up to be 
