doubt that Israel and the Zionist Lobby were key faors in the decision to go to war. It's a decision 
the US would have been far less likely to take without their efforts. And the war itself was ended 
to be only the first step. 

T ust how cozy is Pelosi with AIPAC? 

Obama pick quits over Israel lobby 

"The libels on me and their easily traceable email trails show conclusively that there is a 
wereful lobby determined to prevent any view other than its own from being aired," [Charles] 
Freeman [Obama's choice to chair the US National I ntelligence Council] said. 

"The taics of the Zionist Israel lobby umb the depths of dishonor and indecency and 
include charaer assassination, seleive misquotation, the willful distortion of the record, the 
fabrication of falsehoods, and an utter disregard for the truth. 

"The aim of this Zionist lobby is control of the licy process through the exercise of a veto 
over the apment of people who dispute the wisdom of its views, the substitution of litical 
correness for analysis, and the exclusion of any and all options for decision by Americans and our 
government other than those that it favors." 

See Xymphora's comment on the J IZ's ("J ews, Israelis and Zionists") sabotage of Charles 
Freeman's apment . 

And here is the full text of Charles Freeman's message . 

Dennis Ross's Iran Plan 

Dennis Ross, a hawkish, pro-Zionist Israel adviser ... helped to oversee a series of rerts 
designed to ring alarm bells about Iran's nuclear research and to suprt closer US- Israeli ties in 
resnse. Last summer, while advising Obama, he co-chaired a task force that produced a paper ... 
[which] opted for an alarmist view of Iran's nuclear program and prosed that the next president 
set up a formal US- Israeli mechanism for coordinating licy toward Iran (including any future need 
for "preventive military aion" [read: an unprovoked attack on Iran]). 

Articles on this Website by Gilad Atzmon 

The Ten Most Common Mistakes of the Israeli Peoe 

Murdered At Daybreak 

Not In My Name: An Analysis of T ewish Righteousness 

The Separation Wall and The Myth of the Israeli Left 

Zionism and other Marginal Thoughts 

The Open Society And Its Enemies ”The Story Of Auschwitz 

To Sit in the Dark 

Labour isn't an Option! ! ! 

An Open Letter from Gilad Atzmon 

Third- Category T ews and the Palestinian Solidarity Movement 

Sex and Politics 


Page  of  


Re-Arranging the th Century: Allegro, non Trop 

I azz and T ihad: the Discourse of Solidarity 

Old Testament and the War Crime in Gaza 

Was the Massacre in Norway a reaion to BPS? 

See also reviews of Gilad Atzmon's A Guide to the Perexed and My One and Only Love . 

Further Articles on this Website 

Here are various articles concerning Zionism and the pervasive and pernicious influence 
of Zionism on the government of the United States, an influence which has now led us o a 
global geolitical situation fraught with danger for us all. 

J ason Collett: What Right Do Zionist T ews Have To Palestine? 

... the people known today as Jews are primarily the descendents 
of a Turkish tribe known as the Khazars. The Khazars have no historical 
conneion to Palestine. They converted to J udaism between  and 
AD, and have no genetic conneion to biblical Israel ... 

Israel Shamir: Battle for Palestine 

In the chain of 'Jew - Gentile - animal' the difference between the first two items is much 
bigger than the difference between the second and third, stulated Taniya, a compendium of 
traditional Jewish teaching. This notion sits in the subconscious levels of many Jews, good and bad 
alike. 

While evil Zionist Jews of Sharon's kin slaughter Gentiles without slightest remorse, many 
good Jews obje to Sharon's aions as they would obje to cruel treatment of animals. Aually, 
on the walls of Tel Aviv houses there are more sters protesting inhuman feeding of geese than 
deoring mass murder of Goyim. 

Israel Shamir: The Shadow of Zog 

The problem is, the US people have no way out of the Zionist takeover. While Neo-Cons and 
Right-wingers are guilty of starting World War Three, of roducing Fascist measures against the 
American pulation, of premeditated aggression against sovereign Iraq and of unrestrained 
suprt for the racist Zionist J ewish State, it would be mistake to leave the buck resting with them. 
... [IJf Zionist Al Gore and Joseph Lieberman were the White House incumbents now, the US 
Marines would be in Baghdad nevertheless, the National Library of Iraq and Iraqi museums would 
still have been looted, and the olive trees of Mesecha uprooted and the flow of American cash to 
Israel would be continuing unabated. 

A Brainwashed American Looks at CNN, MSNBC, Fox News, CBS, ABC and NBC 

I already know that Jewish lives are more imrtant than Palestinian lives. The ultimate in 
evil is the death of a J ewish child. My humanity is outraged. 

Political prisoner Ernst Zimdel 

Donald Cassidy: In Remembrance of the September th Dead! 

The rise of the Conspiracy over the last two centuries parallels the rise of Zionism. This is not 
a coincidence. Early on, the Conspiracy realized that it needed a strong litical agency, Zionism, 
and its own country where it would be free from all governmental oversight and create the 
murderous rogue state (Zionist Israel) that menaces the world today through Washington. 

Reviews of Michael Collins Piper's The Final Judgment, a book which provides evidence 
in suprt of the theory that J ohn F. Kennedy was assassinated in a combined Mossad/CIA 
operation. 

J ohn Kami nsk i- 'Powere Hour' Blocks Kaminski at T nst JMinute 

The Zionist takeover of the colleive American mind has been more than a century in the 
making. Through the anned deterioration of the American educational system, the produion of 
harmful and needless medications, produs and services that keep the public anesthetized and 
disoriented, and the endless stream of xenophobic propaganda spewed forth by media which have 

Page  of  


absolutely no erest in either the health of individuals or the morality of litical issues, the United 
States has become a robotized killing machine, suting pre-programmed inveive that vilifies all 
opsed to its crimes, an out- of- control monster that sickens and kills all those who come in conta 
with its demonic military might, including even those misguided souls who an the atrocities and 
wield the weans. 

Wendy Cam pbell : The Secret Relationship Between Israel and Oil: What the US Media Hides 
J ohn Kaminski: Devils from Heaven 

Mark S. Bilk: Why T ared Israel Is Attacking Scott Ritter And Deceiving The -  Truth 
Movement 

David Hirst: The Lavon Affair 
