The CHRISTIAN NATIONSLIST CRUSADE was built on the following ten princies: 

 - Preserve America as a Christian nation, being conscious of the fa that there is a highly organized 
campaign to substitute Jewish tradition for Christian tradition. (This was before the time of the arch- 
collaborators, Jerry Falwell and Jimmy Swaggart. However the Judaizers were hard at work even then - 
ED.) 

 - Exse, fight and outlaw Communism in the U.S. 

 - Safeguard American liberty against the menace of bureaucratic Fascism. 


Page  of  



- Maain a government set up by the majority, which abuses no minority and which is abused by no 
minority. To fight mongrelization (this is a Scriptural teaching - ED.) and all attempts being made to 
force ermingling of the black and white races. 

 - To maain the George Washington Foreign Policy of friendship with all nations, with entangling 
relations with none. 

 - To exse world government and the super-state 

 - To prove that the worker, the farmer, the businessman, the veteran, the unemoyed, the aged and the 
infirm can enjoy more abundance under the true American system than by any alien system being 
prosed by foreign propagandists. 

 - Stop immigration to prote American jobs and American housing. 

 - Enforce the Constitution as it pert to the monetary system. (In other words, no control by foreign 
bankers; no control by a Federal Reserve -ED.) 

 - To prote and earmark national resources for the use of our own citizens, comittee for the 
permanent record. SIGNED: Gerald L.K. Smith TELEGRAM TO A CONGRESSMAN Los 
Angeles, CA 

Answere from Col. Jack Mohr 

While most decent people will find little controversy concerning these princies, the CRUSADE 
came under bitter and unrelenting attack from the Communist and Zionist Jewish elements. Why was 
everything short of murder tried to silence Gerald L.K. Smith? There has to be some basis for this hatred. 

Here are the major reasons for the enemy attack. They apy in  to those of us who have the 
courage to stand against the same enemy. They are being used today against the CHRISTIAN 
PATRIOTS DEFENSE LEAGUE, my CHRIST AND COUNTRY CRUSADE and any other white 
Christian patriotic organization which will tell the American people the truth about what is happening. 

. If you are anti-communist, then in the eyes of the enemy, you are also "anti-Semitic." The two 
go hand in hand. When Gerald L.K. Smith called for an investigation o the antics of the Jewish traitor 
Alger Hiss in the middle 's, he was immediately accused of being an alarmist and a rabble rouser. 

. If you join in the American tradition of expressing Christian, Scriptural Conviions on the 
subje of racial segregation, you will be attacked. We do not believe that hatred for another race should 
ever enter the subje of segregation, but that it should be approached from a Scriptural perspeive. (This 
is something Evangelist Billy Graham has not done.) 

. Smith believed, as I do, that Blacks are creatures of Almighty God and that under our 
Constitution they deserve life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness. This includes emoyment, freedom 
from want, education and all the values of American life. (If this rubs some of you racialists the wrong 
way, so be it - it is still the truth!) But Smith believed, as I do, that the forced mixing of the races, 
involving social mixture of the races through ermaage, is contrary to the laws of God as set forth in 
the Scriptures. We both believe that this un-godly movement is part of the Jewish ot to destroy our 
White Christian civilization. We have the writings of a multitude of Jewish writers to confirm this. 

. Smith, like my self, was prior to World War II, an AMERICAN FIRSTER! I still believe this 
is a sound idea. I have nothing but the utmost contempt for those so-called Christian preachers who put 
the welfare of the Israelis before that of their own people. What more patriotic attitude can one take, than 
to resolve in his heart that the welfare of his people, and his nation should come first? There have been 
many great and good Americans who have believed and lived by this princie. These too have been 
persecuted by the enemy and their "brainwashed" followeres. 

There are many historic events which have taken ace since  which prove this princie to 
be sound. I believe as did my World War Commander, Gen. George Patton, that we may have fought on 
the wrong side in World War II, since we most certainly did not fight a "war to end all wars," nor a war 
"to defend democracy." All the evidence coming from World War II shows that it was fought for the 
benefit of ernational communism and its Jewish overlords. 


Page  of  



In spite of all the high sounding rhetoric which has come from Washington, D.C. in the  years 
since that war ended, haranguing the American people on how our government has been in the forefront 
of "stopping the advance of communism," no matter which Party has been in were, our official licy 
has been to aid the Communists whenever they needed us and we have set them on their feet on at least 
fourteen major occasions, when they were on the verge of economic collapse. So much for our anti- 
communist stance! In aiding the Communists, we have made a multitude of Zionist Jewish banking 
billionaires. 

Many knowledgeable Americans know that while we "won" World War II, we "lost" the peace. 

Our hycritical leaders said we fought this war to save Poland and other Iron Curtain countries 
from the threat of Nazism. Then we turned around and gave these same countries o the hands of a 
more savage Stalin. This treason was accomished at Yalta and Potsdam with the help of Jewish 
advisors. 

We said we must prote China from the military ambitions of Japan, then turned against the 
Nationalists and handed China over to the Communists. So you see, those of us who believe World War 
II might have been avoided, with millions of lives saved, and countless billions of dollars spent žn 
peaceful pursuits, were not so wrong after all. 

.  also observed, what Smith had seen a long time before, that if you took an uncompromising 
stand against communism and fought it effeively, you would be viciously smeared. You would be 
labeled a "fascist," a "neo-Nazi," a "member of the lunatic fringe," an "anti-Semite," and the most vicious 
attacks would always be led by Zionist Jews. Figure it out for yourself! 

One of the men who was unmercifully smeared by the communist- Jewish enemy, was Martin 
Dies, Congressman from Texas, head of the House Committee on Un-American Aivities. This was 
pularly known as the DIES COMMITTEE. Dies began his investigation of Communism as a naive, 
sincere, elligent statesman. But when he delved o the fas, it brought him face to face with 
murderers, conspirators, liars, charaer assassins - in fa, the campaign against Congressman Dies 
became so deadly, that he went in dire danger of his life and the lives of his family. 

Then there was Congressman John Rankin, one of the men who succeeded Martin Dies as 
Chairman of the House Un- American Aivities Committee. Nothing was too degrading for the enemy 
to do to destroy this patriot. He was greatly respeed in his home state and community as a fine 
Christian gentleman, but the Zionist controlled press and the "smearbund" represented him as a "rabble- 
rouser, a hate-monger, and a blatherskite." (A "blatherskite is a contemptible fellow.) His charaer was 
so blackened that men who had known him for years in Congress were afraid to be seen in his company. 
Others who suprted Congressman Rankin, found that huge sums of money from Jewish sources, were 
being spent to defeat them in upcoming eleions. (Shades of Jesse Helms and Sen. Charles Percy.) When 
Rankin invaded the sacred Jew tetory of Hollywood and began to exse communism there, Zionist 
hatred knew no limits. 

There was Representative J. Parnell Thomas who faced as vicious a smear campaign as any 
which had ever been mounted up to the time of Sen. Joseph McCarthy. He was finally convied for 
receiving payroll kickbacks and was sent to a Federal Penitentiary. He found that the very men he 
exsed, were those running the penitentiary where he was incarcerated. His conviion was a "cooked 
up farce," which has a modern parallel in the trials of Congressman Ralph Hansen. 

There was Father Charles Coughlin, a humble priest of a congregation known as the CHURCH 
OF THE LITTLE FLOWER, at Royal Oak, Michigan. When he began to understand something about 
the conspiracy which was taking ace and had the courage to speak about it on his radio programs, he 
was "smeared" beyond all comprehension. He was attacked mainly, because he showed the conneion 
between Communism and Zionism. 

There was a national hero named Charles Lindberg, who with General Mac Arthur, has become 
one of the greatest American heroes of the Twentieth Century. He believed that World War II could have 


Page  of  



been avoided and said so in a historic speech given at Des Moines, Iowa. He stated: "The three great 
forces seeking to involve the United States in the war are the New Dealers, the British, and the Zionist 
Jews." 
