that will most likely end with expulsion or comete subjugation, degradation, and apartheid. During 
this same period Zionist J ewish organizations in America have been a principal force, in my view the 
main force, for ereing a state dedicated to suppressing ethnic identification among Europeans, for 
encouraging massive multi-ethnic immigration o the U.S., and for ereing a legal system and 
cultural ideology that is obsessively sensitive to the comas and erests of ethnic minorities: 
the culture of the Holocaust. 

Stephen J . Sniegoski: The War on Iraq: Conceived in Israel 
It is also remarkable that while in  Israel was to "shape its strategic environment" by 
removing her enemies, the same individuals [Perle, Feith, and Wurmser] are now prosing that 
the United States shape the Middle East environment by removing Israel's enemies. That is to say, 
the United States is to serve as Israel's proxy to advance Israeli 
erests. 

William Bowles: Has a Right-Wing Zionist Cabal Hijacked 
the White House? 

J effrey Steinberg: Behind the Iraq Dossier Hoax: Intelligence 
Was Cooked in Israel 

J Lilian Borger: The spies who pushed for war 
The OSP [the Office of Special Plans] ... forged close ties to a 
parallel, ad hoc elligence operation inside Ariel Sharon's office in 
Israel specifically to bypass Mossad and provide the Bush 
administration with more alarmist rerts on Saddam's Iraq than 
Mossad was prepared to authorise. ... In , he [ Douglas Feith l and 
Richard Perle ... served as advisers to the then Likud leader, Binyamin 
Netanyahu. In a licy paper they wrote, entitled A Clean Break: A New 
Strategy for Securing the Realm, the two advisers said that Saddam 
would have to be destroyed, and Syria, Lebanon, Saudi Arabia, and 
Iran would have to be overthrown or destabilised, for Israel to be truly safe. 

Linda S. Heard: The Hijacking of the War on Terror' 

Gilad Atzmon: The Protocols Of The Elders Of Zion (Verse ) 

J effrey Blankfort: AIPAC Hijacks the Roadmap ” How Israel's US Lobby is Stackingthe Deck 
Charles E. Carlson: President Carter Speaks the Truth in Boston 
Ralph Nader: Letter to ADL Direor Foxman 
PatrickJ . Buchanan: Whose War? 

A neoconservative clique seeks to ensnare our country in a series of wars that are not in 
America's erest. 

Webster Griffin Tarey: Behind the Israeli Mole Affair: Po of Maximum Danger of 
War with Iran Approaching 

J ustin Raimondo: Traitorous 'Conservatives': Israeli spies in Pentagon are heroes to the 
neocons 

Stephen Green: Serving Two Flags: The Bush Neo-Cons and Israel 



Page  of  



Since -, a small group of "neo-conservatives" in the [Bush] Administration have 
effeively gutted ” they would say reformed ” traditional American foreign and security licy. 
Notable features of the new Bush dorine include the pre-emptive use of unilateral force, and the 
undermining of the United Nations and the princie instruments and institutions of ernational law 
.... all in the so-called cause of fighting terrorism and promoting homeland security. 

Kathleen and Bill Christison: Dual Loyalties: The Bush Neocons and Israel 

Maxim Kniazkov: US To Rate Countries On Their Treatment Of T ews 
Alton Raines comments: 

Oh, well, now what is THIS useless crap going to cost the taxpayers, eh?! Have you ever 
seen such worthless, sniveling, whiney self-erest in your life? These people are so obsessed with 
persecution that they want RATINGS now. Utterly ridiculous!!!! 

A J azeera: Rert: Pentagon twisted pre-war data 

[Democratic Senator Carl] Levin's rert concluded: "Intelligence relating to the Iraq-al- 
Qaida relationship was manipulated by high-ranking officials in the [Defense Department] to 
suprt the administration's decision to invade I raq." 

Undersecretary of Defense Douglas Feith ” one of the Zionist Bush administration's 
strongest advocates for war against Iraq ” led the now defun CEG. 

The - page document detailed how Feith's analysts repeatedly sought to outflank the CIA, 
which was much more skeptical of I raq-al-Qaida ties. 

Neocon/ Zicnist Douglas Feith was pursuing the Neocon/ Zionist agenda of having the US 
disse of Israel's enemies. Although no evidence has ever been produced of a conneion 
between Saddam Hussein and either /  or Al- Qaida, the CEG fabricated evidence for the use 
of the Bush administration, allowing it to ay its assigned role in the Zionist strategy of 
militarily defeating (using US forces) and ssibly dividing any country perceived by it to be a 
threat, the first being Iraq . 

J ohn Anast: The Yarmulke And The Chopstick 

America needs its own "clean- break" strategy in the Middle East, and away from the cold- 
war dominated themes created in many ways by Zionist Israel based un the inane notion that 
treason against America is somehow excusable where Israel is concerned. It is the same psychotic 
reasoning which prevails un Israelis to murder Palestinian woman and children in a blood lust of 
frustration to drive the indigenous people from Palestine. As if the world is expeed to realize the 
establishment of a religiously racist foreign Zionist state void of any diversity through murder, 
treachery, and ethnic cleansing is somehow noble? The mayhem, suffering and toll on American 
society is just not worth it, it's time for a different way. 

As America Sleeps, The Strausscon Plan For Iran Is On Schedule 

How AIPAC Works ” Part  ” Why AIPAC is Feared 

David Com, The Nation, -- : Wolfowitz To Rule the World (Bank) 

Xymphora on ssible Israeli blackmail of G. W. Bush : 

The most serious charge made against Israel was that it had information on the - 
terrorists and failed to inform American authorities so they could have prevented the terrorist 
attacks. What if this is cometely backwards? What if Israel fully informed the CIA of its concerns 
and elligence, and made sure such information reached Bush, but had its neocon agents ensure 
that Bush would not do anything about it, thus leaving him open to continuous blackmail? That 
would exain the supreme over-confidence of Israel and the neocons, the fa that the American 
government caves in to every insane Likudnik sition no matter how damaging to real American 
erests, and the apparent lack of concern about outrageous embarrassment of the American 
government by the Israelis. Has George Bush fallen o the same Zionist Israeli blackmail snare 
that caught his father? 

War Summit ” Bush, Sharon Meet To Plan Iran Attack 

Xymphora: Douglas Feith, radical Zionist 

Study: U.S. Mideast licy motivated by pro- Israel lobby 

J ohn Mearsheimer and Stephen Walt: The Israel Lobby 


Page  of  


Since the Oober War in , Washington has provided Israel with a level of suprt 
dwarfing that given to any other state. It has been the largest annual recipient of dire economic 
and military assistance since , and is the largest recipient in total since World War Two, to the 
tune of well over $ billion (in  dollars). Israel receives about $ billion in dire assistance 
each year, roughly one-fifth of the foreign aid budget, and worth about $ a year for every 
Israeli. ... 

Given the neo-conservatives' devotion to Zionist Israel, their obsession with Iraq, and their 
influence in the Bush administration, it isn't surprising that many Americans suspeed that the war 
was designed to further Israeli Zionist erests. Last March, Barry Jacobs of the American Jewish 
Committee acknowledged that the belief that Israel and the neo- conservatives had conspired to get 
the US o a war in Iraq was 'pervasive' in the elligence community. Yet few people would say so 
publicly, and most of those who did ” including Senator Ernest Hollings and Representative J ames 
Moran ” were condemned for raising the issue. Michael Kinsley wrote in late  that 'the lack of 
public discussion about the role of Israel ... is the proverbial elephant in the room.' The reason for 
the reluance to talk about it, he observed, was fear of being labeled an anti-Semite. There is little 
