Jerm. : ;  False Prophets walk in lies and prophesied in Baal' 

Jerm. :- False prophets pervert the word of God (Elohim) 

Titus :- Qualifications of a preacher 

Matt. :- Peoe who teach the Commandments of men do not worship God ( 

Mai. : Preachers have no fear of the Lord and despise His name; and they say "Wherein have we despised thy name?" 

Heb. :- You need the meat of the word, not just milk 

Matt. :- Answere the people who say because someone heals someone they must be a godly person 
Ezk. :- Preachers do violence to the law 

Jerm. : Pastors destroy the vineyard 

Ezk,:l- Preachers preach their own vanity and seduce people with "peace" when there is no peace. God (Elohim) will destroy 
them they strengthen the wicked! 

Hos.: Preachers teach not the Law and people are destroyed 

Judges :-; :- & - Baal religions destroyed first! 


Page  of  



GENTILES 

Authors note; Every time the word "gentiles" is used in the Bible it is a mistranslation or 
misuse of the Hebrew word # "gowy"or "Goy" (this same word was correly translated nations 
 times in the Bible, like when God told Abraham in Gen. :, "And I will make of the a great 
nation " How would it sound if they had translated this ("And I will make of the a great gentile "! 
ridiculous? Some times they had to properly translate! They did the same in the New testament with the 
Greek word # "ethnos" which mean "nation" or "tribe", not gentiles (nations of Israel, not Jews). 
The word in the modern Bibles translated "Jews" should have been translated "yehuwdiy", one 
who may be distantly related or associated with "yehowdah," Juda, and certainly not Jew or Jews. 
See Strongs word #. The word gentile should have been translated nation or nation of Israel, 
meaning all  tribes, and properly translated would throw a different meaning on many 
Scriptures. Remember the Christians worst enemies, the Jews had a hand in translating the Bible and 
changed things to make it look like they were God's chosen people and we were just the scum of the 
earth, mere gentiles or heathen. 

As : All Israel are brethren of the gentiles 

As : God took Israel out of the gentiles 

Rom. : All nations are gentiles 

Rom. :- Israel is His Christian people 

Rom. :- Israel are gentiles - all Israel shall be saved 

I. Cor. :- Paul called the brethren Gentiles 

Eph. :- In times past we were Gentiles, but now we are Christian Israel in the flesh! 

Eph. : They are fellow heir, they are of the same body 
Col. :- His sas and gentiles are the same 
Eph. : Israel should walk not as the other Gentiles walk 

Micah : The remnant of Jacob shall be among the Gentiles (Nations) in the midst of many people as a lion among the beasts of 
the forest 

I Peter : Can be Israel 

Luke :- Jesus (YASHUA) said the gentiles would scourge and kill Him 

WHO IS TRUE ISRAEL TODAY? 

In my studies to prepare this book, I have learned much in other areas. The most imrtant thing 
I`ve learned is; finding out who the true Israel and who the Imster Israel are. The truth should be 
obvious by the time you are through reading this book, but the truth is I have just begun to scratch the 
surface of the truth that God left us in the Bible, when it is properly read. I could add thousands of 
pages of proof. Below I will give the names of a few very good authors that write on the subje of true 
Israel. 

Each of these authors have written many books and produced tapes on the many areas of study 
about true Israel and how it apies to America today. Send for their book lists and literature. Tell them 
you are an investigator, looking for Bible truths about Israel. Truths that have been kept until the last 
days, when people really wanted to return to the truth that has been hidden from all but a few. Today the 
truth is coming forth from hundreds of good writers, each good in his own area of study. Each making a 
few mistakes as I do myself when I get outside of the areas I specialize in. 

It`s like another author and good friend of mine once said when we were talking about mistakes 
all authors make when writing a book: "A good book is like a good fish, you have to eat the meat and 
spit out the bones. " 

Below is a partial list of good authors who have written good books, without many bones. They 
also have book stores with hard to get books. 

Robert Allen, Dave Barley, 

Sacred Truth Ministries, America`s Promise Newsletter, 

P O Box , P O Box , 

Mountain City, Tenn.  Sand, Idaho  

Phone --- 


Page  of  



Richard Kelly Hoskins 
P O Box , 

Lynchburg, Virginia  
--- 

Charles A. Wiseman 
 W Riverhills Dr. #D, 
Burnsville, Mn.  

Pastor Everett Ramsy, 

Faith Baptist Church, 

Houston, Missouri 

Destiny Publishers, 

Memac, Mass. 

Americas Destiny Church Publications, 
 W. Peoria, 

Phoenix, Arizona  

The Jubilee, 

P.O. Box , 

Midpines, Ca.  


Pete Peters, 

Scriptures for America, 

P O Box , LaPort, 

Colorado  

Church of Israel, 

