Here's a clear case of criticism of the state of Zionist Israel being classified 
as "anti-Semitism." It's a cheap trick and should never be allowed to pass without 
refutation. Israel has as much right to exist as you have to give your neighbor's house to your 
relatives and force your neighbor to live in the street, but to assert this is not to cast aspersion 
un J ews. Israel is an apartheid state because of the way the Israeli government (with the 
suprt of most Israelis) treats Arabs within its borders as second-dass dtizens and because of 
its attempts to destroy Palestinian sotiety in the occupied tetories so as to rid the land of 
Arabs and make it suitable for Israeli annexation, but to suggest this is not to make any 
critidsm of J ews, but rather, of Israelis ” and they richly deserve it. 

Ken Livingstone: This is about Israel, not Anti-Semitism . For  years Israeli 
governments have attempted to rtray anyone who forcefully critidzes the lides of Israel as 
anti-Semitic. The truth is the opsite: the same universal human values that recognize the 
Holocaust as the greatest radst crime of the th centuiy require condemnation of the lides 
of successive Israeli governments ” not on the absurd grounds that they are Nazi or equivalent 
to the Holocaust, but because ethnic cleansing, discrimination and terror are immoral. Michael 
Goodspeed: In Defense Of T eff Rense. . . 

E. JVIichael J ones: The Conversion of the Revolutionary T ew 

In  former U.S. President J immy Carter published a book, Palestine Peace Not 
Apartheid, which is critical of Israel. Prediably the Zios label him as "anti-semitic". 

In his artide Carter's Inconvenient Truths Paul craig Roberts writes: 

The reason that Israel has been able to appropriate Palestine unto itself with American aid 
and suprt is that Israel controls the exanation of the Israeli- Palestinian confli. At least % of 
Americans, if they know anything at all of the issue, know only the Zionist Israeli propaganda line. 
Israel has been able to control the exanation, because the wereful Zionist Israel Lobby brands 
every critic of Israeli licy as an anti-semite who favors a second holocaust of the Jews. 

In the book Palestine Peace Not Apartheid, By J immy Carter takes the risk of speaking truth 
to propaganda. Prediably, the Zionist Israel Lobby and its shills ranging from the "conservative" 
National Review to "liberal" media and commentators have attempted to banish Carter by labeling 
him an "anti-semite." 

We must not let the Israel Lobby get away with demonizing an American president who 
dares to stand up to their lies. 

Zionism as Racism 

A prindpal comnent of Zionism is radsm, in the form of the belief held by Zionists 
that J ews constitute a race (or ethnic group or however they see themselves) superior to all 
others, and in particular to those, the Palestinians, who lived on the land that the Zionists stole 
from them in  (under the pretext of the land having been given to them by the United 
Nations) and subsequently. 

She Muzher: Radsm: When will We Face the Fas? 

More water is given to Jewish citizens than to Palestinians; jobs are more entiful for Jewish 
citizens than Israeli Palestinians; Jewish citizens are not subjeed to torture while in prison; only 
Israeli citizens and illegal Jewish settlers drive with yellow license ates, which allow them freedom 
to travel throughout the Holy Land; non-Jewish Israelis cannot buy or lease land in Israel; Israel's 
licies have involved anning regulations prohibiting Palestinian building on  percent of Gaza, 

Page  of  


 percent of the West Bank and  percent of East Jerusalem. While restriing Palestinian 
development, Israel builds housing for its people in the occupied tetories. 

Kawther Salam: Israel is a Racist State 

Elias Davidsson: 

Memorandum on institutionalized racial discrimination by and in the State of Israel 

Zionism rejes the idea of a modern secular state, based on equality of all citizens. Zionism 
predicates a state where Jews have privileged rights. Thus, according to Israeli law, a person born 
in London, who has never visited Israel, does not speak Hebrew and professes atheism, is granted 
automatic Israeli citizenship, if he can produce proof from a rabbi that his mother was considered a 
Jew, while indigenous Palestinian inhabitants who were born to Christian or Muslim parents are at 
best tolerated but never considered as full fledged partners in Israeli society. Racial discrimination, 
as defined in ernational law, is thus not only refleed in Israeli laws and licies, but is grounded 
in the very nature of Israel as a Jewish state, in public perception and in the Zionist credo. 

Rabee' Sahyoun: Why Zionism Is Racism (Also here .) 

Kathleen and Bill Christison: Zionism as a Racist Ideology 

When you are on the ground in Palestine, you can see Zionism physically impred on the 
landscape. Not only can you see that there are settlements, built on land confiscated from 
Palestinians, where Palestinians may not live. Not only can you see roads in the occupied tetories, 
again built on land taken from Palestinians, where Palestinians may not drive. Not only can you 
observe that water in the occupied tetories is allocated, by Israeli governmental authorities, so 
inequitably that Israeli settlers are allocated five times the amount per capita as are Palestinians 
and, in periods of drought, Palestinians stand in line for drinking water while Israeli settlements 
enjoy lush gardens and swimming ols. Not only can you stand and watch as Israeli bulldozers 
flatten Palestinian homes, business, olive groves and other agricultural land, destroy Palestinian 
wells, and demolish Palestinian homes to make way for the separation wall that Israel is 
construing across the length and breadth of the West Bank. The wall fences off Palestinians from 
Israelis, supsedly to provide greater security for Israelis but in fa in order to cage Palestinians, 
to define a border for Israel that will exclude a maximum number of Palestinians. 

But, if this is not enough to demonstrate the inherent racism of Zionist Israel's occupation, 
you can also drive through Palestinian towns and Palestinian neighborhoods in and near J erusalem 
and see what is perhaps the most cruelly racist licy in Zionism's arsenal: house demolitions, the 
preeminent symbol of Zionism's drive to maain Jewish predominance. Virtually every street has a 
house or houses reduced to rubble, one floor pancaked onto another or simy a pile of broken 
concrete bulldozed o an incoherent heap. Jeff Halper, founder and head of the non-governmental 
Israeli Committee Against House Demolitions (ICAHD), an anthrologist and scholar of the 
occupation, has observed that Zionist and Israeli leaders going back  years have all conveyed 
what he calls "The Message" to Palestinians. The Message, Halper says, is "Submit. Only when you 
abandon your dreams for an independent state of your own, and accept that Palestine has become 
the Land of Israel, will we relent [i.e., stop attacking Palestinians]." The deeper meaning of The 
Message, as caed by the bulldozers so ubiquitous in targeted Palestinian neighborhoods today, is 
that "You [Palestinians] do not belong here. We uprooted you from your homes in  and now we 
will uproot you from all of the Land of Israel." 

Human Rights Watch, --: Israel destroys Palestinian homes as punishment 

The group, based in New York, says , people have been made homeless in southern 
Gaza over the past four years, regardless of whether their homes sed a genuine military threat. 
... [Kenneth Roth, the executive direor of Human Rights Watch, said:] "Part of the rationale here 
seems to be to punish civilians for the condu of militants. The people whose homes are destroyed 
are, for the most part, just ordinary civilians."... Peter Hansen, the commissioner general of the UN 
Relief and Works Agency [said] ... "Most of what we have seen here ... over the past two weeks is 
in gross violation of ernational humanitarian law ..." 

Could the real reason for Ariel Sharon's desire Palestinian inhabitants of Gaza as 
hostages, to be allowed water and elericity (which Israel controls) for just an hour a day and 
thereby to be reduced to even more abje misery and desperation, if any Palestinian should 
continue to opse Israel's continued attempt to destroy Palestinian society? 

Page  of  


Christian Zionism 

There is also something called "Christian Zionism", whose adherents (including the 
followeres of Jeny Falwell) totally suprt Israel. This psychopathological delusion sees Jewish 
occupation of Palestine as partly fulfilling biblical prophecy in a process leading to Armageddon 
and the Rapture (in which, they believe, all Christian Zionists will be taken up to heaven, 
leaving the rest of us to die on a scorched Earth) . 

Donald Wagner: Christian Zionists. Israel and the 'second comind 
C. E. Carlson: Why T udeo- Christians Suprt War 
Gaiy North: Fundamentalism's Bloody Homeland for T ews 
Grace Hal s ell ; Armageddon: Zionism's Diabolical Goal 

Christian Zionists, or dispensationalists, give Israel total suprt because they think 
there has to be an Israel there, a ace ” not for Jews, but for the battle of Armageddon, 
which they anually believe must occur. It's part of the required steps, they believe, that 
will lead to their Rapture and the Second Coming of Christ. 

Zion's Christian Soldiers 

Carol Valentine: The Traitors Among Us 

Ronald Bleier: In the Beginning, There Was Terror 
