already the case: 





. Suprt of Diators: For all the happy talk of spreading Democracy and proteing human 
Page  of  


rights, the empire has repeatedly not only suprted diators, but in many cases overthrew pularly 
eleed leaders and reaced them with puppet tyrants. Exames range from secretly funding the Nazis, 
to installing the Shah in Iran, Pinochet in Chile, suprting Musharraf in Pakistan, and their everlasting 
love affair with the brutal Saudi royal family, to name a few. Aions speak louder than words to those 
who can navigate the storm of propaganda with a moral compass set to recognize good from evil. 
Diators and freedom cannot coexist. 

. Preemptive Wars of Aggression: It could be said that all wars are preemptive in nature because 
so many entities benefit from war. Yet, even before America's latest crusades, they covertly and 
surgically attacked countries that never threatened them. This allowed them to maain the moral high 
road in the public's eye while construing the foundation of their empire. That was until the Bush 
Dorine; the use of preemptive military aion to confront ssible threats was unofficially adopted to be 
the new foreign licy for combating terror. Since then, America has become the violent aggressors, 
having officially invaded two countries ” Afghanistan and Iraq ” without legitimate provocation. 

Violent aggressors have always been judged by history as evil. But it gets worse.... 



The Plot To 
Destroy Christianity! 


Dees Illustration 

. Torture: Torture has never been acceptable by those promoting a high moral standing in the 
global community. Nazis and Japanese soldiers were convied and executed for engaging in the exa 
same torture techniques that America has redefined as 'enhanced errogation'. "I was just following 
orders," was not a justifiable excuse for such inhumane behavior, much like it wasn't a good enough 
defense for the low-ranking patsies who took the heat for the sinister Abu Ghraib torture scandal even 
though their aions were approved at the highest levels . Can state-sanioned torture of prisoners held 
without charges ever be viewed as anything less than bmtal? 



Dees Illustration 


. Suppression of Dissent: All tyrannical regimes throughout history have suppressed homeland 
dissent. As government oppression grows bolder at home and abroad, more citizens will naturally 
express outrage, resulting in even more oppressive controls. This is happening in the United States 
through the all-seeing eye of the Department of Homeland Security with warrantless spying, arbitrary 
watch lists, citizen spy campaigns, and TSA molestation to travel anywhere. Additionally, in an attempt 


Page  of  



to squash free speech, they arbitrarily seize websites and violently confront peaceful protesters. 
Unfortunately, as awareness of the topics in this very article expands, the U.S. will likely become even 
bolder in their pursuit of stifling dissent. In other words, the worst is yet to come, and history will judge 
the U.S. as not quite the beacon of freedom they have pretended to be. 

. Elimination of Habeas Corpus: Say goodbye to the notion of being innocent until proven 
guilty, the right to face charges and your accuser, and the right to a free and fair trial. Habeas corpus, 
considered the only humane path to "which a prisoner can be released from unlawful detention," has been 
eliminated for those vaguely labeled 'enemy combatants' of the empire. As Guantanamo prisoners rot 
under such pretenses, prominent lawmakers in the empire prose the exa same lack of rights for 
American citizens if they're labeled an ' enemy belligerent '. Similar to the Spanish Inquisition, now you're 
guilty until you're tortured to admit your guilt. Can it get more evil? Why yes, it can. Read on. 



Anthony Freda Art 

. Assassinating Citizens: That's right. No judge, no jury, no conviion; just straight to execution. 
America has set another precedent in their tyrannical march toward empire when they openly 
assassinated an Am erican citizen and government patsy, Anwar al-Awlaki, and his teenage son on the 
suspicion of terrorism. Paul Craig Roberts laments "Now the US government not only can seize a US 
citizen and confine him in prison for the rest of his life without ever presenting evidence and obtaining a 
conviion, but also can have him shot down in the street or blown up by a drone." Isn't this the reason 
America claims to be knocking off diators around the world ” the deliberate killing of their own 
citizens? 

But Awlaki was a bad ape because the elligence community said so. What's most telling that 
America will continue this wickedness is that almost every US lawmaker turned a blind eye to the 


grotesque violation of Constitutional rights. Only Ron Paul said that assassinating an American citizen 
without charges is nothing less than an "impeachable offense". Too bad most of the country cheered the 
Awlaki killing as a "viory" in the war on terror, indicating that it is now an acceptable taic. 



Page  of  



Dees Illustration 


. Unauthorized Drone Wars: Unprovoked wars without authorization, accountability, or 
independent oversight only seem to be escalating; and with little resistance. The US Congress no longer 
votes to "declare war". They simy give the Commander in Chief broad "authorization" to use force 
against specific nations. However, even that is not broad enough in the rapid pursuit of empire. Now, 
joystick waors direed by the CIA and Pentagon have targeted at least three countries with 
"unauthorized" military strikes; Pakistan, Yemen, and Somalia. Even worse, they waged a full-scale war 
for regime change and resource undering in Libya without any authority inside the United States. 

Under the NATO flag, which is % funded by the U.S., they flew over  strike sorties in Libya to 
illegally tope Gaddafi. Drunk with success, the bloodthirsty empire marches on to their next 
preemptive targets, Syria and Iran. Quick morality check: unprovoked killing and stealing as a first resort 
is still wrong, right? 

. Use of Weans of Mass Destruion: How ironic that the world's liceman for weans of 
mass destruion is the only one to use them on a mass scale. The United States is on record using 
chemical, biological and even nuclear weans. From the atomic bombs dropped on Hiroshima and 
Nagasaki in WWII, to Monsanto's Agent Orange in Vietnam, to the deeted uranium used in 
Afghanistan and Iraq. America only condemns itself when speaking about the evils of WMDs. However, 
killers don't appear to care how the killing is accomished, so long as it achieves their goals. The real 
firecrackers will likely be brought out in a confrontation with Iran, or if China and Russia are lured o 
the confli. It won't really matter much what history says if the use of WMD escalates by either side, but 
the aggressors should rightly be blamed for the ensuing scorched earth, while the defenders against 
killers and thieves should be viewed as righteous. 

. World's Largest Drug Dealer: The Am erican empire is the largest dmg dealer in the world? 

Say it isn't so. Well, in addition to forcing legal drugs and genetically modified organisms on nations, 
usually under the cover of foreign aid, America also leads in the illegal drug trade. In fa, many 
researchers reveal that the war on dmgs is only utilized to control and monolize the illicit drug trade. 
The US government has been caught multie times shipping in cocaine, colluding with certain cartels to 
control the industry, and now openly protes and transrts opium from Afghanistan . In fa, Global 
Research s out that in , "according to UN figures, opium produion had fallen to  tons. 
Immediately following the Oober  US led invasion, produion increased dramatically, regaining 
its historical levels." This month, the U.N. announced that Afghanistan now provides % of the world's 
opium produion; up % compared to  to a whopping  tones. Although the empire tries to 
keep it secret, they can't hide the hycrisy forever. 


World Reserve Currency Prison: Although using Weans of Mass 
Debt is a non-violent form of expanding the empire, it's perhaps the most bmtal and effeive form of 
control. Requiring foreign nations to purchase oil and other imrted commodities with US dollars 
wields immense were. Because all nations must acquire dollars to purchase critical resources, they 
quickly become indebted to the US Federal Reserve, their affiliate central banks, and the IMF. Before 
long, the entire world is colonized by debt. It seems that only the nations that don't need or refuse credit 

Page  of  


