
May th: One man dead with Flux. 

June th: One man dead by Kap Henry. 

June st: One man dead by James Fluss. 

July th: One woman dead with Fever. 

July th: One girl, sick for two months, died. 

This vessel was on its way for five months. What teble and unspeakable suffering was the lot 
of these millions of Blacks, who were torn with brutal force from their friendly, African huts, jammed 
together like animals below deck, and then sold with less concern than selling a head of cattle. Small 
wonder that ten of them died, being purchased for just a few dollars, and then sold for the sum of 
$,. 

Some Negroes managed, through insurreion, to gain control of one or another ship, and turned it 
around with full sails, toward their African Home. The crew of one slave ship, for instance, "Three 
Friends" tortured their Black Cargo in such a manner, that the Negroes reciprocated in a bloody rebellion. 
They killed the Captain, and the entire crew and threw the dead overboard. They then sailed back to 
Africa where they had barely escaped their hard won freedom. 

A similar fate struck the slave ship "Amistad". Among the slaves was the son of an enemy, tribal 
Chief. Once the ship was under way, he schemed with his compatriots to attack the ships' crew. 
Following a bloody battle, they managed to capture the Captain. The Negro Prince forced him to turn 
back to Africa, then in the evening, under cover of darkness, he changed his course, zig-zagged for 
months until he came close to the American coast, and encountered a government ship. This took ace in 
the year  when slave trading was already forbidden and illegal. 

The Negro slaves were freed and the Captain punished. These sea-voyages were not without 
danger when they had Black cargo. Which accounts for the fa that the Jews most always engaged non- 
Jewish Captains. 

The slave dealers preferred to remain in their offices, and counted the fat winnings following each 
journey, such as Aaron Lopez, who left his heirs, following his death, one of the largest fortunes in the 
New England era. 

When reviewing the documented fas contained herein it' is imrtant that one always remember 
that it was a lucky Captain who did not lose more than  out of  slaves on the return trip. 

It is equally imrtant to remember that these or Black creatures had to lay in human 
excrement for the entire trip Think of it! No wonder sickness and disease took such a high toll. 

Remember the figures approximately one hundred and ten million Black people were captured 
and removed from their homeland in Africa Only ELEVEN MILLION of these Black slaves reached the 
Colonies alive. 

And the Jews still talk about the Germans and Hitler and how six million Jews were exterminated 
during World War . This is the greatest LIE ever perpetrated un the people of the world - whereas 
the story of the or Black slaves is documented. Documented with TRUTH. The evidence is still 
available for the people of the world to see. 

The "Carnegie Institute of Technology" is located in Pittsburgh, Penn. 


Page  of  



As this document is distributed, eventually reaching the hands of the Jew, the evidence will 
probably be removed and destroyed until finally all documentation is removed which is damaging to the 
Jew. The Jews have been engaged in this praice for centuries Truth however, truth which bears fa 
cannot remain covered or hidden forever, and more truths are being disclosed by those of us who end 
to free America of these sons of the devil - the Jews. 

The published Documentation contained herein was obtained from the Carnegie Institute of 
learning, presently known: "The Carnegie Institute of Technology". 

The following is a partial list of the slave ships owned by Jews: 


'Abigail' by Aaron Lopez, Moses Levy and Jacob Franks. 

˜Crown' by Isaac Levy and Nathan Simpson. 

'Nassau' by Moses Levy. 

'Four Sisters' by Moses Levy. 

'Anne & Eliza' by Justus Bosch and John Abrams. 'Prudent Betty' by Henry Cruger and Jacob Phoenix. 
'Hester' by Mordecai and David Gomez. 

'Elizabeth' by David and Mordecai Gomez. 

'Antigua' by Nathan Marston and Abram Lyell. 'Betsy' by Wm. DeWoolf. 

'Polly' by James DeWoolf. 

'White Horse' by Jan de Sweevts. 

'Expedition' by John and Jacob Rosevelt. 

'Charlotte' by Moses and Sam Levy and Jacob Franks. 'Caracoa' by Moses and Sam Levy. 

Slave-runners, also owned by Jews were the 'La Fortuna', the 'Hannah', the 'Sally', and the 
'Venue'. 

Some of the Jews of Newrt and Charleston who were engaged in the distillery or slavery trade, 
or both, were: Isaac Gomez, Hayman Levy, Jacob Malhado, Naphtaly Myers, David Hart, Joseph Jacobs, 
Moses Ben Franks, Moses Gomez, Isaac Dias, Benjamin Levy, David Jeshuvum, Jacob Po, Jacob 
Turk, Daniel Gomez, James Lucana, Jan de Sweevts, Felix (cha-cha) de Souza (known as the 'Prince of 
Slavers' and second only to Aaron Lopez), Simeon Potter, Isaac Elizer, Jacob Rod, Jacob Rodrigues 
Rivera, Haym Isaac Carregal, Abraham Touro, Moses Hayes, Moses Lopez, Judah Touro, Abraham 
Mendes and Abraham All. 

Of some  ships leaving the rt of Newrt, more than  were engaged in the slave 

trade. 

A typical cargo of one ship, 'La Fortuna' was  slaves which cost about $ and sold for 

$,.. 

Only about % of the slave ship Captains were Jews, they not wanting to subje 
themselves to the rigors of the  month journey. They preferred to stay at home and continue their 
distillery operations which continued to supy rum and whiskey to the Indians for many years at a very 
great profit. 

DOCUMENTATION 


"Documents Illustrative of the History of the Slave Trade to America" Elizabeth 
Donnan,  Vols. Washington D.C. 

- 


"Carnegie Institute of Technology", Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. 

"Adventures of an African $laver" by Malcolm Cowley, . Published by Albert and 
Charles Bori, New York. 

"The $tory of the Jews in Newrt" by Rabbi Mos A. Gutstein. 

"The Jew Discovers America", by Othmar Krainz. "The International Jew", by Henry Ford. 
"The Plot Against The Church", by Maurice Pinay. 


Page  of  



"Protocolfor World Conquest"  by The Central Conference of American Rabbis. 

"Behind Communism" by Frank L. Britton. 

We cannot undertake even this brief history of the modern Jew without taking note of a 
phenomenon which had confounded gentile societies for twenty centuries. This is the ability of the 
Jewish people to colleively retain their identity despite centuries of exsure to Christian civilization. 
