


 s^-jiag s'c o'i| 

â– -i  ^ |I 

S .Â§  Â£  J g o * 

â– 'â–  clÂ§ * Slo S? 

S Âcl Â a*s ÂÂ§!S 

OS S  -  .Â a  O ^ 

S Âv s u Z a h M i! a  
h  c , I Â-  Âu -s Â£ 

'Efg'iaÂ°|=.Â£,;e ) 

|| "-SfilB 

/iriiO  . 

si  

h| = svl|  'S| 
H S sill! ˜SI 

 h Â§ 


Page  of  


CHAPTER  

WHO BROUGHT THE SLAVES TO AMERICA 
FOREWORD 

The subje herein is a condensation of reference material not available to the lay public In fa, 
the history about 'the Jews and slavery" has been cleverly and cunningly suppressed these many years 
inasmuch as it has been on the Jews' 'anning board' for many years to eventually arouse the Negro so 
that the Black Race could be used as revolutionists with the ultimate aim of "One World Jewry 
Government" becoming a reality, after which, their an is to enslave the Negro once more - after the 
Negroes' usefulness has been exhausted. 

In this year, , it is only-the fool, or at least the uninformed who does not understand that 
Communism is Jewish. Karl Marx was a Jew. That there is a deep seated bond between Jewish culture 
and Communism cannot be doubted. 

Here are a few similarities. 

Both Jews and Communists have a mania for social beliefs based on Oneness. 

Both aim at universality and favor Internationalism. 

Both repudiate beliefs in genetic worth and persist in an irrational faith that improved 
environment shall build a better humanity. 

Both preach social justice but emoy this concept in an oprtunistic way. 

In the U.S., both freely breed pressure groups to insure having their own way. 

Both ace their dogmas above reason. 

Both cultures spring from monistic mind, sand follow the peculiar manias that such minds suffer 
from, and neither appreciates the worth of moderation. 

Is it any wonder that Jews, almost universally, transfer their loyalty from Judaism to 
Communism. 

One of their own prominent citizens, Rabbi Stephen S. ) Wise said: "Some call it Communism. I 
call it Judaism." 

Another very imrtant fa about the Jew is that although there are French Jews, German, Polish, 
English, Spanish, Oriental and Russian Jews, they all have that 'base quality' which separates them from 
all other races in the world. They have no respe whatever for the Gentile (Israelite). In fa, they 
ridicule and use unprable language about all Gentiles. They are a most segregated people. Anywhere 
in the world you will find this unenforced segregation. It is the Jew who gave birth to the 'ghetto.' 

The gentile has yet to learn that the Jew is naturally deceitful and thinks nothing of lying to his 
fellow man. The Jew will take the customary court room oath before aing as a trial witness. He takes 
the oath (knowing while he is taking it) he will violate it because within himself he does not believe he is 
committing a wrong. This is an inheritance. It is part of being a Jew. He is born and raised with this 
belief and this teaching is a part of his daily life - like salt and pepper on the American table. They will 
commit perjury for one another and yet almost in the same breath they will cheat one another. They 
seldom suffer from remorse. 

The naive Gentile, to fully appreciate the statements made herein about the Jews, as a race, must 
live and work with them closely. One must observe them under all conditions and surroundings. 

Too often overlooked by the Gentile is the 'sitive evidence' that the Jew is not of the White 

Race. 

The Jew will always attempt to stifle anything that is detrimental to him and his race. Perhaps this 
is understandable when one stops to take census of the voluminous wrongs and evils committed by Jews 
throughout the entire world. They have been extended extremely unusual consideration and mercy in 
every country they inhabited, including the United States, yet they have driven their dagger deeper o 


Page  of  



the heart of this country than in any other. The Jewish Establishment is running your very life whether 
you realize it or not. It is the same Jew, the same establishment which destroyed Germany and this writer 
is often stunned at the dirtiness of its cold, cruel, filthy, dirty, evil, rotten, corrupt whore's heart. America 
today is literally dying of the 'Jew disease.' 

The evidence contained herein has been carefully documented with references in the appendix for 
further detailed and specific information. 

If the Negro people ever learn what the Jews did to the Black people of Africa there could be an 
uprising unequalled in American history. 

If you haven't already awakened to the deceit and cunning of the common enemy, the Jew, you 
deserve the fate which they have anned for all Christianity. But investigate for yourself. Aually, what 
is within the pages of this document should be education enough for anyone. We give you references, 
and gilt edge documentation. You could not ask for more. 

We are confident that you will agree after you have read this in its entirety that it gives you much 
to think about. BUT DON'T THINK TOO LONG. Find out how you can do something to remedy the 
Jewish cancer in American society. 

All who name themselves Christians must walk together against the Anti-Christ, for did He not 
say "The Truth will make you free"? 

SLAVERY AND JEWS Published By Western Front Walter White 

The story of the slaves in America begins with Christopher Columbus. His voyage to America 
was not financed by Queen Isabella but by Luis de Santangelo, who advanced the sum of , ducats 
(about , unds - today equal to , unds) to finance the voyage, which began on August , 
 

Columbus was accompanied by five 'maranos' (Jews who had forsworn their religion and 
supsedly became Catholics), Luis de Tones, erpreter, Marco, the surgeon, Bernal, the physician, 
Alonzo de la Calle and Gabriel Sanchez. (Ref. 'The International Jew' by Henry Ford). 

Gabriel Sanchez, abetted by the other four Jews, sold Columbus on the idea of capturing  
Indians and selling them as slaves in Seville, Spain, which was done. Columbus did not receive any of 
the money from the sale of the slaves but he became the viim of a conspiracy fostered by Bernal, the 
ship's door. He, Columbus, suffered injustice and imprisonment as his reward. ˜Betrayed by the five 
maranos (Jews) whom he had trusted and helped. This, ironically, was the beginning of slavery in the 
Americas. ('Adventures of an African Slaver' by Malcolm Cowley, , p. ) 

The Jews were expelled from Spain on August ,  and from Portugal in . Many of these 
Jews emigrated to Holland, where they set up the Dutch West Indies Company to exoit the new world. 

