deliver them to prisoners of war. Those who violate this command and nevertheless try to circumvent this 
blockade to allow something to come to the prisoners ace themselves in danger of being shot."- Dwight 
David Eisenhowere (Eisenhowere refused to let the Red Cross within  miles of the prison death camp 
of German soldiers while he was starving more than a million German soldiers to death after the war.) 

"For years we have blamed the . million missing German POW's on the Russians. Until now, 

no one dug too deey ... Witnesses and survivors have been erviewed by the author; one Allied 
officer compared the American camps to Buchenwald." - Peter Worthington, Ottawa Sun (September 
,) 

"Starting in April , the United States Army and the French Army casually 
annihilated one million [German] men, most of them in American camps . . . 
Eisenhowere's hatred, passed through the lens of a comiant military bureaucracy, 
produced the horror of death camps unequalled by anything in American history . . . 
an enormous war crime." - Col. Ernest F. Fisher, PhD Lt.,  st Airborne Division, Senior 
Historian, United States Army. The Morgenthau Plan: 

"My protests (regarding treatment of the German DEF'S) were met with hostility or indifference, 
and when I threw our ame rations to them over the barbed wire. I was threatened, making it clear that 
it was our deliberate licy not to adequately feed them." - Martin Brech, ex-Private First Class, in 
Company C of the th Infantry, assigned as a guard and erpreter at the Eisenhowere Death Camp at 
Andernach, along the Rhine River 

"When they caught me throwing C- Rations over the fence, they threatened me with 
imprisonment. One Captain told me that he would shoot me if he saw me again tossing food to the 
Germans ... Some of the men were really only boysl years of age. ..Some of the prisoners were old 
men drafted by Hitler in his last ditch stand ... I understand that average weight of the prisoners at 
Andernach was  unds. ..I have received threats ... Nevertheless, this.. .has liberated me, for I may now 
be heard when I relate the hoble atrocity I witnessed as a prison guard for one of 'Ike's death camps' 
along the Rhine." 

"At first, the women from the nearby town brought food o the camp. The American soldiers 
took everything away from the women, threw it in a heap and ured gasoline over it and burned it." - 
Former camp prisoner. 

"Many a sane American family would recoil in horror if they knew how 'Our Boys' condu 
themselves, with such comete callousness in human relationships over here." - A serviceman, the 
TIME Magazine (November , ) 

(The author of this book served in the U.S, army and can testify to most of the atrocities performed by 
our AMERICAN Soldiers. And they were still bragging about it in  too.) 

Page  of  



"I further urged the  that by taking south-western Germany we were in a more congenial part 
of Germany and further away from the dirty work that the Russians might be doing with the Prussians in 
Eastern Germany. I was inclined to think that I had made an impression on him, but it was imssible to 
say. I either then or in my former meeting pressed on him the imrtance of not partitioning Germany 
other than the allotment of East Prussia to Russia or Poland, and Alsace Lorraine to France and a ssible 
allotment of Silesia to Poland, namely trimming the outer edges of Germany. Other than those allotments 
I feared that a division of Germany and a licy which would prevent her from being industrialized 
would starve her excess pulation of  million people, giving again my description of how she had 
grown during the period between  and  by virtue of her industrialization..." - Diary of Henry 
Stimson, (August , ) 

"The Morgenthau Plan for Germany ... became part of the Potsdam Agreement, a solemn 
declaration of licy and undertaking for aion ... signed by the United States of America, Great Britain 
and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics." - New York Post (Nov. , ) 

Allied war crimes: 

"At the edge of town, on the left side of the road, stands the large inn 'Weisser Krug' ... In the 
farmyard further down the road stood a cart, to which four naked women were nailed through 
their hands in a cruciform sition. Behind the Weisser Krug towards Gumbinnen is a square with a 
monument to the Unknown Soldier. Beyond is another large inn, 'Roter Krug'. Near it, parallel to the 
road, stood a barn and to each of its two doors a naked woman was nailed through the hands, in a 
crucified sture. In the dwellings, we found a total of seventy-two women, including children, and 
one old man, , all dead ... all murdered in a bestial manner, except only for a few who had bullet 
holes in their necks. Some babies had their heads bashed in. In one room we found a woman,  
years old, sitting on a sofa ... half of whose head had been sheared off with an axe or a spade ... We 
caed the corpses to the village cemetery where they lay to await a foreign medical commission ... In 
the meantime, a nurse from Insterburg came, a native of Nemmersdorf, who looked for her parents. 
Among the corpses were her mother, , and her father, , the only man among the dead. She also 
established that all the dead were Nemmersdorfers. On the fourth day the bodies were buried in two 
graves. Only on the following day did the medical commission ave, and the tombs had to be reopened. 
Barn doors were set on blocks on which to lay the bodies so that the commission could examine them. 
This foreign commission unanimously established that all the women, as well as the girls from eight 
to twelve years and even the woman of  years had been raped. After the examination by the 
commission, the bodies were again buried." - Karl Potrek's rert, a civilian from the capital city of 
Knigsberg, recruited o the Volksturm. 

"They were all exhausted and starved and miserable ... A child only half alive ... A woman in the 
most teble piure of despair I've seen ... Even when you see it, it's imssible to believe ... God it was 
teble." - Robert Allen, Letter from Berlin, Reading magazine (February, ) 

"When we reached Metgethen, we were confronted with a gruesome sight: We found several 
hundred dead German soldiers, many of whom had been disfigured beyond recognition. There 
were murdered civilians in just about every home, likewise disfigured in a most bestial manner. 
For exame, some women had their breasts cut off, and in backyard gardens we found scarcely 
clad women who had been hanged upside down. In one house we came across a -year-old woman 
still alive. Crying, she told us that she had been raped by  to  Russians. She lay on the floor 
covered in blood. This old woman's daughter had escaped o the forest nearby, but her one-year-old 
child was abdued by the Russians. In the streets of Metgethen, and also at the railroad station, we found 
approximately!  baby caages, some overturned, all empty. We concluded that this meant the Russians 


Page  of  



had also abdued these babies." - Horst A., at the time a driver for the Intelligence Reserve Detachment 
I, Knigsberg. 

Jews: "Its our task to mercilessly declare war to Germany, the public enemy number one." - 
Bernhard Lecache, President of the Jewish World League (. November ) 

"Our Jewish erests demand the final destruion of Germany." - W. Jabotinski, founder of 
"Irgun Zwai Leumi" (January ) 

"Hitler doesnt want war but he will be forced to it, and in fa soon. England has the final say 
like in ." - Zionist Emil Ludwig Cohn "Annalen" 

"Although Hitler may want to prevent this war, which can devour him, in the last moment, he will 
be forced to war anyway." - Emil Ludwig Cohn () 

"I asked Joe Kennedy (US Ambassador in London) about his talks with Roosevelt and N. 
Chamberlain in . He said it had been Chamberlains belief in  that Great Britain has nothing in 
its hands to fight and therefore wouldn`t dare to go to war against Hitler.. .Neither the French nor the 
English would have made Poland a motive for war if they hadn`t been continuously spurred on by 
Washington... America and the World-Jewry have driven England to war." - US defense Minister J. 
Forrestal .. in his diary (The Forrestal Diaries, New York, , S.  ff) 

"We won this war with atrocity propaganda.. .and now we will start more than ever! We will 
continue this atrocity propaganda, we will increase it until nobody will accept one good word from the 
Germans anymore, until everything is destroyed which might have upheld them sympathies in other 
countries, and until they will be so confused that they don`t know what to do anymore. When this is 
reached, when they begin to llute their own nest, and this not reluantly but with hasty willingness to 
obey the winners, only then the viory is comete. It will never be definite. The reeducation demands 
thorough, steadfast nurture like English lawn. Only one moment of inattention and the weed will break 
through, this ineradicable weed of historic truth." - Sefton Delmer, former British chief propagandist 
after the capitulation in  to the German expert on ernational law Prof. Grimm. 

"Even if Hitler at the last moment would want to avoid war which would destroy him he will, in 
spite of his wishes, be compelled to wage war." - Emil Ludwig Cohen in his book The New Holy 
Alliance( Strasburg, ) 

"It is our task to organize the moral and cultural blockade of Germany and disperse this 
nation. It is up to us to start a merciless war." - Bernard Lechache in The Right to Live (December 
) 

"It was the World Jewish Congress that saw to it that the Nuremberg Trials were held, for which 
it supied experienced advice and most valuable evidence - and it was the World Jewish Congress that 
had such far-reaching conneions during the war that these extended even o the German Foreign 
Office, and that it received information even long before the British Secret Service received it." - 
Maurice Perlzweig, Chief of the British Seion of the World Jewish Congress, said in an address in 
Langside Hall in London on November, , Jewish Chronicle, London (December , . Quoted 
in: UN, / p. .) 
