from  to  (one hundred and thirteen years) approximately one hundred and ten million slaves 
had been removed from their native land. About %, or ELEVEN MILLION Black Slaves 
reached the Colonies alive. 

We have talked about the small ship "Abigail" which could accommodate only  people and yet 
the profits per each trip were enormous, with little or no investment. There were many other ships but we 
will concentrate here on only a few such as the "La Fortuna", "Hannah", "Sally" or the "Venue" which 
made very great profits. The "La Fortuna", but the way, transrted approximately  slaves on each 
trip. The owner cleared not less than $,. from such a trip. These were dollars which the slave 
dealers 'could keep'. And these were dollars of value which would buy a great deal in return. 

When one considers that the Jews of Newrt owned about  slave-transrting ships, aive 
without erruption, docking at either Newrt - Africa, Charleston, (or Virginia), one can approximate 


Page  of  



the tremendous earnings which made their way to the Jewish ship owners. Indeed, the Jews admit, that of 
the  ships, leaving Newrt harbor o all the world, "at least half of them" wend their way to Africa, 
and we know what these ships, going to Africa "were seeking". 

The fa that Aaron Lopez had control of over more than half of the combined deals in the 
Colonies of Rhode Island, (with Newrt) is a well known fa. The well-known Rabbi Mos A. 
Gutstein, in his book: "The story of the Jews in Newrt", attempts to remove these fas, maaining 
that there is not any evidence that the Jews were conneed with the Slave Trade. It is therefore, 
imperative to prove that the Jew was indeed conneed with the slave trading. Especially so, since this 
Rabbi insists they had made great contributions, and how very "blessed" their residence became for the 
city of Newrt. Surely Mos A. Gutstein will grant us permission to present the fas which he was 
unable to find. 

Turning to one rert of the Chamber of Commerce of the "Rhode Island Colony" in the year 
, we find for instance, that in the year  "A few Merchants in Newrt devised the idea to send 
their Newrt Rum to the coast of Africa. It developed o such a great exrt, that in the matter of a 
few years "several thousand (Hogsheads*)" of rum went that way. To which purse did this rum serve? 

The Carnegie Institute in Washington, D.C. presents and makes public, authentic 
Documents, titled: "Documents illustrative of the History of the Slave Trade in America." We wish 
to present a few fas from this particular colleion of Original Documents, and scrutinize them at closer 
range, and not at all to prove the heretofore Rabbi Mos A. Gutstein in error. In this colleion of the 
first American Institute of learning, we evaluate the Capitol "Rhode Island" which contributed the main 
share of the public Documentation regarding the Slave trading. Here we find, documented, the recipients 
of the numerous Shipping letters, also letters to the Slave dealers, and corresndence to the Ships' 
Captains, who were about % Jews, living in Newrt. Among these, we find for instance the Jew: 
Isaac Elizar. He wrote a letter to Captain Christopher Chamin on February th, , saying he would 
like to be an agent for a load of slaves. Then follows the Jews Abraham Pereira Mendez, and one of the 
main slave dealers, Jacob Rod Rivera - The father-in-law of Aaron Lopez. 

And then there is Aaron Lopez himself, and many, many more other Jews. Although we have 
considered Aaron Lopez several times, the size of this documented treaties limits us, and we cannot 
describe all of the writers concerned in the Slavery Dealing corresndence, their names and the special 
dates - rather, we wish to study the Documentation of the Carnegie Institute" itself, - keeping Aaron 
Lopez in mind. We wish to see, what in the main this Jew was pursuing. What his business was. This due 
to the fa, that Rabbi Mos A. Gutstein presents him as an "lofty, and fine civilian of Newrt", who 
was so generous, and even "made contributions to welfare." 

In a great number of published original unprejudiced writings in the Carnegie Institute, we find 
that Aaron Lopez pursued a tremendous commerce in Rum with the African Coast in exchange for 
slaves. These irrefutable fas are as follows: 

June , , a letter by Captain William Stead to Aaron Lopez. 

July nd, , a letter by Aaron Lopez to Captain Nathaniel Briggs. 

July nd, , a letter to Captain Abraham All. 

Febmary th, , a letter to Captain William Stead by Aaron Lopez. 

March th, , a letter by Captain William Stead to Aaron Lopez. 

Febmary th, , a letter by Aaron Lopez to Captain William Stead. 

Oober th, , a letter by Captain William Stead to Aaron Lopez. 

Febmary th, , a letter by Captain William Stead to Aaron Lopez. 

Aside from that, there are similar statements out of letters by Aaron Lopez in the original, which 
he direed to the Captains Henry Cruger, David Mill, Henry White, Thomas Dolbeare, and William 
Moore. Indeed, one letter by Captain William Moore to Aaron Lopez and Company, is particularly 


Page  of  



revealing, and of special mention at this . We wish to remark on the main contents of this letter, in 
which Captain Moore writes: 



An identical illustration of how slaves were stowed in the Brookes of Liverol. ¢The upper 
illustration shows the six-foot-wide atform on which slaves were ranged like books on a shelf. There 
was no space for them to sit up. The decks were cometely covered with chained bodies. 

(C) shows the men's seion - to the right. (G) shows the women's seion to e left. (E) is the boy's 
seion in the center. 

(From Clarkson's Abstra of the Evidence ). 

"I wish to advise you, that your ship "Aim" docked here night before last, with  slaves, 
consisting of  men,  large youths,  small boys,  women,  grown girls,  small girls, and I 
assure you this is such a one Rum-Cargo - (Rum in exchange for slaves) which I have not yet 
encountered, among the entire group there may be five to which one could take exception." 

The date of the above letter was November , . 

We have not yet concluded, because of lack of space, the excerpts, and grateful compilations 
made available by the "Carnegie Institute". 

On November th, , the Jew Abraham Pereira Mendez - who had been cheated by one of 
his kind - from Charleston, where he had journeyed to better control his Black Cargo, wrote Aaron Lopez 
at Newrt. 

"These Negroes, which Captain Abraham All delivered to me, were in such or condition, due to 
the or transrtation that I was forced to sell  boys and girls for a mere  (und)  others for  
(unds) and two women each for  (unds). *(no doubt, English money). 

Abraham Pereira Mendez was very angry, and he accused Aaron Lopez of "cheating" him. This 
letter delineates to us that this generous, and fine citizen of Newrt was insatiable in his greed for 
money. This is what caused the Rabbi Mos A. Gutstein to present this nobleman, Aaron Lopez, to 
pursue his objeionable methods. Negroes presented to him but a commodity. 

In all the letters which the "Carnegie Institute" published, it stresses the lack of human sympathy 
for the or Negro slaves. This lack of feeling and compassion for the abused and pitiful Blacks at 
the hands of their Jewish dealers, can be read out of the diary of a Captain who manned a ship 
owned by Aaron Lopez. The entrees concern a trip from the African coast to Charleston. Moreover, 
they are authentic Documents, published by the 'Carnegie Institute" in Washington, D.C. calling attention 
to an organization which had heretofore known little or nothing about it; neither had they encountered 
further publicity in books or newspapers. Therefore, it is not to be wondered at, that the fas of the 


Page  of  


leading share of American Jews in the slave trade could be ed out as a monoly, and unknown to 
the non-Jewish Americans, including the great masses of people all over the world. Others, however, 
acquaed with the fas, had good reason to remain painfully quiet. 

The Captain of another ship, the "Othello" among other things, makes the following entrees in his 

diary: 

February th: One man drowned in the process of loading. 

March th: Two women went overboard because they had not been locked up. 

April th: One man dead with Flux. (No doubt an illness) 

April th: One woman dead with Flux. 
