were brought out of the erior, to the coast, and then separated through the buyer - the father going with 
one ship, the sons and daughters o another. These "farewell" celebrations were usually packed with 
emotion, tears, drama and sadness. There was little joy, if ever. 

The following day the transrt began from land to ship. It was managed by taking four to six 
Negroes at one time in rowboats to the ship. Of course the slave dealers were aware of how the Negro 
loved his homeland above all else, and could only be induced by great force to leave it. So, some of the 
Negroes would manage to free themselves n the short trip to the ship and they would leap o the 
water. But here the overseers were prepared with sharp dogs, and retrieved the fleeing men. Other 
Negroes preferred drowning. What came aboard alive, was immediately undressed. Here was another 
oprtunity to jump over board and reach land and freedom. But the slave dealers were pitiless and 
ruthless; they were merely concerned to get their Black cargo to America with the least loss. Therefore, 
an escapee, recaptured, had both of his legs sawed or cut off before the eyes of the remaining Negroes in 
order to restore "Order". 

On board the ship the Negroes were separated o three groups. The men were aced in one part 
of the ship. The women o another, whereby the lusty Captain arranged it so that the youngest, most 
comely Negro I women were accessible to him. 

The children remained on deck, covered with a cloth in bad weather. In this fashion the slave ship 
proceeded on its journey to America. In the main, the ships were too small, and not at all suitable to 
transrt people. They were barely equipped to transrt animals, which the Negroes were likened to. In 
one space, one meter high - ( inches), these unfortunate creatures were aced o a horizontal 
sition, pressed close together. Mostly they were chained together. In this sition they had to remain 
for three months, until the end of the voyage. Rarely was there a Captain who sympathized with them or 
evidenced any feelings whatever for these pitiable creatures. Occasionally they would be taken in groups 
to the deck for fresh air, shackled in irons. 

Somehow, these Negroes were expendable, and endured much. On occasion one of them became 
insane, killing the other one, pressed closely to him. They also had their finger nails closely cut so they 
could not tear at each others flesh. The most hoble battles came about among the men, to acquire a 
Centimeter or two, for a comfortable sition, ft was then that the slave overseer stepped in with him 
bullwhip. The unimaginable, hoble, chained laying on their backs in their own human excrement in 
which these slaves had to endure these trips, is imssible to describe. 

In the women's quarters the same conditions prevailed. Women gave birth to children lying 
pressed closely together. The younger Negro women were constantly raped by the captain and the crew, 
resulting thereby, a new type of Mulatto as they came to America. 

In Virginia, or in any of the other Southern rt cities, the slaves were transferred to the land, and 
immediately sold. A regular auion would take ace, following the method of purchase in Africa. The 
highest bidder obtained the "Ware". In many cases - due to the indescribable filth - some of the Blacks 
became ill during the sea voyage from Africa to America. They became unemoyable. In such cases the 


Page  of  



captain accepted any price. It was rare to disse of them for no one wanted to purchase a sick Negro. 


nro BE SOLD, on board the 

Ship on tucfdxy the th Â 

I cf A*<xy next, at Ferry j a choice ! 

cargo of about, a  fine healthy 

X NEGROES, A â–  

UR juft aved from rhe W\ 

Windward & Rice Co* ft. J 

fl ” The utmoft care has ft 
Â«AiaÂeircady been taken, anrfaAak* ' 
j (hall be continued, to keep them free from 
d Â£J  ?' Â°* inf =^ with the 

I SMALL-POX, no boat haring been on  
: board, and all ocher communication with â–  
people from CbttrUs-Trom prerented. 

fit f?lcby. 



Left: Slave far sale advertisement in a Charleston newspaper, IB. These particular slaves were valued far their knowledge 
â–¡f rice culture sa they usually brought their Jewish owners a higher price. 

Right: This was standard equipment fur all slave ships. A, is a pair af iron handcuffs by which the right wrist af one slave is 
padlocked tu the left wrist af another B, is a pair af leg irons, also far twa slaves. D, D B E is an instrument af torture, the 
thumbscrew, F, G B H is the speculum oris ar mouth opener, far slaves whD refused tu eat. (They were created and built by 
Jews.) 



colored lithograph in the Macpherson Colleion, London). 

Therefore, it is not surprising that the Jewish, unethical door senses a new form of revenue. 
They purchased the sick Negro for a small sum, then treated him, and sold him for a large sum. On 
occasion the captain would be left with a few Negroes for whom he did not find a buyer. In that case he 
returned to Newrt, and sold them to the Jews for cheap domestic help. In other cases, the Jew owner of 
the ships took them over. This is why the city of Newrt and its surroundings had , black slaves in 
the year . 

Slavery did not extend to the North. Moreover, in many of the North American Colonies, slavery 
was strily forbidden. Georgia came under discussion; likewise also Philadelphia. And again it was the 
Jews who managed a loophole, which had, given them freedom following the Revolutionary War, so, 
they schemed to make slave trading legal. 


Page  of  


One had but to read the names, of which persons, living in Philadelphia who were requesting the 
elimination of existing laws, re the slavery dealing. They were: the Jews Sandiford, Lay, Woolman, 
Solomon, and Benezet. That exained it all! But let us turn back to the slave ship "Abigail". Its captain - 
and we are reading from his ships books - did a profitable business. He sold all of his Negroes in 
Virginia, invested some of the money in tobacco, rice, sugar, and cotton, and went on to Newrt where 
he desited his wares. 

We learn from Captain Freedman's books that the "Abigail" was a small ship, and could 'only' 
accommodate  people. He managed however to clear from this one trip , dollars, which he in turn 
delivered to the owner of the ship: one Aaron Lopez. 

The staggering amounts of money acquired by the Jew ship owners and slavery dealers is better 
illustrated when we emphasize the many years in which this sale and purchase of human flesh was 
praiced. Prior to , all of the Colonies had laws prohibiting slavery. It was in that year that the Jews 
had become wereful enough to bring about the repeal of these laws, and slavery began in earnest. 

The Jews had discovered that the Colonists needed additional manwere to help them clear their 
fields for anting, helping in the construion of dwellings, and in general to help with harvesting their 
crops. This was particularly true of the Southern States which we have referred to earlier. The 
Southerners had vast tras, of rich soil suitable for rice, cotton, tobacco and cane sugar. At first 
imverished Europeans were recruited. English prison doors were opened and finally prisoners of war 
from England and Holland were brought to the Colonies, made to work until they had paid the cost of 
transrting them by ship and then set free. 

It doesn't take a Jew long to discover what his brothers are doing so a group of Jews settled in 
Charleston, South Carolina where they set up distilleries for making rum and whiskey. They too learned 
that they could trade with the natives on the West Coast of Africa for ivory, and several ships were 
purchased and sent to Africa, trading the usual glass beads and other cheap ornaments for ivory, which, 
however, took up but little space on board ship. It occurred to these Jew traders that they could supy the 
antations in the south with 'Black Ivory', needed under swampy and malarial conditions which 
European labor could not tolerate without sickness, and which would not only fill the holds of their, 
ships, but bring enormous profits. (This same group had earlier tried selling Indians as slaves but they 
found them cometely unsatisfaory, as the Indians would not tolerate this type of work.) Thus another 
segment of the slave trading had become aive and profitable out of Charleston, South Carolina. Several 
shioads of Black slaves were sent by the Dutch West Indies Company to Manhattan. 

During this time there were a number of Jew antation owners established in the West Indies 
and! two Jews, Eyrger and Sayller, with strong Rothschild conneions in Spain, formed an agency called 
ASIENTO, who later operated in Holland and England. It was through these conneions that Jews in 
Holland and England exerted influence and both of these countries cooperated in helping the Jews 
provide Black slaves for the Colonists. 

With the yearly capture and transrt of  Million Black Slaves it is not difficult to figure that 
