 "Germanys unforgivable crime before WW  was its attempt to loosen its economy out of 
the world trade system and to build up an own exchange system from which the world-finance couldn`t 
profit anymore. ...We butchered the wrong pig." - Winston Churchill, The Second World War (Bern, 
) 


"The war wasn`t only about abolishing fascism, but to conquer sales markets. We could have, if 
we had ended so, prevented this war from breaking out without doing one shot, but we didn`t want to." 

"Not the litical dorine of Hitler has hurled us o this war. The reason was the success of his 
increase in building a new economy. The roots of war were envy, greed and fear." - Major General J.F.C. 
Fuller, historian, England 

 "We didn`t go to war in  to save Germany from Hitler...or the continent from 
fascism. Like in  we went to war for the not lesser noble cause that we couldn`t accept a German 
hegemony over Europe." - Sunday Corresndent, London (..) 

 "We made a monster, a devil out of Hitler. Therefore we couldn`t disavow it after the 
war. After all, we mobilized the masses against the devil himself. So we were forced to ay our 
part in this diabolic scenario after the war. In no way we could have ed out to our people that 
the war only was an economic preventive measure." - US foreign minister Baker () 

 "What we didn`t want to comprehend in the German (anti-Hitler) resistance during 
war, we learned cometely afterwards: this war wasn`t led against Hitler but against Germany." - 

Eugen Gerstenmaier, President of the German Bundestag since , member of the resistance group 
"Bekennende Kirche" during WW 

"Hitler and the German people didn`t want this war. We didn`t answere Hitler`s various 
petitions for peace. Now we have to admit that he was right. Instead of a cooperation with Germany, 
Page  of  



which he had offered us, now stands the gigantic, imperialistic might of the Soviets. I feel ashamed to see 
how the same entions which we accused Hitler of now are pursued under a different name." - Sir 
Hartley Shawcross, British chief-accuser in Nuremberg 

 "(We must rally against) a isoned Russia, an infeed Russia of armed hordes not only 
smiting with bayonet and cannon, but accompanied and preceded by swarms of typhus-bearing vermin." 
- Churchill, quoted in the Boston Review (April/May ) 

 "So far as Britain and Russia were concerned, how would it do for you to have % of 
Romania, for us to have % of the say in Greece, and go / about Yugoslavia?" - Churchill, 
addressing Stalin in Moscow (Oober ) 

 "This movement (Zionism and communism) among the Jews is not new. From the days 
of Spartacus-Weishaupt to those of Karl Marx, and down to Trotsky (Russia), Bela Kun (Hungary), Rosa 
Luxembourg (Germany), and Emma Goldman (United States)... this worldwide conspiracy for the 
overthrow of civilization and for the reconstitution of society on the basis of arrested development, of 
envious malevolence, and imssible equality, has been steadily growing. It has been the mainspring 
of every subversive movement during thelth century; and now at last this band of extraordinary 
personalities from the underworld of the great cities of Europe and America have gripped the 
Russian people by the hair of their heads and have become praically the undisputed masters of 
that enormous empire." - Writing on 'Zionism versus Bolshevism' in the Illustrated Sunday Herald 
(February ) 

"Kill, kill, you brave Red Army soldiers, kill. There is nothing in the Germans that is innocent. 
Obey the instruions of comrade Stalin and stamp the fascistic beast in its cave. Break with force the 
racial arrogance of the Germanic women. Take them as your legal loot. Kill, you brave soldiers of the 
Red Army, kill!" - Ilya Ehrenburg Stalin's Jewish propagandist for genocide (Frankfurter Allgemeine 
Zeitung, Frankfurt, February ,  - page ) 

Authors Note; Think about this; Hitler hated all forms of Communism and according to old  
Encyclopedias he was the greatest Communist fighter in the world. But to get votes he ran for office in 
the National Socialist party to get more votes. Below it says he expedited social changes in Germany. 
But it is not what they try to tell us. The social changes he maid were giving back to the German people 
the land, homes, farms and businesses the Zionist bankers had taken from the people. In Spain the 
communist took over the country under Franco. Hitler and Mussolini freed Spain from Jewish 
Communism. Then after that the Communist took over Poland, Czechoslovakia, Romania, other 
European countries and in  took over Russia. Hitler`s aim was to free all these countries from 
Jewish Communism. As the encyclopedia said he was the greatest Communist fighter in history, there 
fore the Jews hated him and Germany because they were loosing land and countries they had already 
conquered. 

"There can be no doubt: National Socialism was part of a modernization process in German 
society. It expedited the social changes in Germany. It transferred more to the underprivileged segments 
of society and brought equality and emancipation to women." - Heinz Hoehne, Gebt mir vier Jahre Zeit 
[Give me four Years], Ullstein Publishing House, Berlin-Frankfurt , p. ) 

"It is not the Germany of the first decade that followed the war - broken, dejeed and bowed 
down with a sense of apprehension and imtence. It is now full of hope and confidence, and of a 


Page  of  



renewed sense of determination to lead its own life without erference from any influence outside 
its own frontiers. One man has accomished this miracle. He is a born leader of men. A magnetic 
and dynamic personality with a single-minded purse, a resolute will and a dauntless heart." - David 
Lloyd George (Ex-Prime Minister, UK), in the Daily Express (Sep. , ) 

"Without the holocaust we would not have a Jewish state." - Robert B. Goldmann in the 
Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung (Dec. , , p. ) Poland (Is that why they invented the Holocaust?) 

"The minorities in Poland are supsed to disappear. The Polish licy makes sure that they don`t 
only disappear on the paper. This licy is ruthlessly established and without any attention to the public 
opinion of the world, of ernational contras or the League of Nations. The Ukraine turned to hell 
under Polish (Jewish) rule. One can say this about Belorussia with even more right. The purse of the 
Polish licy is the disappearance of the national minorities on the paper and in reality." - Manchester 
Guardian (th December ). 

"The Polish (Jewish) terror in the Ukraine today is worse than anything else in Europe. Ukraine 
became a country of desperation and destruion. The murderous deeds multiied. The Germans have 
been tortured, mutilated, excruciated to death, their corpses were desecrated. Villages and palaces 
have been robbed, ignited, blown up. The depied incidents in the official publication of the German 
government in  exceed the worst aions one can imagine." - Prof. Dr. Ren Martel in his book, LES 
FRONTIERS ORIENTALES DE L 'ALLEMAGNE (PARIS ) about the Polish raids in Upper Silesia in 
. 


"We are ready to make a contra with the devil if he helps us fighting against Hitler. Listen: 
against Germany not only against Hitler. The German blood will be spilled in a future war in such 
streams like it wasnt seen since the beginning of the world." - Warsaw newspaper Depesza 
(. August ) (but who owned the newspaper?) 

"We are ready for any war, even with the strongest opnent..." - Polska Zbrojna (. Mrz ), 
quoted in Walendy, Historische Tatsachen, a.a.O. (Heft , S. ) 

"Poland wants war with Germany and Germany will not be able to avoid it, even if it wants to." - 
Rydz-Smigly, Chief inspeor of the Polish army in a public speech in front of Polish officers (Summer 
) 


Britain/Churchill: "The Air Ministry agreed that it was most useful to be able to use gas on less 
sophisticated enemies who would have no idea from where the danger they faced came. The use of gas 
was banned by the  Geneva protocol." - The Daily Telegraph (January , ) 

"Previously it appeared to me to be a just answere to the crimes of the Third Reich, but I've since 
changed my mind. Until the Second World War there was a common consensus that the 
massacre of civilian pulations was illegal." - Jrg Friedrich, historian 

"I am, of course, a Zionist, and have been ever since the Balfour Declaration." 

- Churchill quoted in The Official Churchill in One Volume, N.Y. Times (Nov. , ) by Herbert 
Mitgang. 


Page  of  



Eisenhowere on German war prisoners: "God, I hate the Germans..." - Ike 
The Kike Dwight David Eisenhowere in a letter to his wife (September, ) 

"Prison enclosures are to provide no shelter or other comforts." - Ike The 
Kike Dwight David Eisenhowere 

"Under no circumstances may food supies be assembled among the local inhabitants in order to 
