to sail under a false flag, so ease bear with me as I seek to exain the situation. 

For over a year now, I have been deey, disturbed by what is happening in Israel and it's 
imications for the United States. As a result, I have engaged in a lengthy and prayerful study of the 
Scriptures and historical documents dealing with these people we have been taught to regard as God's 
Chosen Peoe. 

After over  hours of study concerning the Zionist Jew, I am convinced that these openly 
atheistic. Communist haters of God, Christ, and Christianity, are neither our friends, or the 
Chosen Peoe of God. 

Israelis the only nation I know of which boasts as it's leader a man who has a reputation as a 
former bank robber, terrorist and who boasts of his murders. I am of course refeng to Menachim 
Begin. He has been direly resnsible for the deaths of many Christian Arabs, along with innocent 
Moslem Arabs who have been caught in his "militant Zionism." Yet most Fundamental preachers would 
have us believe these murderers are God's Chosen people. 

You need to recognize that many of those who today call themselves Jews, are not of the "blood 
line" of Abraham (See Esther :, as an exame.) You also need to recognize that many who are of 
Israel, are not Jews, the terms are not erchangeable, as we have been led to believe. The Bible makes a 
clear distinion between the Jews and Israel, from the time the Kingdom was sit as recorded in I Kings 
:, . 

The more I studied Zionism, the more disturbed I became, for they are a real danger to America's 
freedom. I believe one of the major reasons this country is falling under the curse Socialism- 
Communism, is that Fundamental preachers have refused to face the evil which is being brought o 
America by the people they proclaim as the "Peoe of the Book." 

It is very ssible that you will not accept this, but it is true nevertheless. There is no way in 
which you can discuss Marxism- Communism, without getting involved in the Jewish question. You 
cannot honestly discuss Communism, without revealing the proven fas, that the founders of Russian 
Communism, were for the most part, Zionist Jews. Nor can you get away from the fa that all but a very 


Page  of  



few of the top leaders in the American Communist Party, have been Eastern European Jews. These are 
proven fas of history, over which I have no control, but which we MUST accept if we are honest men. 

I can understand why historical writers, speakers and preachers have been afraid to face these 
truths; they are afraid being labeled "race haters," "bigots," or even worse, " anti-Semites." One simy 
does not use the word "Jew" when you discuss Communism, for this always brings the bitterest of 
censorship. Why do you supse General Brown, Chairman of the Jo Chiefs of Staff, was forced o 
making a public alogy, after he has stated that the Zionists had far too much influence in our 
Government? 

I have before me a letter written by Dr. W. S. McBirnie, the well- known conservative from 
Glendale, California. It is dated March . In part, here is what it says: "I wish I could tell you, straight 
out, about the tremendous heavy problems facing our entire work at this time. I can only say that we are 
under heavy attack from a great many sources. When and if I can prove the origin of the organized effort 
behind the rash of problems created, I'll shout it from the housetops... I wish I could tell you of my 
suspicions, but I dare not! ...  have reason to believe our difficulties will get worse before they get 
better." 

Could it be that Dr. McBirnie, is afraid of exsing the Zionist attack against anything which is 
pro-American? The same can certainly be said concerning the Moral Majority! 

When I went to my pastor with these fas and tried to talk with concerning the Jewish situation, 
he was understandably upset, since he too had been "brainwashed" by the pro-Jewish propaganda which 
is "Standard Operating Procedure" in most of Protestant churches. He said: "Do you realize that you will 
Alienate yourself with all fundamentalists if you continue to think way?" The question was not: "Are the 
fas true?' But that Fundamentalists would be upset with the truth! 

Why Is this? My dorinal belief's are the same; I am willing to put them up against his or yours. I 
still follow and preach the fundamentals of the Faith. Why should I be ostracized because I tell the truth? 
Do you remember what Paul told the Christians at Galatia? "Am I therefore become your enemy, because 
I tell p truth?" (Gal. :). 

History proves that the Bolshevik Revolution in Russia was with Zionist dollars, supied in  
to Lenin, by two Jewish Bankers from New York, Jacob Schiff, and Max Warburg. It /also proves that 
most of the Communist leaders in Central Europe have been Russian Khazar Jews. It proves that most of 
the people In the United States, who have been tried for treason in the past sixty years have been Eastern 
European Khazar Jews. 

Here is a fa which should weigh more heavily than any other on those of you who deore the 
moral and spiritual degradation we see spreading over America like a hideous cancer; the leadership and 
money behind this, is Jewish! These are fas which you cannot in honesty deny! 

It is Jewish doors, for the most part, who man the Abortion Clinics of America, where over one 
and half million American unborn babies are murdered every year. It is the Zionist Jew who controls and 
owns most of the TV, the movies, and the lying media. They are behind the rock and roll business, the 
rnography, the dope trade, and the prostitution. It is these people who are engaged in every effort to 
destroy Christian decency and patriotism, and who are engaged in destroying everything you say you 
stand for as a Christian preacher. Yet you continue to defend and suprt them. Why? You have no right 
to comain of these evils, when you suprt those who bring them about. 

In  Chronicles , , there is a story of a good king, who helped a wicked fellow named Ahab 
(who was a fellow Israelite, by the way) in his fight against the Assyrians. When Jehosophat returned to 
Jerusalem, he was met by a Prophet who told him: "Shouldest thou help the ungodly, and love them that 
hate the Lord? Therefore is wrath un thee from before the Lord!" God will never bless America, if we 
aid wicked, murderous, anti-Christ countries, whether they be Russia, China, or the Israeli! The Word of 
God clearly indicates this. 


Page  of  



Now I realize you will come back with the argument that the Jews are God's Covenant people and 
that in Genesis :, God told Abraham: "I will bless them that bless you, and curse them that curse 
you." You will say, as I have been told, over and over again: "God will bless America, only as we bless 
the Jews. The reason we have been blessed, is because we have aided them Well, I beg to differ with you. 
I would like to call to your attention that the years of America's greatest disasters and worst problems in 
every area, has come since , when we recognized the Israeli Government. These have been the years 
of our greatest moral and spiritual decline; these have been the years. America's decline on the 
International scene; our years of increase in crime, of declining economic greatness. So ease an 
elligent man, don't use that argument, since it just "doesn`t hold any water!" 

Most Fundamentalist preachers tell their people about the teble persecution of the Jews by 
Hitler, which was supsed to have eliminated -million Jews. But do you ever tell your Christian people 
about the more than -million who have been destroyed by the Jewish led Communists? Furthermore, 
documented evidence, adequately proves that it would have been an imssibility for Hitler to have 
killed so many, since there never were more than , Jews in this area at any one time prior to the 
war. 

The more I study this problem, the more I am convinced that a lot of the error in our- 
fundamental church teaching concerning the Jews, is due to the fa that preachers have refused to 
accept the difference between the Jews and Israel. Take your case for exame. Do you believe and 
teach that the "Jews are all of Israel?" After years of this teaching, would you have the "moral courage" 
to admit to your people that you have been wrong all the time, even if the Word of God proved this? On 
the basis of what I have seen among most Fundamental preachers, you would not! 

Have you ever wondered why the number of Jews now in Palestine, is about the same as those 
who came out of Egypt  years ago? This does not sound like the fulfillment of Genesis :,  to 
me. 

If there were -million Israelites in Canaan in  B.C. when Moses was still alive, how do you 
account for the promise of Deuteronomy : which states that they would become "a thousand times as 
many?" If my mathematics is right, this should me out to about -billion. Yet the Jewish census for , 
indicates there are less than -million Jews in the entire world. I doubt if all the Jews who have lived 
since Moses time would number three billion. 

It has been estimated that King Solomon had about -million Israelites in his country over  
years ago; yet you would have believe that the -million Jews living today are the multiied seed of 
Abraham? I 

Do you mean to tell me that the re-gathering of some -million Jews in Old Palestine fulfills 
God's promise that they are to be as the "sands of the sea?" Less that % of world Jewry now live in 
Palestine and in the past five years, according to Israeli immigration figures, more Jews have left 
Palestine than have immigrated to it. 

Why did Jesus, speaking to the religious leaders of His day in John : say: "...ye therefore hear 
them not (His words), because ye are not of God." Why did He say in John : - "But ye believe not, 
because ye are NOT MY SHEEP?" 

He then went on to describe His sheep: "My sheep hear my voice, and I know them, and they 
follow me. " Who has heard the voice of Christ and followed Him? Certainly not the Zionist Jew! They 
hate and despise Him! They hate Him so much that they spit when they hear His name in anything except 
