
Nah. :- The red shall come up against Israel 

Is. :- Edom's garments are red, art thou red in thine apparel like he that treadeth in the wine vat 
As : The city was divided between Israel and the Jews 
Gen. : Cursed are all Canaanites 

John :- Pilate gave Jesus (YASHUA) to the Jews to be crucified 

Deut. : And they say in their heart, my were and my might got me this wealth 

Luke : If you despise Christ you despise God also 

Gen. :- Esau took strange wives which gave Isaac and Rebekah grief 

Rev. : The Kingdom is , furlongs square of  mi. sq. (they will ay hell fitting this 
in Palestine - or England either!) 

Gal. :- Separates the Jews from Israel 

Matt. :- What the Jews believe about the resurreion 

Matt. : That un you shall come all the righteous blood shed un the earth 

Josh. : Judah could not drive the Jeb-usites out and are with them today 

Ob. : Concerning Esau, "I will make you small among the heathen and despised among men" 

is. : Another shall claim to be Israel 

JUDAH (Germany?) 

Zech. :- Lord will save Judah first so House of David and Jerusalem do not magnify themselves against Judah 
Psm. :- God (Elohim) chose Judah over Ephraim 
Heb. : Jesus (YASHUA) sprang out of Judah 
Heb. : Jesus (YASHUA) sprang out of Judah 

Is. : Manasseh, Ephraim & Ephraim and Manasseh, together shall be against Judah (England 
and U.S. against Germany?) 

Josh. : Judah could not drive the Jeb-usites out, they are with them today 

II Kings : Sennacherib took all of Judah except Jerusalem 

 Sam. : Judah had five hundred thousand men that drew the sword 

JUD AO-C HRI STI ANITY (Is it truly Christian?) 

John : I & My Father are One (you can't have God without Christ!) 

 Cor. :- Christ is the image of God 

Jude :- God & Jesus (YASHUA) Christ are both called Lord 

John :- Jews are not God's sheep 

John :- Jews HATE Jesus (YASHUA) & God Matt. : Jesus (YASHUA) ties Jews back to Cain 
John :- Work of God (Elohim) is to believe in Jesus (YASHUA) 

Luke : If you despise Christ you despise God (Elohim) also 


Page  of  



Matt.l:ll- Jesus said "Beware of the teaching of the Pharisees" (Modern Jewry) HOW CAN YOU BE Christian & STILL 
LOVE AND GO ALONG WITH THE ENEMY OF JESUS (YASHUA)!!!!!! 

MONGRELIZATION 

Judges :- Children of Israel did evil, took other people for their wives (races) 

Psm. : Lord was angry because of egration 

Neh. :- Marrying strange wives transgresses God and He destroyed them for it 

Heb. : Esau had ermaed 

I Cor. :- Fornication unlawful,  killed in  day 

Gen. :- Going after strange flesh, Sons of God took daughters of men 

Jude : Going after strange flesh 

Num. :- Mongrel people brought on ague, , killed altogether, mongrel coue killed - ague destroyed 

Deut. :- Not to ermarry the races 

Ezra :-; -;  Put away wives and children of a different race 
Ezra :-; - Mongrelization an abomination - separate 

I Peter :-; Hos. : Israel a chosen people or race 

Gen. :- Abraham didn't want his son to have an erracial maage 
Deut. : A half breed shall not enter o the congregation of the Lord 
Matt. :- As in the days of Noah (end Time) 

Prov. :- Stay away from aliens (another race) 

Prov. : Keep from a strange woman 

Prov. : Strange women are a pit and he that is abhorred of the Lord shall fall therein 

Joel : A prayer against heathen rule over Israel 

Hos. : You go against the Lord to have strange children 

Ex. : The difference between Israel and the other people 

Gen. : Noah was perfe in his generations, not mongrels 

Jerm. : Israel & Judah sown with the son of man and seed of the beast 

Deut. :- Thou shalt not ow with an ox and an ass together 

Num. : Lo the people shall dwell alone and shall not be reckoned among the nations 

Ex. :-; Josh. :-; I Kings : Israel was commanded to make no covenants with anyone, nor were they to ermarry 
Lev. : Ye shall, be holy unto Me for I, the Lord, am holy and have separated you from other people, that you should be mine. 

Lev. :- Levites to marry virgins from their own people so as not to profane off spring 

Ezra  &  compare with Matt. : Unchastity and forbidden lineage and erracial maage are one and the same 

Deut. :- When the most High divided to the nations their inheritance when He separated the sons of Adam He set the bounds of the 
people according to the number of the children of Israel 

PREACHERS 

Mai. :- Teach not the Law 

Jerm. :; :- Ministers cause people to go astray 

Ezk. :- Preachers do not feed His sheep 

Jude :- Phoney preachers 

Ezk. : Law shall perish from the priests 

Lam. : Law no more in Israel 

Ezk. :- Sun worship (Easter Sunrise Service) 

Jerm. : False religions to be broken by Israel in end time 

Jerm. :- Shows in latter days if preachers taught God's word, people would not do evil 

II Cor. : Some preach a different Jesus (YASHUA) 

