comments (pred) by Prof Leonard J. Fein who addressed the Reform Rabbis meeting in Boston. 


Page  of  



Speaking on the Jewish academician, Prof. Fein exained that "we are not white symbolically, 
and we are not white literally." He then added that we should 'not permit ourselves 
to be lumped, together with white America for that is not where we belong." 

Continuing he exained that "We are too much an oppressed people, still, and too much a 
rejeed people, even in this country, to accept the designation 'white.' And to count ourselves as 
white, moreover, is to deny our brotherhood with the Yemenites and the Kurdistanis in Israel, with 
the B'nai Yisrael from India and the Black Jews of New York." 

Emoying a theme which he used in addressing other Jewish convention, Dr. Fein asserted that 
Jews are not black. "We are Jews," he went on, "and because we are Jews, and not white, and not 
black, we must see to it, as a community, that we do not come to a as whites, whether by choice or 
because others so identify us. Not only because it is forbidden us, not only because we of all people 
ought to know better, but because we shall cut ourselves off from our own future if we do. " 

Moses Mendelssohn, speaking of Jews said: "Judaism is not revealed religion, but revealed 
legislation." 

Meanwhile, we need only refer to the previous page relating to the Jews establishing an 
appearance of munificence, to allure the attachment and confidence of the Africans. It is now history, an 
ancient history as to what they did to the unfortunate Black people of Africa, a suppressed history which 
we aim to make known to every Black American; man, woman and child. YOU should also spread this 
truth. 

Very soon after the commencement of the slave trade, the Africans began to be considered as an 
inferior race, and even their very color as a mark of it. They were transrted for centuries until various 
persons, taking an erest in their sufferings, produced such a union of public sentiment that such 
commerce in human flesh was abolished. We have brought you but a brief sketch in all its sickening and 
hoble details in the hope that some day - because of our humble effort - the guilt will be aced where 
it rightfully belongs and that somehow, those people will be punished. 

The condition of slaves and their personal treatment were sufficiently humiliating and grievous, 
and may well excite our pity and abhorrence. They were beaten, starved, tortured, and murdered at 
discretion; they were dead in a civil sense; they had neither name or tribe; they were incapable of judicial 
process; and they were, in short, without appeal. 

This slavery of the Black people which began many centuries ago, depressed the human species 
in the general estimation; and they were tamed like brutes by hunger and the lash, and the treatment of 
them so condued as to render them docile instruments of labor for their ssessors. This degradation of 
course depressed their minds; restried the expansion of their faculties; stifled almost every effort of 
genius, and exhibited them to the world as beings endued with inferior capacities to the rest of mankind. 
It is only recently that the Black man has been given equal oprtunity in America, and although the 
Negro, generally, has not been too successful, he is nevertheless finding a ace. 

H.R.  is a Bill to authorize repatriation of Americans of African descent who have 
voluntarily expressed their desire to repatriate under the provisions of this ACT. 

Sec.  (a) The President of the United States is authorized and direed to enter o 
negotiations, through the Department of State or otherwise as he may deem appropriate, with 
approximately  Governments of the African continent and other independent African countries, 
respeively, for land sites that the repatriates can live on. 

Many millions of American Negroes look to Africa as their fatherland whose people are % 
illiterate. It is three times the size of the U.S., under pulated, rich in undeveloped resources and in need 
of skilled people. According to African standards, there are no unskilled black people in the United 
States. Many, many American negroes say that "our purse in America has been served - we must now 
leave and build Africa as we helped build America; to serve our world as we served the 'New World'." 


Page  of  



The above bill H.R.  was referred to the Committee on Foreign Affairs, March , . 
This committee is headed by Emanuel Celler (Jew) and inasmuch as International Jewry ends to 
continue its use of the Black man as its litical football, IT must become the White man's problem to 
DEMAND that this bill be given consideration by the United States Congress. The signing of a petition 
by more than SIX MILLION American Negroes is significant enough that this voluntary 
expression of the Blacks deserves every consideration. It is our opinion that this should become an 
obligation of the Unites States government to properly initiate legislation which will finance the 
transrtation of, and the proper and adequate establishment of these people in the respeive 
countries. This apies to ALL American Negroes who voluntarily wish to make Africa their 
permanent residence. Don't ask, DEMAND that your representative in Washington snsor Bill 
H.R. ! 

Meanwhile, this author will speak before Negro groups and organizations throughout America, 
educating them to the FACTS of slavery in America, and we will hope that the White American will 
DEMAND of HIS representatives proper consideration of Repatriation for American Blacks. 

REFERENCES 

The History of Slavery and the Slave Trade, Ancient and Modern. The African Slave Trade and the 
Political History Of Slavery in the United States. Compiled from authentic materials by W.O. Blake. 
Published and sold exclusively by subscription by J. & H. Miller,  Columbus, Ohio. Plus References 
as liste d on pages - 



Page  of  



Chapter  

HITLER DID NOT START WORLD WAR !! 
PROOF THE ZIONIST JEWS PLANED 
AND STARTED WORLD WAR  

WORLD WAR ONE started in August  and ended in  where  mill i on people were 
killed and injured caused by the Zionist Bankers continued with their usurious way of robbing the 
German people as they are doing in the U.S.A. today through (erest) usury which is the cause of all 
inflation. And in  the Zionist Bankers inflation in Germany went wild. As I said before in this book 
a sime Postage Stamp went from  pfennigs or (,cents) to ,,,. marks (or Dollars) in 
less than  years caused by the deliberate pring of too much money by the Zionist Rothchild controlled 
banking system who have a long history of taking over one country after another with their debt usury 
system caused by erest that always grows so large it can never be paid. 

The Zionist`s aned World War  for many years before the War, just as they did World War  
and they have aned World War , which is already started in seven Arab Countries and will spread. 
Below I will show just a little of their ruthless ans and proof from their own papers and books 
although thousands more proofs could be added about Zionist ans for World War  going back to the 
end of World War . 

We must keep in mind that the one of the main reason the Zionists HATED Germany so bad was 
World War  was brought about to make their Zionist bankers even stronger in Germany. And they 
started the inflation in  which ended up foreclosing and taking all the Homes, Farms and Businesses 
in the country that had been in the same families for generations back and the German people ended up 
working for the Bankers for a pittance putting them more in to SLAVERY than ever at the end of this 
inflation. 

Then the Zionist financed their little dupe Hitler to take control of running the country for them. 

Instead Hitler double crossed the Zionists and took back from the bankers all the homes, land, 
farms and businesses and giving it back to the people. He also took over the Banking system and 
started his own banking system to loan erest free money without erest LIKE ALL 
COUNTRIES SHOULD AND COULD DO TODAY. With this erest free loans Hitler built the 
greatest industrial economy in the world and he did it in only five years, just as America and 
Europe could do today if they kicked out the Zionist Bankers. This is the reasons why the Zionist 
Jews hated Germany so much and for many years aned a second world war to take back 
Germany for the Zionist so called Israeli to control. 

Fwd: "Judea declares War on Germany." - Daily Express (March , ) If you really 
want to know how the Zionist Jews aned and what started World War  read these 
clippings from Jewish News Papers and magazines. It is not what you have been 
told! But then we must remember: Who ever wins the war gets to write the history! 

 "We know that the war between Poland and Germany can`t be prevented. We have to 
systematically and energetically prepare ourselves for this war. The present generation will see that a 
new viory at Grunwald will be written o histories pages. But we will battle out this Grunwald in the 
suburbs of Berlin. Our ideal is to chamfer Poland with borders along the Oder in the west and the Neie 
at Lausitz and to absorb Prussia from Pregel to the Spree. In this war no prisoners will be 
made, there will be no ace for humanitarian feelings. " - The censored, and closely to the 

