Nick Pretzlik: Why? 

Chomsky and Finkelstein on T oan Peters' From Time Immemorial 

Israel Shamir: The SpiderWeb 

Israel and the Empire ” J on Elmer erviews J eff Halper 

... Israel has located itself very strategically right in the centre of the global arms industry. 
Israel's sophisticated military hardware and military software are very imrtant to weans 
development in the United States. Zionist Controlled Israel has also become the main subcontraor 
of American arms. ... But ... there are no ethical or moral constras ... For exame, there are 
American Congressional constras on selling arms to China because of China's human rights 
problems. So what Israel does is it tinkers with American arms just enough that they can be 
considered Israeli arms, and in that way bypasses Congress. 

Xymphora: The Eleion of Mahmoud Abbas 

The World can watch the Proje [of creating Greater Israel from Egypt to the Euphrates] 
continue until it causes a world war, world-wide economic catastrophe, and millions of deaths, or it 
can put a stop to it now by forcing Zionist Israel to start to a in good faith towards a negotiated 
settlement. 

David Livingstone: Globalists Created Wahhabi Terrorism to Destroy Islam and T ustify a 
Global State 

Syria is Doomed 
Xymphora: Perie's Pogrom 

... what he [Richard Perle] is advocating is for the United States to drop bombs on innocent 
civilians of a sovereign country [Iran] that ses absolutely no threat to the United States. Here we 
have a prominent Zionist Jewish elleual talking to a group of Jewish lobbyists for Israeli 
erests, advocating what amounts to a slaughter of Muslim civilians ” a Jewish grom against 
Muslims, if you will ” all to the cheers and apause of his audience. 

Edgar J . Steele: Bush Must Go! 

J ohn Kaminski: If T oe was right ... then Zionist neocon crazier an tr> kill millions tn 
control the world ” but who was T oe, really? 

J ohn Kaminski: Who's Wagging Whom? 

In a document ... published by The American Enterprise's "Proje for a New American 
Century", System Planning Corration (SPC) International executive, Dov Zakheim, called for 
"some catastrophic and catalyzing event ” like a new Pearl Harbor" being necessary to foster the 
frame of mind needed for the American public to suprt a war in the Middle East that would 
litically and culturally reshape the region. ... Dov went from his sition at Systems Planning 
Corration to become the Comptroller of the Pentagon in May . Perhaps not so coincidentally, 
it was an SPC subsidiary, Tridata Corration, that oversaw the investigation after the terrorist 
attack on the World Trade Center in . 

SPC ...specializes in many areas of defense technology produion and manufaure, 
including a system ... [which] allows the control of several 'drones' from a remote location, on 
varying frequencies, and has a range of several hundred miles. This technology can be used on 
many different types of aircraft, including large passenger jets. 

Xymphora: Prolegomena to any future paralitics 


Page  of  


Critics of the idea that the current mess in the Middle East is part of a Zionist Israeli-direed 
ot can cavil all they want, but when exaly the same people who wrote exaly the same 
bluepr that is being followed all end up in the Zionist Bush Administration, and set up a specific 
organization, the Office of Special Plans (led by Feith), to ensure that only lies suprting the attack 
on Iraq reach Bush, such caviling appears to be a form of insanity. 

Walter C. Uhler: "Fixed" Intelligence from Feith's "Gesta Office," the CIA and the Bush 

Administration's Impeachable Lies about Iraq's Prewar Links to al Qaeda 

Xymphora: Gunships up the Fiords 

This is getting embarrassing for the Americans as well. If one of Israel and the United States 
is the tail and one is the dog, who is wagging whom? 

To which one commenter reied: 

Tail and dog is so old hat. I see America as a guy and Israel as his dick. When the dick 
makes up its mind, the guy will always go along. 

Per Spiegel Interview with Mahmoud Ahmadinejad 

Amos M. Gunsberg: Beyond Insanity 

Webster G. Tarey: , Americans in Lebanon left by Bush as sitting ducks for 
false flag provocations to drag US o World War III 
Iranian President Ahmadinejad's Letter to the American Peoe 

Xymphora At Last Suprts a One- State Solution to the Israeli- Palestinian Confli 

 Reasons America Will Be Judged 

as the Most Brutal Empire in History 

: PM ozyism  comments /nov/ll 



Good and evil doesn't have a grey zone. Killing and stealing is bad. Violence is never "good" or 
necessary unless it is used to defend against killers and thieves. Indeed, that is the morality behind the 
"just war" princie as defined by ernational laws and treaties. 

Yet, this sime concept of right and wrong gets muddled by differing ideas about 
religion, patriotism, economics and many other divisions. The "just war" rule has crumbled under the 
Page  of  




ambitions of empires throughout history. The American-led Anglo Saxon empire is no different. 

This empire has been brutally conquering and colonizing tetory since the fall of Rome. 
However, it has only gained an American face in the last century. The Zionist controlled United States 
quickly emerged as the world's "superwere" primarily through its economic might. For some time, 
many believed the U.S. to be a shining exame of economic freedom for other nations to emulate. 
Indeed, America was eager to promote "economic freedom" globally to open new markets for U.S. -based 
corrations. 

When foreign leaders refused to allow these Zionist corrate erests o their country, those 
leaders were reaced through a variety of covert aions. The form of government that would be 
installed did not matter to the empire makers so long as the corrate erests were served. In most cases 
these nations simy surrendered to the seemingly unlimited were of the almighty dollar, thus 
camouflaging the traditional method of forceful empire building. 

Surtrival 
Stockpiling 
Secrets 


However, some nations, especially in the last two decades, remained stubborn and have refused to 
alter their banking systems while also shunning Western companies. Despite the empire's best efforts to 
diomatically bribe or sanion them o submission, they ultimately required an iron military fist to 
force their comiance. Until recently, military aion remained the last resort. But now, preemptive 
military aion seems to have become the preferred, and perhaps necessary, method to conquer the last 
resource-rich nations out of their grasp. 

The empire's pulations cheered this strategy out of fear of being attacked by these rogue 
nations who never attacked or even threatened to attack them. In the fog of fear, killing and stealing 
became acceptable. In fa, detention without charges and even torture became acceptable in the former 
capital of freedom. America has determined that the means justifies the end ” which is more were. 

As with all empires, these "means" have become increasingly violent and destruive in the face 
of resistance. Yet, only a few more dominoes are left to knock over for America to comete a an set in 
motion well before they were one of the colonies. That is unless, of course, other world weres break 
ranks and attempt to stop the conquerors, which could lead to a large scale confli. 

Regardless, when the dust settles and moral history is written, Zionist America and her Western 
cohorts will likely be viewed as the most brutal empire in history. Here are ten reasons why this is 
