been suprting the Zionist-Communist enemies of America for many years. When you find a 


Page  of  



clergyman, or a litician who gives aid to the enemies of America, and this includes International 
Zionism,: which is dedicated to the destruion of Christian America, then that person is a traitor, no 
matter how cleverly they conceal their: motives. 

To those of you who have been "seduced" by our enemies, knowingly or unknowingly, we must 
apy the same term, for you too have given aid to the enemy and did not care enough to learn the truth 
about who our enemies really are. 

We know there are traitors at work in our Government, and in our churches. They are seeking to 
destroy white Christian civilization and everything our forefathers fought and died for. Most of our 
people are more erested in aying games than they are defending our civilization. So those of us who 
know the truth, face an awesome resnsibility. Will we continue to enjoy the benefits and comforts God 
has given to us, or will we too be destroyed by the "synagogue of Satan," (Rev. :) which has risen up 
among us? 

The outcome of this war we are in; the fate of civilization and Christianity rests in our hands. I do 
not alogize for changing y mind about the Jews. I believe God led me to this truth. It was He who said: 
"If ye would know the truth, the truth will, set you free!" Before Him today, and with you as witnesses, I 
make this renewed edge. "I will do everything within my were, as far as my strength, money, 
talent, and time will permit, to see that America will have a rebirth of freedom; that the 
Government of ( people, by the people, and for the people; a government under God, shall not 
perish from this Earth." 

SIGNED: Jack Mohr // 

Will you join me in this Holy War for our survival? 

Today I am convinced that I am doing what God wants me to 'or some strange, unknown reason, 
God picked me to be a watchman on the walls of Israel- America." Why, I will never understand! But I 
believe that what I am doing is right. I believe it scriptural, and I believe the day will come when I will 
be able to before my God with a clear conscience. THIS IS MY GOAL IN LIFE! Today, () I am 
undergoing the greatest smear campaign- of my life. The enemy is trying to tie me in with all sorts of 
enterprises, even indirely accusing me of the murder of a Jewish Talk Show host, who was shot after I 
was on his show. But I will not give up! They will never get me to surrender!.... 

...I submit the following fas, and defy any honest reader, or elligent Patriot to ignore these 
fas. I am going to give you these fas without conclusion, and then I dare the reader who is skeptical, 
to follow these fas, add them up and make your own conclusion:" 

The leading Jewish Journal in the United States, THE AMERICAN HEBREW, said on Sept. , 
: "The Bolshevik Revolution in Russia was the work of Jewish brains, of Jewish dissatisfaion, of 
Jewish anning, whose goal was to create NEW ORDER in the world. What was performed in so 
excellent way in Russia, thanks to Jewish brains, and because of Jewish dissatisfaion, and by Jewish 
anning, shall also, through the same Jewish mental and physical forces, BECOME A REALITY OVER 
ALL THE WORLD!" 

The literature of the Jewish community during the entire lifetime of the Un-American Aivities 
Committee; during the lifetime of the McCarran Committee and during the lifetime the Internal Security 
Committee; has shown a consistency with this statement. 

Here are some inescapable fas: The history of opsition to the Communist Party and the 
Communist movement in the United States has centered around certain committees and personalities. 
(Remember this was written in  - ED) 

 - The House Un-American Aivities Committee; 

 - The McCarthy Committee; 

 - The McCarran - Walther Immigration A; 

 - The Internal Security A; 

 - Loyalty oaths; 


Page  of  



 - Gen. Douglas Mac Arthur; 

 - Dean Acheson and his licies, and, 

 - Outlawry of the Communist Party. 

This great confli has embraced many more issues and personality`s, but the above are enough to 
identify the issues 

Now here is the dynamite! Here is the discovery that brought persecution against Gerald L.K, 
Smith, not only from Jewish sources, but from the Judeo-Christians in the Churches. 

In , there were something like  national and local Jewish organizations in the United 
States. These represented the Jewish community in their towns, cities, counties, states and the Nation. 
They concentrate under the leadership of wereful, highly financed organizations such as the 
AMERICAN JEWISH CONGRESS; the AMERICAN JEWISH COMMISSION; the ANTI- 
DEFAMATION LEAGUE; the B'NAI B'RITH lodges; the JEWISH WELLFARE SOCIETY, and 
numerous Women's youth and veteran organizations. These organizations probably represent % of 
Jews in the country. 

You may be shocked to know, that all of these organizations, a careful monitoring of all 
newspapers and magazines published by Jews, including stories, editorials and official columns have all 
opsed the following: 

. All Jewish organization have fought against the taking of loyalty oaths. 

. All Jewish organizations have fought any effort to outlaw the communist Party. 

. ALL Jewish organizations have fought efforts of any government security organization to exse 
communist agents in the U.S. government or business. 

 - ALL Jewish organizations have joined in the effort to defame Gen. Mac Arthur. 

superb job of exsing their Satanism. This effort in itself should tell an elligent Christian how 
dangerous these Christ haters really are. 

 - ALL Jewish organizations suprted the traitor, Dean Acheson. 

 - ALL Jewish organizations favored the censure of Sen. McCarthy. 

This list could go on at length. But as an elligent reader, you must either prove these statements 
wrong, or accept them at face value. 

The reason the CHRISTIAN PATRIOTS DEFENSE LEAGUE THE CRUSADE FOR CHRIST 
AND COUNTRY, THE ARYAN NATIONS, and many other anti-Communist organizations are being 
attacked by organized Jewry, is because we are fighting the efforts of TALMUDIC JUDAISM to take 
over control of our country We know who the enemy is, because we can follow these smears back to 
their TALMUDIC sources. 

The reason any Christian patriot can be smeared overnight; the reason a Congressman can be 
smeared, is because these Jewish organizations have always been on the side of the "left." They are 
cometely united in their campaign to stamp out white Christian Civilization. 

We hear a lot these days in the Jewish controlled media about the "hate campaign" being caed 
out against the or Jew But when Congressional Committees begin to investigate the allegations, I 
would respefully suggest that they first read an article which appeared in the JEWISH VOICE, the 
largest Jewish newspaper west of Chicago. It was written by a Milton Friedman. In this article Friedman 
deores the fa that after many years Jewish effort to silence him, Gerald L.K. Smith was still enjoying 
his liberties. The typical Jewish attitude can be seen in Friedman's words: "Although the Jewish defense 
agencies have spent many years and millions of dollars to destroy Smith, he and his henchmen now 
emerge stronger than ever. Smith has never been in a more wereful sition than today." 

When Jewish organizations are willing to spend millions dollars and countless hours of work to 
destroy one man and organization, you can bet your bottom dollar that he is doing a Job of exsing their 
Satanism. This effort in itself should tell an elligent Christian how dangerous these Christ haters are. 


Page  of  



America has always been by tradition a Christian nation, no matter what Jerry Falwell may say to 
the contrary. We are not ridiculous enough to imy that you must be a Christian in order to be an 
American, although it would make you a better one. No religious dogmas should be imsed on our 
