In , the first Jew, Jacob Barsimson, emigrated from Holland to New Amsterdam (New York) 
and in the next decade many more followed him, settling along the East Coast, principally in New 
Amsterdam and Newrt, Rhode Island. They were prevented by ordinances issued by Governor Peter 
Stuyvesant from engaging in the domestic economy, so they quickly discovered that the tetory 
inhabited by the Indians would be a fertile field. There were no laws preventing the Jews from trading 
with the Indians. 

The first Jew to begin trading with the Indians was Hayman Levy, who imrted cheap glass 
beads, textiles, eangs, armbands and other cheap adornments from Holland which were traded for 
valuable fur pelts. Hayman Levy was soon joined by Jews Nicholas Lowe and Joseph Simon. Lowe 
conceived the idea of trading rum and whiskey to the Indians and set up a distillery in Newrt, where 
these two liquors were produced. Within a short time there were  distilleries in Newrt, all of them 
owned by Jews, manufauring and distributing firewater'. The story of the debauching of the Indians 
with its resultant massacres of the early settlers, is a dramatic story in itself. 

It is essential to comprehend the seart of Newrt. It is imrtant in order to recognize the 
Jewish share in the Slave commerce. There was a period when it was commonly referred to as 'The 

Page  of  



Jewish Newrt - World center of Slave Commerce'. Altogether, at this time, there were in North 
America six Jewish communities; Newrt, Charleston, New York, Philadelphia, Richmond, and 
Savannah. There were also many other Jews, scattered over the entire East Coast. Although New York 
held first ace in the settlers of Jews in North America, Newrt held second ace. New York was also 
the main source of Kosher meat, supying the North American settlements, then the West Indies Islands 
and' also South America. Now Newrt took over! 

Newrt also became the great trade harbor of the East Coast of North America. There, vessels 
from other rts met, to exchange commodities. Newrt, as previously mentioned, represented the 
foremost ace in the commerce of Rum, Whiskey, and Liquor dealings. And to conclude, it finally 
became the Main Center of Slave dealings. It was from this rt that the ships left on their way across the 
ocean, to gather their black human cargo and then derive fl ( great sums of money in exchange for them. 

An authentic, contemrary rert, based on authority, indicates that of  Slave ships, for 
instance, unloaded in Charleston, within one year, their "Cargo",  of these were undersigned by Jews 
from Newrt and Charleston by their own name. About the rest of them, one can surmise, although they 
were entered as Boston () Norfolk (), and Baltimore (), their real owners were similarly the Jewish 
slave dealers from Newrt and Charleston. 

One is able to assess the Jewish share in the entire dealings of the Newrt, if one considers the 
undertaking of a lone Jew, the Portuguese, Aaron Lopez, who ays an imrtant part in the over-all 
story of the Jews and Slavery. 

Concerning the entire commerce of the Colonies, and the later State of Rhode Island, (which 
included Newrt) bills of lading, concessions, receipts, and rt clearances caed the signature name 
of the Jew Aaron Lopez. This all took ace during the years  to . He had therefore more than 
% of all dealings under his personal control for almost fifty years. Aside from that there were other 
ships which he owned, but sailed under other names. 

In the year , the first Masonic Lodge was established. % of the members of this first lodge, 
fourteen all told, were Jews. And one knows that only so-called "prominent" individuals were accepted. 
Twenty years later the second Masonic Lodge: "King David" was established. It is a fa that all of these 
members were Jews. 

In the meantime the Jewish influence in Newrt had reached such prortions that President 
George Washington decided to pay them a visit. Un his appearance both of the Masonic Lodges sent 
an emissary: a Jew named Moses Seixas, to approach the President with a petition, in which the Jews of 
Newrt stated: "If you will permit the children of Abraham to approach you with a request, to tell you 
that we honor you, and feel an alliance...", and then: "Until the present time the valuable rights of a free 
citizen have been withheld. However, now, we see a new government coming o being based on the 
Majesty of the people, a government, not sanioning any bigotry nor persecution of the Jew, rather, to 
concede the freedom of thought, which each shares, whatever Nation or Language, as a part of the great 
Government machine." 

It is necessary at this  to consider the disclosures as to who in reality obtained this legendary 
freedom in America at the founding of the Union. To be sure, the province became independent and 
severed from the English Jurisdiion. However, we can see from the petition which Moses Seixas 
offered President Washington in the name of the Jews of Newrt, that it was not in reality this type of 
freedom which they had in mind. They were merely concerned about themselves, and their "own civil 
rights," which had been withheld. Therefore, following the Revolutionary War, the Jews were accorded 
equal rights, and freed of all restriions! And the Negroes? The Revolutionary War not withstanding, 
they remained Slaves! In the year  one sixth of the pulation in New York was Negroid, and 
prortionately in the Southern parts of the Country, they out-numbered the others, but the proclamation 
of Freedom did not touch them. More of this later. 


Page  of  



Let us scrutinize at close range this dismal handwork of the Jews which gave them influence and 
were, so we may comprehend the Slave Trade; for there has been so much written since that time by the 
zealous Jewish writers, that at the present, long since removed, it might appear natural, for the time 
element has tendency to make things nebulous. 

Let us follow the journey of one ship, owned by a slave dealer, Aaron Lopez which had made 
many trips to the African coast. 

For instance, in the month of May, , the ship "Abigail" was equipped with about , 
gallons of rum, a great supy of iron foot and hand restras, pistols, wder, sabers, and a lot of 
worthless tin ornaments, and under the command of the Jewish Captain Freedman, sailed off for Africa. 
There were but two Mates and six sailors comprising the crew. Three and one-half months later they 
landed on the African Coast. Meantime, there had been construed an African Agency, by the Jewish 
slave dealers, who had corralled them, and prepared them for sale. This organization reaching deep o 
Africa, had many ramifications, including the heads of groups, villages, etc. This method to win over 
these leaders for the Jewish slave trade, was similar to that which the Jews had emoyed with the 
Indians. 

At first, they presented them with rum, and soon found themselves in an alcoholic delirium. 
When the gold dust, and ivory supy was exhausted, they were induced to sell their descendants. At first 
their wives, and then their youths. Then they began warfare among each other, otted and developed 
mostly by the Jews, and if they captured prisoners, these, too, were exchanged for rum, ammunition and 
weans to the Jews, using them for further campaigns to capture more Negroes. The captured Blacks 
were linked two by two, and driven through the medieval forests to the coast. The painful treks required 
weeks, and some of them frequently became ill, and felled by exhaustion, and many unable to rise even 
though the bull whip was apied as an encourager. They were left to die and were devoured by wild 
beasts. It was not unusual to see the bones of the dead laying in the tropical sun, a sad and gruesome 
reminder to those who would later on tread this path. 

It has been calculated that for each Negro who withstood the rigors of this wandering, there still 
had to be the long voyage across the ocean, before they reached American soil. Nine out of ten died! And 
when one considers, there was a yearly exodus of ONE MILLION black salves, then, and only then, can 
one assess the tremendous, and extensive exodus of the African people. At present Africa is thinly 
It' pulated, not alone due to the ,,; literally dragged out of huts, but due to the five to nine 
million who never reached their destination. 

Once they reached the coast, the black slaves were driven together, and restras were apied, to 
hold them, until the next Transrt ship docked. The agent - many of them Jews - who represented the 
Chief, then began the deal with the Captain. Each Negro was personally presented to him. But the 
Captains had learned to become suspicious. The Black one must move his fingers, arms, legs, and the 
entire body to insure that there were not any fraures. Even the teeth were examined. If a tooth was 
lacking, it lowered the price. Most of the Jew Agents knew how to treat sick Negroes with chemicals in 
order to sell them as sound. Each Negro was valued at about  gallons of mm,  unds of gun 
wder, or in cash between  to  dollars. The notations of a Captain inform us that on September th, 
, one Negro brought as much as  gallons of rum, due to the bidding among the agents, raising the 
price. 

Women under  years, pregnant or not, resulted in the same measure, if they were well, and 
comely. Any over  years lost %. 

And here it should be stated that those Negroes, purchased free at the African coast for  to  
dollars, were then resold by the same slave dealers in America for two thousand dollars. 

This gives one an idea how the Jews managed to acquire tremendous fortunes. Following the 
bargaining, Captain Freedman paid the bill, either in merchandise or cash. He also recalled some advice 


Page  of  



which his Jewish emoyers gave him as he left Newrt for Africa: "Pour as much water o the rum as 
you ssibly can." In this manner the Negro chiefs were cheated two times by the Newrt Jews! 

The next step was to shave the hair from the head of the acquired slaves. Then they were bound, 
and branded with a hot iron, either on the back, or the hip, identifying them with their owners. Now the 
Negro slave was indeed the property of the Jewish purchaser. If he fled, he could be identified. 
Following, this procedure there was a farewell celebration. There were instances when entire families 
