To any student of Judaism, or to the Jews themselves, this phenomenon is partly exained by the fa 
that Judaism is neither mainly a religion, nor mainly a racial matter, nor yet is it simy a matter of 
nationality. Rather it is all three; it is a kind of trinity. Judaism is best described as a nationality built on 
the twin pillars of race and religion. All this is closely related to another aspe of Judaism, namely the 
persecution myth. Since first appearing in history we find the Jews propagating the idea that they are an 
abused and persecuted people, and this idea is, and has always been, central in Jewish thinking. The myth 
of persecution is the adhesive and cement of Judaism; without it Jews would have long since ceased to 
exist, their racial-religious nationality notwithstanding. 

It is fa that the Jewish people have suffered numerous hardships in the course of their 
history, but this is true of other peoples too. The chief difference is that the Jews have kept score. We 
must repeat - 'they have kept score' - they have made a tradition of persecution. 

A casual slaughter of thousands of Christians is remembered by no one in  years, but a 
disability visited un a few Jews is preserved forever in Jewish histories. And they tell their woes not 
only to themselves, but to a sympathetic world as well. 



Note the tanned leather covering overhead - the only proteion from the elements for these 
masses of slave 'walking skeletons'. This is illustration of slaves on deck of "Wildfire", which was 
captured and brought to Key West on April , . (A daguerreotype engraving published in Harper's 
Weekly). 


Page  of  


WHO BROUGHT THE SLAVES TO AMERICA? 

APPENDIX 

CONFIDENTIAL NOTICE TO ALL JEWS 
(Orthodox, Reform, Non-Religious and "Christian") 

We are about to reach our goal. World War II furthered our ans greatly. We succeeded in 
having many millions of Christians kill each other and returning other millions in such condition that 
they can do us no harm. There remains little to be done to comete our control of the stupid Goyim. 
JEWS IN AMERICA - These are your final instruions: 

. Continue to enlarge our control over radio, TV, newspapers, movies and magazines. 

. Educate our sons and crowd the Gentiles out of the praice of law, medicine, pharmacy, and all the 
retail trades. 

. Make their schools and colleges training camps of our Red revolution. 

. Bring ridicule un their Christian faith, divide their people, weaken their churches. 

. Demoralize their women and children. 

. Corrupt their courts and bring them o contempt. 

. Turn class against class. The Negro against the White. 

. Buy liticians and continue to corrupt their local, state and national governments. 

. "GET" the Fascist anti-Semites, one way or another. 

. Use willing tools like Tmman, Eisenhowere, Stevenson, and Warren; they will do our bidding. Yes, 
even Johnson and Nixon. (And all the Presidents them) 

. Plan unlimited immigration of our persecuted people without restriion. 

. Continue our control of their money thru the Federal Reserve System. 

. Continue to ace Jews in key sitions in government, army and navy. 

. We must destroy the Republic and reace it with a Democracy (Jewish-governed state Socialism.) 

. Continue our control over labor, agitate unrest, strikes and violence by any means or schemes. 

Especially through these methods shall we unge this country o destitution, demoralization, 
bankruptcy, and civil war, further lessening the numbers of our enemies. 

The Bolshevik Revolution made us masters of Russia. 

The last war made us rulers of all Europe except Spain. 

Let the next war make us MASTERS OF AMERICA. 

For the preservation of our race, you are warned to renounce, abjure, repudiate and deny any of 
this information if questioned by Gentiles, even under oath, as direed by the Talmud. 

It is needless to caution you of the teble consequences that might follow if these instruions should 
fall o Goyim hands. 

(Signed) THE CENTRAL CONFERENCE OF AMERICAN RABBIS, Dated -  

HE WHO HAS DISCOVERED THE TRUTH ABOUT JUDAISM, AND 
WHO DOES NOT FIGHT JEWRY AND WARN HIS FELLOW-CITIZENS OF 
THE JEWISH MENACE, BECOMES AN ACCOMPLICE OF THE JEWS AND 
AN ACCESSORY TO THE MISFORTUNES OF HIS NATION. 

POPES, CHURCH FATHERS AND SAINTS COMBAT AND CONDEMN THE JEWS. 

The great Pope Gregory VII, the renowned Hildebrand, the great reformer and organizer of the 
Church, writes in a letter to King Alfonse VI of Castile in the year : 'We exhort your Royal Majesty, 
not to further tolerate, that the Jews mle Christians and have were over them. For to allow, that 


Page  of  



Christians are subordinated to Jews and are delivered to their whims, means to oppress the Church of 
God, means to revile Christ himself." () 

However, this great Pope was strily opsed to forcing the Jews to baptism, for he knew, how 
dangerous false conversions were and seized un measures to avoid this kind of error and proteed the 
Jews against the immoderate zeal of some fanatics. Pope Gregory VII fought unerruptedly to prevent 
that the Jews ruled the Christians, for - as he said - this came close to a repression of Holy Church and 
elevating of the "Synagogue of Satan." But in addition he asserted that to ease these enemies of Christ, 
meant to revile Christ himself. What would the members of the "Fifth Column" say to this, who at 
present do exaly the opsite of what Pope Gregory VII ordered? The same thing, which was asserted 
by this renowned Pontifex - one of the most renowned of the Church - is championed today by those who 
fight against Jewish Imperialism and for this reason are called anti-Semites, i.e., to prevent that the Jews 
rule the Christians and as a result vilify Christ and His Church and cause grave harm to the Christian 
nations. St. Ambrose, a Bishop of Milan, and great Church Father, said to his flock, that the Synagogue 
"was a godless House, a colleing ace of wickedness and that God Himself had damned it." () 

And if the host of Christians on grounds of the faithless condu of the Jews could not hold back 
their rage and burned a synagogue, St. Ambrose allowed them to enjoy his full suprt and said in 
addition: "I declare that I have set the synagogue on fire or have a least given the crowd mandate to do it. 
And if it is said against me, that I should not have personally set the synagogue on fire, I answered that it 
was burned through the judgment of God." () 

We must also not forget, that St. Ambrose of Milan is recognized in the Holy Church as model 
bishop and an account of his Christian neighborly love is held to be worthy of imitation. This proves, that 
neighborly love, must not be used to prote the evil weres. 

Holy Thomas of Aquin, who knew the danger of Jews in Christian society, held it to be corre, to 
allow them to live in eternal servitude. A semitophilic writer comains about this and writes as follows: 
"Aquinas based himself un the stand of that time, that they should live in eternal servitude." () 
This opinion of St. Thomas of Aquinas is cometely justified. If the Jews in every land, in which they 
live, constantly instigate conspiracies un command of their religion, in order to conquer the people 
which magnanimously offered them hospitality, and they in addition fight to ob it of its goods and to 
destroy its religious belief, there is no other choice: either they must be expelled from the land, or they be 
allowed to live there, but in hard servitude, which binds their hands and prevents them from doing so 
much evil. 

Another great genius of the Church, Duns Scotus, the Door Subtilis, went still further than 
Thomas of Aquinas and prosed to Christianity a solution of the Jewish problem on 
the basis of the comete destruion of this devilish se. In this aspe a renowned Rabbi, comains that 
Duns Scotus "Instigated the forceful baptism of Jewish children and that parents who refused to be 
converted should be brought onto an island, where they could praice their religion until the prophecy of 
Isaak concerning those remaining, who wished to return, was fulfilled. (.)" () 

As one sees, the idea of banishing all the Jews in the world onto an island, where they should 
live alone, without being able to harm the remaining peoples, originates not from Hitler but from 
