not a single Jewish settlement that was not established in the ace of a former Arab Village. ” 
MosheDyan,  


Everybody has to move, run and grab as many hilltops as they can to enlarge the 
settlements because everything we take now will stay ours . . . Everything we don't grab will go to 
them. ”Ariel Sharon,  

The difference between the Jewish soul ... and the soul of all the Gentiles ... is greater and 
deeper than the difference between the soul of a man and the soul of an animal. ” Rabbi Avraham 
Yitzhak HaCohen Kook (-) 


Israel constantly and loudly demands that Arab states must recognize Israel's "right to 
exist". But, as Faisal Bodi s out in his article published in the Guardian UK, 

< Jsrael simy has no right to exist . > 



Zionism 

Zionism and T udaism 
Anti-Semitism and Anti- Zionism 

Zionism as Racism 

Christian Zionism 
Israel's Pernicious Influence 

on U.S. Policy 


Israel's Nukes 

Secret CIA Documents on Mossad 

Articles by Gilad Atzmon 
Further Articles on This Website 

Further Articles on Other Websites 

Earlier links 
Later links (Don't miss!) 


Zionism is ... racist, it is nationalist, and it is Biblically inspired for the true Israelites not the 
Zionist who originally were Asians driven out of Asian (rather than spiritually inspired). Being a 
fundamentalist movement, Zionism is not categorically different from Nazism. Only when we 
understand Zionism in its nationalist and racist context will we begin to comprehend the depth of its 
atrocities. ”Gilad Atzmon: Not In My Name: An Analysis of  ewish Righteousness 

See also: 

Israel Shamir: To Those Who Think All I ews Are Pro-Israel &Zionists . 

J oe Quinn: Zionist Israel ” the True Enemy of the  ewish Peoe 

Why Orthodox  ews OPPOSE Zionism and the Zionist state 
The name of a good book; AMERICA THROUGH OFF THE YOKE BY CHARLES S. NORBURN 


Page  of  


A discussion between Anti-Semitism and Anti-Zionism 

Normal human: What's anti-Semitism? 

Zionist: Well, since Israel is a Jewish state, any criticism of Israel is anti-Semitism. 

NH: Israel is a Jewish state and has aed despicably toward the Palestinians. It deserves criticism! 

Zio: Ooh! You anti-Semite! How could you say such a thing! Are you a Nazi? Oh!oh!oh! Anti-Semite! 

NH: Aually, Israel's despicable aions have made anti-Semitism almost respeable. 

Zio: Oooohh! ! [Fas rather than acknowledge fas evident to everyone else.] 

Zionists are experts at propaganda, disinformation, denying fas and outright lying. Any 
criticism of Zionism or of Israel is labeled as "anti-Semitism", where this is erpreted to mean 
"anti-J ewish". This is a slanderous falsehood. Criticism of Zionism is criticism of a particularly 
ugly litical movement, not criticism of a religion or of the adherents of a religion. One may be 
critical of Zionism and of Zionists while at the same time being guite tolerant of, or well- 
dissed toward, or even an adherent of, the J ewish religion (as we see from the websites dted 
above). 

Whether one approves of or dislikes the beliefs and praices of Judaism it remains that 
J ews have a right to hold those beliefs and maain those praices. No-one, however, J ewish 
or non-J ewish, has a right to drive out people from their homes on land where they and their 
forebears have been living for centuries, to deprive people of their human rights, to cripe their 
society and to damage the welfare of others by a parasitic subversion of the government of 
another country for base litical purses, which is what Zionists have done and continue to 
do. 

MORE UNDERLINED INTERNET SITES (websites) 

FOR YOU TO EXAMINE 

TO PROVE THE ZIONIST ACTIONS ARE CRIMINAL! 

Robert Fisk: A Warning to Those Who Dare to Criticize Israel in the I nnd of Free Speech 
(Also <here.>) 

Are you [Mary Robinson] really suggesting that the military occupation of the West Bank and 
Gaza Strip by Israel, its use of extrajudicial executions against Palestinian gunmen, the Israeli 
gunning down of schoolboy stone-throweres, the wholesale theft of Arab land to build homes for 
Jews, is in some way wrong? 

J ohn Kami nsk i- Heads They Win, Tails We Lose 

As many observers have written recently, an anti-Semite used to mean someone who hated 
Jews because they were Jews. Now, the term anti-Semite is used by Jews to tar and feather anyone 
who disagrees with Jewish licies, influences, and effes. Comain about Israelis burying alive 
Palestinian residents of Jenin and Zionist Jews say you're an anti-Semite. Wonder about the 
prenderance of Jewish influence on the American government and you're an anti-Semite. 

Terrell E. Arnold: Against The LawTo Criticize Israel? 

[A prosed] amendment to Title VI of the Higher Education A ... [whose purse is] to 
require denial of federal funds to any university whose faculty or students, perhaps even guest 
leurers, make statements that are in any way critical of Israel ... is an echo of Nazi, Communist 
and other totalitarian forms of censorship. 

J ean Shaoul: A crude attempt to equate anti- Zionism with anti-Semitism 

Attempts To Smear Rense.com As 'Anti-Semitic' Continue 

Tony J udt: Goodbye to All That? (Also here .) 

It is the licies of Zionist Israeli governments, especially in the past two decades, that have 
provoked widespread anti-J ewish feelings in Europe and elsewhere. 

J akob Schiller: UC Hate Debate as Comex as Mideast Confli 

But many associated with groups that have been linked to claims of anti-Semitism said that, 
contrary to the claims, their groups are working to combat anti-Semitism and all forms of racism on 
campus, but have been targeted because of their Pro-Palestinian litical agenda. Claims of anti- 
Page  of  


Semitism, they said, are a quick and easy way to try to sway the litical debate by students who 
construe any sort of litical criticism of Israel as criticism of Jews. ... 

When litical protests claim Israel does not have a right to exist as a state for 
Zionist Jewish people, Gladstone [the Israel initiatives coordinator for Berkeley Hillel, the 
Jewish student center at UC Berkeley] said he would classify that as anti-Semitism. He said he 
would also classify claims that Israel is an apartheid state as anti-Semitic because he said those 
claims de- legitimize Israel as a state. 

