rary form of the nominalist world outlook, in ops- 
ition both to the scholastic version of humanist 
rationalism and to the historically "neo-atonic" out- 
look of stri humanism which we, together variously 
with Thomas Gresham, Jean Bodin, John Milton, 
Rene Descartes, Benedi Spinoza, Benjamin Frank- 
lin, Hegel and Marx represent. 

The rigorous epistemological approach is indispens- 
able to comprehending how Atlanticist litics func- 
tions. 

Such funions involve, most immediately, the pro- 
cesses governing the way leading Atlanticists think. 
This enables us to predi within a reasonable range of 
accuracy how the Atlanticist faion will behave. The 
Atlanticists are not governed by reason, not by a per- 
ception of aual cause-and-effe conneions in the 
real world; they are governed by a false erpre- 
tation of the real world, a delusion, through which they 
mis-sele and misdefine appearances as purrted 
fas according to a mode which conforms to their 
nominalist ideology. 

Hence, to predi the lawful trends in their behavior, 
we must be able to conceptualize models of the world 
which show how Atlanticists misperceive the real 
world. 

This requires a method which must appear concept- 
ually difficult to the novice at first encounter. It is the 
mastery of precisely this methodology, apied to the 
praical work of litical elligence, which has 

earned our organization its presently growing author- 
ity in matters of global litical and related strategy, 
that cumulative if begrudged credibility we have 
secured in many fields of inquiry. 

The problem demanding this method is in fa ele- 
mentary, once the significance of a ruling ideology is 
recognized. On the one side, there is the real world. 
This is a world which, without the efficient, willful, rul- 
ing erventions of the Atlanticists, would tend to 
evolve patterns according to rational, universalizing 
princies of cause and effe. We can imagine such a 
world governed by forces more or less correly 
committed to the discovery of those rational prin- 
cies, and in which such ruling forces more or less 
correly erpret both the consequences of aions as 
such, and the causal relationship between those conse- 
quences and preceding as of deed or omission. How- 
ever, under Atlanticists' domination of a highly 
influential aspe of the global process of development 







in the real world, the course of events in the real world 
cannot proceed as would be the case in which the rul- 
ing forces were governed by self-improving **negative 
feedback*' tendencies toward rationality. 

To the extent that the ruling forces of the world are 
in significant part axiomatically irrational, we have 
the following rigorous form of problem in at- 
tempting to reduce the course of development to a 
lawful ordering. 

Let E stand for event, and P for perception of the 
event, the judgment of the significance of the event. 
The perception of the nature of the event as such is 
inseparable in fa from an imied anticipation of the 
subsequent occurrence by the perceiving agency. 
Hence, Ei leads to Pi, such that Pj leads to aions on 
the real domain, which aions lead to E. Pi has a real 
content (anually or tentially  virtually  distin 
from its subjeive-error content), such that the real 
content of the aion taken on account of Pi can be 
identified as distin from the imagined ent of the 
a, and this real content designated by Ei' . Now Ei , 
El' , and Eform a causal sequence of aions in a 
lawful, rational perception of the ordering of events. 
However, where Pi is governed by an ideology, the 
rational imications of Ei do not appropriately 
determine Ei' . Hence, although Ei' lawfully 
(causally) generates E , E is not the event generated 
by the alternative erpretation of Eifrom the 
stand of human self-erests. 

Hence, analysis of an ideologically driven system of 
misperception produces a sequence of events which is 
not in corresndence with imications of a lawful 
perception of reality from the stand of real 
human erests. Nonetheless, the ideologically, 
irrationally driven sequence of erventions can 
always, and must be erpreted from the stand 
of rational knowledge of the lawful ordering processes 
in the real world. 

The special feature next to be considered is that the 
cumulative effe of an ideologically driven set of P's 
leads toEjjS which are not in corresndence with the 
imied ideologically-anticipated consequences, Pn. 
However, still worse, aual E^ is then erpreted in 
the ideologically driven system of perceptions as 

Pn-f . 

In the instance of a rational ruling force, the 
discrepancy between Pn and En, insofar as it is taken 
properly as evidence of some error in previously 
emoyed licy or method, causes a correion in the 
defeive method. This is not necessarily the corre 
adjustment at each , but the * 'negative feed- 
back*' aion imied (to speak with admissible 
crudeness for this immediate purse) is operative 
and thus more broadly charaerizes the evolution of 
ruling lices and methods. In the case of the system 



 

of perceptions driven by an ideology of an obsessive 
form, the imied ''negative feedback*' conneion 
almost never causes a correion in the axiomatic 
features of licy and method, but leads to a (**si- 
tive feedback") discarding of every collateral prin- 
cie not axiomatic to the ideology, in the effort to save 
the ideology itself. 

Fascist economy is the best available, most con- 
centrated modern exame of this behavior. The Felix 
Rohatyn-led approach to fascist economic methods of 

debt-rollover against New York City illustrates the 
same princie. Rather than correing the immediate 
error of New York City's  finances  that its 
economic base's capability for revenue-produion 
had been not only stagnant, but anually eroded by 
pyramiding of debt, Rohatyn et al. proceeded to 
savagely destroy the economic base of the local 
economy in order to pyramid the unpayable debt still 
further. 

At each  in the - process during which 
