
The demand was so objeionable that President 
Monroe dared not accept it on his own resnsibility, 
and yet British control of the Holy Alliance had left the 
U.S. so strategically vulnerable to British naval and 
economic warfare that Monroe was in no sition, in 
praice, to refuse. Hence, Monroe solicited the 
counsel and co-resnsibility of two former 
Presidents, Jefferson and Madison, in formulating his 
resnse to Canning's veiled threat. 

The accuracy of our assessment of the Monroe 
Dorine on both these two preceding accounts was 
conclusively demonstrated during the jo British- 
French-Spanish military operation which overthrew 
the legal, Juarez government of Mexico, and aced 



the Barings' and Rothschilds' Hapsburg puppet on the 
throne of that country. The British-instigated com- 
bined operation against the Juarez government was 
taken in behalf of the Barings and Rothschilds, in 
consequence of Mexico's default on foreign debts. 

At that , the government of the United States 
was in profound opsition to this British-instigated 
operation, but for the moment the revolt of the Con- 
federacy, itself a Rothschild effort to destroy the 
United States, prevented the U.S. from taking effec- 
tive countermeasures against the hideous methods of 
debt colleion being emoyed against the Mexican 
nation by French troops of Paris-based Baron James 
Rothschild's puppet, Naleon III. James, at that 
time, was head of the ernational Rothschild House. 
Although jjfugust Belmont, the Rothschilds* principal 
U.S. agent, was conneed to the London branch of the 
House, the licies of the House overall were under the 
guidance of James. As traitor Belmont's corres- 
ndence exicitly states, the Confederacy was a 
Rothschild proje, and the purse of the overall 
Rothschild operations of the period (including Mexico 
and the Confederacy), was to divide the North 
American continent o a **balkanized" colleion of 
squabbling diatorships of various sorts, which could 
thus be managed from London, 

Admittedly, British licy on the Mexican operation 
did change, Lippmann, refeng to that affair, uses 
the change to argue that the British military role in 
the instigation of the affair was in some way an unin- 
tended blunder. On the contrary, the events of  
persuaded the British government to gradually 
disassociate itself from the Rothschilds' North 
American ''black operations," 

Returning to the events of , Lippmann twists the 
significance of a quotation from John Quincy Adams 
around half-circle, to make Adams signify the op- 
site of what he in fa states. Lippmann writes: "... 
at that time, as John Quincy Adams put it ... the naval 
were of the United States was to that of Great Britain 
'as a cockboat in the wake of a British man-of-war.' " 
This Adams view is properly set in the context of his 
successful arguments against accepting the '*doc- 
trine" in the form of the treaty which Canning 
prosed, Lippmann, resorting to his '^commitments 
and means" axiom, thus attempts to prove that the 
proferred treaty's most outsken opnent was 
arguing at least imicitly of the necessity for an 
alliance with British naval were. In fa, as Lipp- 
mann is otherwise forced to acknowledge in effe, the 
prosed treaty problem was solved by a **Solomon's 
decision," not to accept the treaty, but to adopt the 
gist of the draft as a U.S. foreign licy convention. 
Hence, the "Monroe Dorine," which acated the 
dangerous British while leaving a loophole for escape. 







It is in this context that Lippmann piles lie un lie 
in his glosses on the Maximilian affair. Lippmann 
argues against Adams' opsition to the Canning 
prosal of a treaty, arguing that the Maximilian 
ervention was made ssible because the U.S. had 
no operative treaty with the British along Monroe 
Dorine lines. As we have noted, Adams was proven 
corre and Lippmann^s argument indefensible by 
those Mexican developments. Lippmann quotes 
Adams' objeions to the prosed Canning treaty: 
**. . . Britain and America . . . would not be bound by 
' any permanent community of princie,' " (emphasis 
in source) because, Adams stipulated, the United 
States had recognized the independence of the newly 
formed Latin American republics, where Britain had 
so far refused to do so. 

This Lippmann distortion of the circumstances and 
imications of the * 'Monroe Dorine'* is direly 
conneed to the sweeping falsehood of his charac- 
terization of U.S. foreign licy during the - 
period. 

His thesis is: . . for nearly fifty years the nation 
has not had a settled and generally accepted foreign 
licy." Although the statement was ausible to the 
credulous at the time it was written, it is in ent a 
fraud, but we shall return to that  subsequently. 
He argues that the U.S. **had a secure licy toward 
the great weres from the decade after the War of  
to the end of the war with Spain in  . . , But . . . 
(since) the eleion of  ... it has (not) been 
ssible for any President of the United States to rely 
un the united suprt of the nation in the condu of 
foreign affairs." We focus, as we noted, first on the 
fraudulent assertion that the United States had a 
secure licy toward the great weres during the - 
 period. 

The basis for the foreign licy of the American 
Revolution and the United States of the - 
period is amy documented in The Political Economy 
of the American Revolution, () as well as the cir- 
cumstances of sharp shifts in both domestic and 
foreign licy during the period -. It is there- 
fore sufficient to summarize the most general s 
relevant to the case at hand. From , and especially 
 until , the United States* foreign licy was 
overall predominantly a consistent Federalist licy, 
to whose essential features Jefferson in effe largely 
subscribed (at least for purses of considering the 
- period in the broadest terms). The 
predominantly Federalist dorine of the - 



. Nancy B. Spannaus and Christopher White, eds., The Political 
Economy of the American Revolution (New York: Campaigner Pub- 
lications, Inc.. ), pp. -,  ff. 



 

period was continued as a partisan foreign licy of 
the Whigs and Republicans up through Lincoln's 
