Carter Administration's ** environmentalist" and 
**energy" licies have reminded us of the truth, if 

 







that were necessary. The exoitation of a conceptual 
difficulty at a crucial  in experimental physics* 
progress was the basis for hauling o physics  from 
external nominalist philosophy and method  a 
dorine which established a foothold for over- 
throwing the most fundamental princie of physical 
science as a whole: the princie of coherence in the 
universal ordering of nature. () 

In respe of Werner Heisenberg*s association with 
this development, the relevant  is not that he was 
either persona grata under the Nazi regime or that his 
associations with the fascist movement in Germany 
dated from the end of World War L The significant 
thing  for which Heisenberg is epistemologically less 
offensive than the contemrary von Weizsacker  is 
that Heisenberg, as he himself emphasizes in his auto- 
biographical writings, emoyed the same philo- 
sophical conceptions impelling him toward the st- 
war fascists as the rationalization for his defense of 
the kernel issue of the Copenhagen dorine. Heisen- 
berg's significance is not that he was the cause of the 
corruption of physics in this way  Niels Bohr was 
much more culpable  but that his stwar writings 
afford us invaluable insight o the Copenhagen doc- 
trine as seen by a leading insider. 

Logical sitivism was not merely an extension of 
British empiricism o physics  that sort of 
corruption had been long in progress before the s. 
The Copenhagen dorine represented something 
beyond mere empiricism; it was a reaion-formation 
assault, in princie and associated efficient praice, 
against the very kernel of scientific method. 

The case of the Copenhagen dorine illustrates the 
qualitative distinions within nominalism between 
classic British empiricism and its outgrowth, fascism. 
The typification of philosophical fascism is that 
variant of nominalism called logical sitivism. 

It is not accidental that Old Vienna of the pre- 
period should have special notoriety in this con- 
neion, nor that the philosophical fascism of so many 
notable Nazi refugees from Old Vienna (o the 
United States' universities and so forth) should have 
been comemented by the fa that Nazi Austria was 
in the main more Nazi than the other parts of Hitler's 
Germany. The qualitative distinion between British 
empiricism of the classic type and fascist logical si- 
tivism is that it is the specific distinion of logical 
sitivism to represent the qualitative transformation 
of the nominalist's irrationality o its corresnding 
reaion formation. The fascist imications of Rudolf 
Carnap, Kurt Lewin, Bertrand Russell and other 
radical empiricists generally, illustrate the princie 



, By acing an exclamation  where a question mark was 
required. 



 

for which Vienna-flavored varieties of logical si- 
tivism were a special case. 

If many of these philosophical fascists objeed to 
Hitler's Nazism, that objeion refles predominantly 
the consideration that Hitler's fascism was to the Kurt 
Lewin's: "somebody else's fascism, not mine.** It was 
not a hostility of philosophical outlooks, but a differ- 
ence premised in narrow erests of proprietorship. 

It is cruel, but necessarily cruel to emphasize that 
Hitler's Nazism did not accommodate itself to the 
imrtant role of Jewish fascists. The native 
Romanian fascists of the s were exicitly and 
emphatically Zionists in both domestic and foreign 
licy. The indigenous Hungarian fascists of the s 
were not specifically anti-Semitic in either domestic 
or foreign licy. Italian fascism was not anti-Semitic. 
Although anti-Semitism is endemic to backward pea- 
sant and urban lumpen social strata in all countries 
with a perceptible Jewish small business and landlord 
pulation, the cases of the right-wing Israeli and the 
U.S. Jewish Defense League forces only underline that 
there is nothing '^genetically" anti-Jewish in fascism 
as such. It was merely a proprietary peculiarity of 
Nazism that a German philosophical fascist such as 
Dr. Kurt Lewin was compelled to pursue his profes- 
sion in another country, the United States. The funda- 
mental distinion between the philosophical fascists 
who remained with the Nazis, and those who left Ger- 
many and Austria among the ranks of the refugees, 
was essentially a matter of the distribution of job 
oprtunities within the fascist philosophical pro- 

V 

fession globally. 

The case of Old Vienna of the late nineteenth cen- 
tury and first half of the twentieth is that no great 
former center of European culture epitomized so 
hideously the conditions of national moral decay. 
Thus, it provided all the ingredients  to the extent 
that Berlin, for exame, did not, nor Frankfurt  
favorable to the most execrable elleual produc- 
tions. 

As Rosa Luxemburg indicated, the Czarist Russian 
Empire was a paragon of humanist vitality by com- 
parison with the rotting carcasses of the Austrian and 
Ottoman engrossments. The worst features of British 
colonial licies were embedded in the Austro- 
Hungarian Empire's cultural-relativist dorine of the 
' * cone ert of nationalities . ' ' 

Historically, Austria had developed as the southern 
parallel to Brandenburg and Prussia within the old 
Holy Roman Empire. It was the Ostmark  one of the 
**marcher lord" duchies, areas of military and 
colonization operations of the German pulation 
against non-German cultures to the east. Later, 
together with the kingdom of Hungary, it had become 
the marcher lord bastion against the Ottoman Em- 







 

pire's encroachments. As Germany proceeded to 
