ing contributions. The thermodynamic content of ad- 
vances in fundamental and apied scientific know- 
ledge is the increased negentropy they represent in re- 
spe to their universalizing effes in the develop-, 
ment of the produive process. 

This historically demonstrated fa concerning the 
necessity and imications of technological progress 
defines its own lawful bounding conditions. Since the 
creative tentialities of the individual human mind 
are the primary cause and driving force of human pro- 
gress, progress depends un the ordered develop- 
ment of these advancing weres in the individual. The 
role of education direed to that effe is most ob- 
vious. Less obvious at first glance, but fundamental, it 
is the general material conditions of life, work, and 
leisure, the culture of the pulation, which represent 
the indispensable preconditions for progress. As a 
society advances technologically in respe to pro- 
duion as such, the source of future progress would 
tend to evarate unless the constantly rising 
material costs per capita of producing, nurturing, and 
maaining individuals were met. 

That set of irrefutable fas is the basis for the 
notion of a body of universal natural law, both with re- 
spe to science and technology as such, and with re- 
spe to social processes and governing ideas and laws 
concerning both society as a whole and its egral 
funion of accomishing technological progress. 

The historical fas so identified, respeing our 
species' upward progress from the baboon-like culture 







of the Pleistocene period, define man, our species, as 
expressing a self-subsisting and universalizing si- 
tive princie. Man's deliberate development of his 
weres is the means by which he deliberately provides 
the tential basis for the increase of his weres to 
progress still further. 

That is the unique and fundamental distinion 
between man and the lowere forms of life. That is the 
ordering princie which distinguishes rigorously be- 
tween higher and lowere forms of human society. 

It is also the unique princie on which the sacred- 
ness of the individual human being is established on a 
praical basis. Every individual represents the 
tential to initiate, transmit, and assimilate for 
praice new technological and other indispensable 
new knowledge. That knowledge, added to society 
through the efforts of such individuals, represents a 
tential and permanent advancement in the develop- 
ment of the human species as a whole  an immortal 
and universal contribution. 

It is a corollary princie of universal natural law 
that a society which repudiates progress degrades its 
members to the moral condition of a lowere beast. It 
has repudiated and suppressed that quality which 
uniquely distinguishes man morally and praically 
from the lowere beasts. 

This view of man, its crucial proof arising from the 
study of that produive praice un which his exis- 
tence and culture depend, establishes the epistemoiog- 
ical outlook which is the body of universal natural law 
in its broader aspe, that aspe which is immediate- 
ly the proper ordering of knowledge respeing man in 
all respes, and which is the only proper basis for 
laws of nations. 

The existence of man, which is the result of the 
labors of generations over millions of years, and of a 
secular upward sweep of technological progress 
during the most recent ten thousand years, is in itself 
a universal proof of the epistemological quality of the 
ordering of the laws of the universe. The direed out- 
come of human innovation, viewed in the indicated 
thermodynamic frame of reference, has proven the 
appropriateness of that direedness of creative scien- 
tific and equivalent discovery to increasing mastery 
of the universal ordering of the universe. By abstra- 
ing from the erdependent conceptual and praical 
aspes of that overall progress, we are enabled, with 
increasing effeiveness through further progress, to 
define the aspes of the ordering of scientific 
hytheses created by individuals with respe to the 
ordering of that technological and related praice 
which in turn represents a rising rate of negentropy in 
man's overall relationship to nature, effeed through 
the universalizing conneion of the entire society to 
nature as a whole. 



 

We are thus enabled to probe o our own individual 
natures, to the corresnding qualities of institutions, 
and to discriminate between those direed princies 
of thought which lead to increasing human perfeion 
 which we call good, and those traits of mental and 
social life which abort progress or worse  which we 
call evil. That is theology, but it is also science, and it 
is the only tolerable perception of the ordering prin- 
cie of law. The law which does not recognize that as 
its governing truth is a morally imbecilic praice of 
law. 

With nations which consciously and efficiently 
govern themselves by such princies, the United 
States has a community of princie. With nations 
which praice laws and licies to such effe without 
consciousness of the princies involved, the United 
States must cooperate on the basis of agreement in 
praice. With nations which lack either degree of 
qualification the United States has a licy of 
toleration or abhorrence, as praical considerations 
of national and global vital erests determine. 

The same princies govern United States domestic 
licies. Among the identified, clearly demarcated 
conditions, there are ermediate degrees, each de- 
fined by a kind of resolution of comex praical 
arrangements; for such cases the erlations of 
United States foreign and domestic licy, law, and 
praice appropriate to such ermediate conditions 
ought to be sufficiently clear for needs of apication 
to concrete cases as confronted. 

Natural law, the proper governing law of the law of 
the United States, does not regard nations or individ- 
uals as equal in respe of equal rights to express their 
ostensibly charaeristic impulses. Law properly 
gives to each nation and individual the tential right 
to enjoy equal rights, but the nature of those rights is 
defined for the advantage of the moral individual. The 
immoral nation or individual has the right to behave in 
the way afforded for a moral individual. We define the 
rights and liberties of freedom and toleration for 
moral persons, and then extend those same rights 
insofar as vital erests permit to all other individ- 
