colonies and other seors of the world. 

The U.S. use of British credit for development of our 
rails system and other projes obliged our national 
economy to emoy such credit on terms determined 
by the sick sterling system. By adapting our national 
credit system and national monetary licies to the 
margin of national financial balance-of-payments 
represented by sterling credit, our economy became 
increasingly enslaved to and increasingly sensitive to 
fluuations in sterling credit markets. 

These pulsations of bankrupt sterling's world domi- 
nation are the dire cause for the crucial s in the 
history of the labor movement. 

Although the Paris Commune is ausibly exained 
by the Franco-Prussian War, in fa the crisis of 
French institutions produced by Naleon IIFs defeat 
took the lid off the tential eruption which had al- 
ready been developed through the domestic conse- 
quences of France's indebtedness to consortia of ster- 
ling-bloc bankers led by the then-dominant House of 
Rothschild. Indeed, France of that period had been 
ruled by two monarchs, Naleon III and Paris-based 
Baron James Rothschild, the funioning head of the 
Rothschild House. The - wave of mass strikes 
in the USA, predominantly associated with railway 
workers and the Knights of Labor  the strikes which 
created the organizations within the Knights of Labor 
later forming the American Federation of Labor, were 
coordinate with the general strikes of the s in Eng- 
land, and the wave of strikes in Germany, from the 
late s through , which overthrew Bismarck. 



 

The rise of pulism, and the Coxey*s army and Debs- 
linked strikes of the s are also incomprehensible 
social eruptions apart from the effes of the primi- 
tive-accumulation praices extended o various 
countries by the decline of bankrupt sterling. The Rus- 
sian Revolution of , and coordinate eruptions of 
that period, including the symptomatic rise of the 
IWW in the USA, are also direly refleions of the 
deepening crisis of the sterling monetary system. 

From approximately  through , the United 
States was confronted by a fundamental crisis flowing 
from our imprisonment within the dying sterling 
monetary order. 

Beginning with President Theodore Roosevelt, we 
prenderantly committed our nation to the wrong re- 
snse to this crisis. We turned away from the indus- 
trial-capitalist thrust represented somewhat by An- 
drew Carnegie and others, to the inflated nominal 
capitalization of our industries, centering around the 
so-called **trusts.'* The inevitable effe of the '*trust- 
building" process, which came to a head about the 
middle of the first decade of this century, was to 
capitalize U.S. produion in such a way as to drive 
U.S. prices up, skyrocketing toward levels which were 
non-competitive on the world market, and which 
permanently damaged our vital erests by aborting 
the commitment to expansion and technological 
progress. Roosevelt's administration used the fa of 
this scandalous development to admittedly check the 
most extreme heteronomic outrages being perpe- 
trated, but approached the problem in such a seleive 
fashion as to strengthen the sition of financial capi- 
tal as such at the expense of the were of industrial 
capital as such. 

The effe of the way in which the trust-busting was 
done was to break up the concentration of were in 
industries in a way which concentrated were predom- 
inantly in lowere Manhattan. 

Colonel House's role in the establishment of the Fed- 
eral Reserve System was coordinate with the seleive 
approach to trust-busting associated with the Roose- 
velt administration. 

The proper, self-erested licy of the United 
States in resnse to the  panic was to revert to a 
Hamiltonian licy, of establishing a national bank. 
Instead, House and others established a central bank 
modeled un the British monetarist conception, a 
bank effeively controlled by the major, lowere Man- 
hattan financial erests. By committing the United 
States to define the nominal value of its wealth in a 
way determined by lowere Manhattan's control of the 
major conduits of credit, and by acing the monetary 
were of the United States government at the diss- 
al of those banking erests, the Federal Reserve 







 

System created the false appearance that the spe- 
cial monetarist erests of lowere Manhattan were 
the determining feature of national-capitalist self-in- 
terests. 

Wilson*s licy toward Mexico was a dire exten- 
sion of the pro-monetarist counterrevolution against 

I 

the U.S. Constitution and associated licies which 
had been prepared most notably by the preceding 
aions of the Roosevelt administration and Rocke- 
feller-linked Taft administration. Direly contrary to 
John Quincy Adams, in particular, contrary to Lin- 
coln, Wilson overthrew the U.S. princied self- 
erest in the sovereignty of Latin American repub- 
lics. 

Wilson's wretched hycrisy in conneion with 
Mexico is the proper source of insight o the moraliz- 
ing of his ^'Fourteen Pos.*' 

What of such precedents as the Texas affair and the 
Mexican-American War? Taking the charaer of the 
- period as a whole o account, there is a 
double aspe to both affairs. Some will not be eased 
by what we must properly say on this account, but 
truth is truth, however it may offend liberals' pre- 
judices. 

The founding perceptions un which this nation 
was established were those of the Idea of Progress. 
That means, in praice, that the nature and rights of 
nations and cultures are not "culturally relativist." We 

do not regard all cultures and nations as equally de- 
serving of sovereignty or survival. That is not an 
imperialist licy: it does not specify a licy of U,S. 
acquisitions of the areas occupied by more backward 
nations and cultures. It is rather a statement of U.S. 
national self-erest in the realization of the proper 
rule of the Idea of Progress as a universal natural law 
