not the real me; it is my profession, my occupation  
merely my social self." 

The persona is like the child's father, another 
person; it is the person the child (infantile **me*') 
must propitiate in order to obtain goodies from the 
outside world. Thus, the adult father of the household 
(persona), puts on the other personality "at home**  
being, alternately both in the father-role (persona) 



 

and the role of the father's child (infantile "me") with 
respe to himself. Hence, the ordering of maages 
around this duality of comementary and reciprocal 
father-child dind child-mother roles. The father, in his 
outer-world funions, is "father'* to both his children 
and his chilcf-wife; the mother is "daughter" to her 
husband respeing his outer-world role, and is 
"mother" to him and their children in all matters of 
"family life" (inside the house, family affairs, social 
events of a family overtone, etc.). Relative to family 
life, the wife is the conneion to the "outer world" for 
both her husband and her children. (Hence, for such 
cases, the crisis of the unemoyed adult man, whose 
wife assumes the role of "breadwinner," i.e. father.) 

Popular forms of recreation funion for the needs of 
the infantile "real me" as an escape from the strain of 
being the persona. The child ays after school. This 
caes over o school, university and adult- 
speator srts. Entertainment is attuned to the 
"geometry" of the heteronomic infantile self. The 
infantile self requires escape from the lawfulness of 
the "outside world" o a parody of the outside world, 
in which the lawful ordering is determined as a fan- 
tasy world as it might be if the universe were ordered 
according to the propitiatory "geometry" of the in- 
fantile sense of "real me." 

Recreation of this sort, by assuaging the anxiety of 
the infantile self, by allowing a "safe" social area of 
expression for the desire of the infantile self to take 
over the personality, to order its thoughts and so forth 
according to the "geometry" of infantile outlooks and 
"needs," relieves the tension, and thus quite literally 
re-creates the person's capacity to "throw himself" 
once again o effeively concentrated service of the 
persona-ro\e. 

Insofar as infantile recreations perform that func- 
tion, they perform an unavoidable social funion. 
Recreation of that sort permits society to perform its 
day-to-day funions. As adults perform their persona- 
roles of fathers and mothers, the world is fed, housed, 
clothed, and battles for defense of the national com- 
munity's erest are fought. 

As long as infantilism is socially tolerated only 
within the prescribed bounds of such recreation, and 
as long as that moral distinion between recreation 
and reality is rigorously enforced by the society, the 
appropriate degree of such "safety-valve" fantasy- 
aivity helps society to accomish the persona- 
associated funions on which the perpetuation of 
society depends. 

The problem is not that the persona-associated 
aivities are not real. The problem is that except to 
the extent that the infantile identity "within" locates 
its persona qualities as in its essential self-erest  
which is what we properly mean juridically by the 







 

designation of a moral adult person, a rational adult, 
otherwise the individual does not believe in the reality 
of that identity as his or her "real self.'* The loss of the 
persona  loss of profession, protraed unem- 
oyment, or the standard "ego-stripping" praices 
of a behaviorist "group therapy** brainwashing 
session  degrade the individual o conditions of 
infantilism (heteronomy) known as the professions, 
personae of the criminal mind, the lunatic, the fascist, 
the Maoist, and so forth. 

For the true adult, the opsite sort of recreation is 
required. The narrowness of a specific funion in the 
world is rinsically disagreeable to the proper, 
fullsome exercise of the creative mental processes. 
Even though the occupation, the profession, may 
direly, sitively express creative weres in a most 
appropriate particular fashion, to the greatest 
sitive consequences, and so forth, the unavoidable 
narrowness of focus of task-oriented efforts within 
society*s division of labor in all fields is in confli with 
the relatively far-ranging overviews on which the 
creative process depends. The limitation of a defined 
problem to the equivalent of a narrowly defined set of 
praical ernal relations  most frequently 
unavoidable, even necessary in the produive process 
and related matters  is ultimately abortive in effes 
on the mental weres' capacities unless some relief is 
afforded. The normal chief recreation charaeristic 
of the skilled worker, the scientist, the engineer, the 
skilled farmer, the industrialist, is therefore science, 
or a different aspe of science. 

The distinion between the two forms of recreation 
becomes a hideous moral problem in those forms of 
purrted entertainment which attempt to bring a 
scientific-recreational topic within the terms of in- 
fantile-ordered recreational forms. Science as 
recreation  and we are obviously speaking not 
merely of what is ordinarily narrowly called physical 
science  is "outer world"-direed in its praical 
imications; ordinary, pular entertainment must 
not be. Thus, when real issues of the present and 
future are made the content of recreations adapted to 
the norms of pular entertainment, the effe un 
children and other more "suggestible" audiences and 
participants is  as is sometimes comained to be the 
case  to foster heteronomic, even criminal behavior 
by those strata in the outside-world behavior. "Only 
mature audiences" is a prescription in the right 
direion on this account, excepting that it overlooks 
the prortion of raving infantile identities evoked in 
the context of "recreation"-identified audiences 
among those over  years of age. 

The epistemological imication of this immediate 
same  is best brought o view by resuming our 
- synthetic case history of the developing adult who has 



reached the  of maturation of becoming a 
physical scientist. At that , he has the basis for 
using his accomishments, his sense of identity as 
having become epistemologically a scientist, to serve 
as a "fixed base" of strategic deoyments to attack 
the core of his identity problems. He now has the sense 
