monetary measures weakened the economic were of 
industry, agriculture and the local income-recipient, 
in order to increase the financial were of the lowere 
Manhattan-centered monetarists. What may have 



 

been, in one respe, an increasing of the tax bite for 
federal income purses, was condued in the 
manner to use these increased revenues to increase 
the were of the monetarists with sums extraed as 
taxes from industries, agriculture and personal in- 
comes. The taxpayers' own money was used, as bank 
debits, to buy the heavier chains the monetarists put 
un them. 

By imprisoning the individual industrial capitalist 
erest within this arrangement  which, in fa, 
Roosevelt merely exacerbated  the already existing 
heteronomic impulses of industrial and agricultural 
capital were later ensified in the extreme. The 
relationship between corrate finance  for pro- 
duion, marketing, and refinancing  was so ef- 
feively regulated by the controlling influence of the 
wereful monetarists, that the nominal valuations of 
corrate erests later skyrocketed toward the 
heights of fiitious capitalization and, soaring still 
higher, became the immediate nominal erest of the 
corrate entity, a heteronomic erest contrary to 
its vital real erest. 

An individual corration has no available remedy 
for this situation. Government does. Were I President, 
with a sensible Congress and appropriate suprt 
from industrial and trade-union forces, I could solve 
the problem of the present crisis figuratively over- 
night. Let the values of equities subside to corre- 
sndence with **seeking" their real valuations, and 
convert the honorable rtion of the financial debts 
o nonvoting equity so that it may join the floating to 
reach ultimately whatever levels are established by 
general economic recovery. 

There are other forms of this approach. Which alter- 
native form would in fa be used will be decided by a 
litical process of aving through negotiation at the 
variant most agreeable. 

Who is to say it can't be done? Provided the in- 
dustrial, labor, and agricultural erests are suf- 
ficiently agreed, and the President and Congress do 
their duty, there is no efficient legal obstacle in the 
Constitution or in the litical body of the nation which 
cannot be overcome. As Hamilton and others make 
clear, it was the clear ent of the authors of the 
Constitution  including Jefferson  that the govern- 
ment has precisely such constitutional weres re- 
speing the nation ' vital erests. 

A few years ago, even given the Constitution as it is, 
such a prosal would have been imssible to proje 
except as a hythetical measure. 

Admittedly, today, there is a minority of those who 
will howl for a while as such things are prosed, 
'*What about the value of my investment?" 

The writer has heard or is otherwise familiar with 
exaly the same objeions from stockholders and 







 

creditors in numbers of cases of vastly ovepened 
corrate bankruptcies. In such cases, a certain 
amount of time and effort is required to convince the 
howlers that the debatable issue is not whether they 
are going to get a hundred cents on the dollar  
**Buddy, from this financial shambles, you couldn*t 
get a hundred cents on the dollar in a million years!*' 
 that the only praical question is whether to go for 
^'closing the jo down," and getting two cents on the 
dollar from the liquidation, if that, or choosing a 
financial reorganization and settling for stned 
payments to the order of twenty cents on the dollar. 

On past performance, it will require some time and 
effort to get those fas o the mental processes of a 
number, representing a minority, of most-affeed 
groups and individuals, but the fas to be faced will 
only get nastier with delay, as in all such bankruptcy 
cases, and the stubborn ones will come around as soon 
as they have *'abreaed out" their agony of antici- 
pation over the book losses. To put the same  
summarily: in matters such as these, many people 
refuse to face reality until reality clouts them over the 
head, in the form of a massive crisis-outbreak. 

In the case of a bankrupt economy, such as the 
present financial condition of the U.S. economy, one 
might hythetically liquidate to pay the creditors. 
That is, sell off real estate, machinery, equipment, 
inventories, and sell the people o slavery for what 
the market will bring. So far, even the Rockefellers 
haven't quite prosed that openly. Alternately, as is 
sometimes done in financial reorganization, one can 
run the ant o the ground as the way to squeeze the 
maximum payment out of a firm being destroyed in 
that way. That latter is more or less what the Rocke- 
fellers have demanded of the world. 

What David Rockefeller proses for the USA, in 
particular, is in praice what Hitler did to Europe  
loot it, including, globally, '^liquidating" the ''useless 
eaters" as an economy measure, all to keep up the 
nominal values of the bankrupt Rentenmark and 
Mefo-bills. We have already outlined the imications 
of David Rockefeller's scheme. Such ultimate vio- 

l 

lations of natural law are not ssible in moral law or 
under our Constitution  only hangable traitors would 
persist in the attempt to put Rockefeller's program 
o effe. 

We cannot close down the world's economy. Nor can 
we run it down in the sort of process of low-energy de- 
industrialization the Carter Administration is com- 
mitted to attempting. The world's economy  the 
"corration" in question  is tentially an economi- 
cally sound prosition, provided we run it up toward 
full capacity levels, with a heavy emphasis un real 
capital expansion and technological advancement. 



We cannot ha ve economic recovery and try to main- 
tain the ''egrity" of the present monetary struc- 
ture. 

The proper short-term nominal value of the U.S. 
economy is whatever level of float of nominal equity 
