

. It is not the writer's dissition to be such a weak-livered opr- 
tunist that he would avoid giving public credit to Vice-President Spiro 
Agnew for adopting the * 'silent majority" outlook. Agnew may have 
been wrong in various things, but not in that perception. 

. It is the corre, but too often misunderstood corollary of that 
same  that what is said is inseparable from who is saying it, and 
that the relationship is reciprocal: who determines what is said, but 
what is said defines the who. Everything stated to an imrtant  
expresses an autobiography, but the praical imications of what is 
stated is the meaning of the autobiographical content. Everything 
significant has a history which caused it; to understand the causal 
processes expressed by history means to understand the significance 
of its outcome. 



 

augmentation of resources contributed by his asso- 
ciates  is defining what United States licy and its 
ruling litical force must be. 

He is doing what a competent President of the 
United States ought to be doing under the present 
circumstances. The obligation of national leaders  
whether as President or in the alternate sition pres- 
ently occupied by this writer  is to lead, as Benjamin 
Franklin led. That is the essence of the institutions and 
instruments of a constitutional republic. 

To lead is not to cultivate cheap and easy pular 
agreement through demagogic sturing according to 
the winds of superficial currents of pular opinion. A 
President whose addresses and licies are shaped by 
Gallup or Has lls, the contrived public opinion of 
the Washington Post, New York Times or Newsweek, 
or last night's television news broadcasts, is unfit for 
eleion to the honorable office of dogcatcher. To lead 
is to fulfull the vital erests of a nation with respe 
to the most rigorously shaped foresight o the im- 
mediate and longer-term consequences of licies, 
aions, and inaions. A leader must be, in that sense, 
a '^philosopher king"  with the qualification that we 
Whigs abhor anything smelling of monarchy. 

For the obligations of leadership, the knowledge 
that is required is not properly defined by what acci- 
dents of current opinion rtray as sufficient know- 
ledge. The required knowledge is that knowledge 
indispensable for effeively forecasting the conse- 
quences of alternate approaches to the charaeristic 
problems of that nation and the world in that time. 
Heretofore, over this century, the standard of re- 
quired knowledge has been defined in terms of de 
fao acquiescence to the national and world order re- 
sulting from the consolidation of Atlanticist rule over 
this nation. The accepted standards of knowledge 
have correlated with a toleration of treason, and a 
fateful downhill slide o our present national and 
global predicaments. 

During the preceding two decades, this writer was 
of a different persuasion in elaborated outlook than 
most of our nation's leading circles. He foresaw the 
lawful course of a developing disaster, and forecast 
that process of crisis in terms which have been entire- 
ly vindicated by the subsequent two decades* develop- 
ments. Although the writer's starting- was that 
commitment to the Idea of Progress which he shared, 
as a governing impulse, with a majority of his fellow 
citizens, the unfolding disaster and the further expe- 
rience of its lawful developments demonstrated that 
such fellow Whigs were not emoying, and to a 
significant degree, did not ssess, the perception of 
kinds of knowledge indispensable to seeing through 
and correing a process leading to disaster. Hence, 
the divergence between the fa that his aions were 







 

premised un the same Whig impulses and imicit 
goals as a majority of his fellow citizens and the 
separation between his licy opinions and those of the 
overwhelming majority. 

Fortunately, in consequence of an appropriate 
fusion of the religious and scientific commitments 
transmitted o his early development, his sense of 
personal identity was premised in the moral cer- 
taies of knowledge rather than the heteronomic 
seduions of prevailing opinions. Consequently, the 
commitment to develop the necessary knowledge 
through which to realize the Whig impulse became for 
him a governing and impassioned commitment. 

In the course of this past two decades, approximate- 
ly a decade ago, this personal effort was extended o 
the development of an association built predominant- 
ly of gifted young people who typified the elleual 
cream of our nation's young adults of the late s 
and early s. Since , the extraordinary qualities 
of personal charaer and creative elleual 
achievement embodied in that broader association 
brought the writer and his associates o increasing 
contiguity and later collaborative discussions with 
leading circles in our nation and abroad. This latter 
process, paralleling and errelated with our deepen- 
ing influence with broad layers of our nation*s working 
people, farmers, and accomished scientists, shaped 
the U.S. Labor Party and its associated aivities o 
a significant litical institution both in our nation and 
abroad. 

During the period from the spring of , and espe- 
cially during the last months of , the U.S. Labor 
Party became in fa an egral part of an imminent 
Whig coalition of anti-Atlanticist majority forces with- 
in the United States. That coalition, now approximate- 
ly at the threshold of coming o being, represents 
the identifiable charaeristic strata we have already 
noted to this effe: conservative Republican and 
Democratic parties' Whigs, litical Whigs outside 
those parties, the major trade-union forces, tech- 
nology-proud farmers, the black and hispanic working 
Americans who justly aspire to full participation in a 
new wave of accelerated technological progress, 
scientists and engineers who wish to be scientists and 
engineers in fa, industrialists committed to rebuild- 
ing the nation and the world with the instrument of the 
*'high technology" which we, the other OECD nations, 
and the CME A nations joly represent. 

The special historic obligation of the U.S. Labor 
Party at this junure is to provide those conceptions 
which afford appropriate unity of licy and effort to 
the Whig coalition which must become the new 
Federalist rnovementy the ruling litical force of our 
republic. The U.S. Labor Party, like Benjamin Frank- 
lin, like the initiating founders of our nation, must 


