degree also an obscenity contrary to our national 
erests. 

The overall charaer of the problem was that we 
had not made the mess, and lacked immediately the 
degree of were wanted to sort it out to coincide with 
all our principal licy-erests. Obviously, we had to 
maneuver strategically to ensure that the balance of 
the outcome was in our erests. This would have re- 
quired building up our naval and military forces, 
especially our naval forces, prior to , in 
preparation for the difficulties awaiting us. 

No doubt, some of the softer-skulled critics will find 
in this basis to exse me as a raving jingoist- 
militarist or something of that sort. Brushing such 
tential Wilsons to one side, and continuing on the 
presumption that a litical force representing in- 
dustrial-capitalist erests could have shaped U.S. 
licy, the fa of the matter was that, for reasons 
beyond our control, we were doomed to fight war 
somewhere in some context in the immediate future. 
If we did not apy our capabilities, including our 
military tential, at the proper ace, the condition of 
the world was going to become olerably much 
worse. Fighting the right war at the right time during 
that period was the least costly of all alternatives. 

Out of those comexities, it is clear that our indus- 
trial-capitalist erest prescribed a set of basic clear 
licy-guidelines. () Ending monetarist world- 
monetary control of world credit and markets; () 
Fostering independent, truly sovereign, and viable 
republics; () Pressing the **Open Door'* licy to the 
effe of ending colonialism and semi-coionialism; () 
Build a naval were able to control Britain's; () Seek 
and make whatever compromises were necessary to 
improve the balance of world developments in the 
direions stipulated by such a licy. 

Such tendencies did exist, as tendencies toward 
licy perceptions during that and the immediate 
stwar period, but those tendencies did nothing 
more, unfortunately, than to color and constrain, 
rather than sitively charaerize our licies. 

The fa that the writer otherwise proses no 
specific, retrospeive licy for the - United 
States does not refle the writer's methodological 
dissition for vacillation on the problem of strategic 
choices presented. Beyond the formulating of firm 
licies, the execution and further detailing of that set 
of licies is primarily a resnsibility asgigned to the 
statecraft of the executive branch. The aual choice 
of licies which the United States should have 
followed in pursuit of the licies we have listed had to 
be determined through an organic global litical 
process of negotiations among the forces in motion. 



When a were such as the United States was even at 
that time, effeively deoys in behalf of its com- 
mitted erest, diomatically and otherwise, such 
erventions in the course of events readily and 
substantially alter the strategic configuration to 
define a combination from which a concrete course of 
commitment to aion is then eleed. 

For exame, it was in the erest of the U.S. to 
attempt to break France out of the entente with 
Britain and Czarist Russia, and to make that feasible 
through a navy adequate to the anti-colonialist, anti- 
monetarist licy that involved. It was in U.S. erest 
to attempt to secure with the government of Germany 
an agreement on questions of both Russian and 
colonial licy, to stipulate an independent Russian 
republic to undergo massive industrializing 
development, and a similar anti-colonialist, in- 
dustrialist licy for the region below the Tropic of 
Cancer. It was our proper course to make our erests 
and objeives clear, to the  that the commitment 
of a credible amount of mobilized U.S. were added to 
or aced opsite to the licies and aions of any 
nation or combination of nations would have re- 
presented a significant, probably decisive margin in 
determining the perceivable consequences of alter- 
native licies and projes among other nations. 

The problem of the Wilson administration was not 
that it was fumbling and incompetent (as it was), but 
that it could not have conceivably developed a licy 
consistent with U.S. erests. This was not a problem 
located so much in the unstable Wilson himself, but is 
a problem better brought to consciousness by refer- 
ring to Colonel House. 

There are two crucial features of Colonel House's 
role preceding and during the Wilson administration 
which adequately prove the case. The first was the 
establishment of the U.S. Federal Reserve System on 
a predominantly monetarist basis. The second is the 
monetarist-imperialist innovations in U.S. foreign l- 
icy exemified by Wilson's condu in the Mexican 
affair. The Mexican affair underscores the pure 
hycrisy overall of Wilson and the ** Wilson tradi- 
tion," 

The United States had undergone a major and pro- 
traed crisis during the s and s, a new crisis 
early during the s, and joined the world in the 
ominous crisis of the - period. All of these 
crises were essentially global in cause, rather than 
autochthonous problems of our national economy. 
These were crises of the British monetary system. The 
sterling ruled the world's credit and trade markets, 
the ernal convulsions of sterling were necessarily 
global monetary convulsions. However, in global 
crises, the effes prortionately experienced in each 







nation, the tendency of one or another nation to exhibit 
the crisis earlier or later, and the prolongation of the 
crisis in each national seor, represent differential 
features of the national seor^s relative global 
sition  degree of illiquidity, economic develop- 
ment, and so forth  and ernal weaknesses and 
strengths of the national economy and its domestic 
monetary system. 

In fa, the succession of crises from the early s 
through - were overall a ratchet-process of de- 
cline of the sterling system as a whole. Sterling  the 
sterling system  founded most immediately un the 
crushing debt imsed un Britain and Europe dur- 
ing the Naleonic wars and immediately following 
the Treaty of Vienna, was a sick system from the out- 
set and becoming no healthier. The sterling system 
survived, first, because bankrupt England of - 
was able to imse a major rtion of its national illi- 
quidity (as credit) un the defeated Europe of the 
Holy Alliance, because it was able to imse that self- 
aggravating mass of nominal wealth, British sterling 
bankruptcy, in the form of primitive accumulation 
and related forced backwardness licies un the 
