values at which low-erest government credit 
direed to industry and agriculture will automati- 
cally set o motion the industrial capitalist mech- 
anisms of self-feeding economic growth and pros- 
perity. What the subsequent values of various present 
capital holdings will be two, three, five years from 
now will be determined by which seions of pro- 
duion and finance best adapt to the climate of 
general economic recovery. 

These illustrations of the matter have been ro- 
duced for a double purse. This is the proper ace in 
the writing to ace these observations on needed 
changes in licies. In certain respes, the prosals 
and associated analysis usefully provoke an array of 
objeions. In the main, those objeions aggregate to 
a sperum of fears, suspicions and resentments, 
which taken as a whole is eminently prediable. All of 
the notable objeions of that sperum involve a 
significant fallacy on the part of the objeor. By 
sting up such emotionally charged views we have 
established the appropriate preconditions of con- 
sciousness for resolving those vital issues of licy- 
making. This is the  of the writing to provoke 
them; each of them involves the cited problem of 
heteronomy direly or in respe of one of its princi- 
pal byprodus. Thus, **to the extent that that ob- 
jeion seizes you, it can be demonstrated to your con- 
sciousness in such sensuous terms of reference how 
Rockefeller has seized you in his psychological grip, " 

The grip of monetarism and its nominalist core ideol- 
ogy un industrial capitalist societies is not some 
mere abstraion, to be easantly exained away. 
Peoe do not a viciously, persistingly against their 
own vital erests by influence of a mere casual 
misperception of fas. Only when heteronomic im- 
pulses have been transformed o corresnding 
reaion formations can such phenomena persist on a 
broad scale of obsessive behavior over extended 
periods, in the fashion of the history of the duration of 
the present - monetary breakdown-crisis 
process. 

For the viims of such obsessions, it is unavoidably 
painful to confront the truth, even at the  that the 
nature of the crisis permits them no alternative. 
Circumlocution  trying to talk one's way easantly 
around the problem, diomatically avoiding the 
"loaded issues"  could not succeed, by virtue of the 
charaer of the situation. The hard truth has to be 







sed direly by resnsible leaders, and without 
equivocation, which means evoking and hitting 
direly at painful topics which are by no means 
merely tender corns. 

Among capitalists and trade unionists alike, the 
most prominent issue  expressed with somewhat 
different emphasis, of course  is, **What about my 
savings?'* Although the objeion so identified ap- 
pears ausible at first glance, everything imrtant 
behind the question is sheer indefensible fallacy. 

We have already dealt, just above, with the overall 
fallacy of the assumption that the ^'savings" can be 
saved as a whole at current nominal values. As a 
matter of licy  a combined consideration of 

national economic erests and relevant litical 
considerations  we must defend the institutional 
egrity of industries, farms, and of those financial 
institutions of credit and desit which the industrial 
capitalist economy requires. We must also certainly 
prote individuals' savings up to a certain ceiling 
level. This was comprehensively covered in the 
writer's widely-circulated draft of the prosed 
Emergency Emoyment A, 

Otherwise, two s direly settle the remaining 
faual issues involved in the objeion. 

The significance of '*your savings'* is: what do they 
represent for your future? Would you prefer to **get 
every nickel" of such nominal holdings secured for the 
moment, and go through - at minimum  an un- 
precedented economic collapse, or would you accept 
whatever financial reorganization procedure is 
necessary, on condition that these mean an immediate 
and extended future in what in fa will be the greatest 
economic boom in history? 

The second  to be emphasized is that any losses 
refleed in a financial settlement negotiation today 
do not represent anything **taken away" now. Rocke- 
feller and Company have already robbed these 
amounts ; the apparent losses involved in financial re- 
organization merely confront the objeion with the 
present reality of that past looting and deceptions. The 
only way anyone is going to defend today's **hundred 
cents on the dollar" is by continuing to be among a 
very few at the head of the line when the general panic 
strikes. **If you insist on your 'hundred cents on the 



 

dollar,' that panic  or far worse  is what you are 
gettingfor 'your money.' " 

More broadly, more significantly, the objeion 
refles the more or less conscious and more ob- 
noxious perception that, while nearly everyone else 
would have to suffer monstrously to make that 
ssible, that is permissible as long as "I get mine 
first." This is precisely the kind of objeion the 
founders of the republic faced in the breakdown of the 
economy of the Confederation. It should not be dif- 
ficult for the objeor to discover rationally  as his 
litical forebears, the eleorate that adopted the 
Constitution and republic did  that the idea that his 
individual erest is something that can be served 
despite and at the expense of the general erest is a 
delusion. 

The fear of "big government" is a less ense and 
less broadly sed objeion than the agony of antici- 
pation over **my savings." Most notably, "big govern- 
ment" is equated with "regimentation." The writer 
covered most of this in major papers widely circulated 
during the  eleion campaign. Those aspes of 
the matter, concerning the elimination of the properly 
objeionable oppressive features of the present 
government organization need not be elaborated 
again here. What is notable and ironical is that those 
same much-looted persons who endure every imagin- 
able degree of brutally oppressive centralized 
authority through the Federal Reserve System and its 
controlling monetarist weres in private hands be- 
yond their control, so often obje to transfeng that 
were from a few hands to the control of their own 
eleed representatives. 

