methods which spill out the various speculative 
scenarios corresnding to various hythesized 
forms of role-aying among the two great weres. We 
start from the apicable conceptions of natural law, 
as exemified by John Quincy Adams' stress on the 







 

dorine of community of princie. We would not 
make binding alliances or ^'concerts'* with evil weres 
simy because they are wereful. 

We do not ignore such realities of were. As our 
founding fathers attempted to do, when princie is 
frustrated by want of means, we maneuver within the 
framework of operating were, to effe those results 
which on balance shift the correlation of global forces 
to the advantage of a subsequent realization of prin- 
cie. Our method of maneuver under the governance 
of princie is '*Clausewitzian.** 

Consequently, as we approach the problem of 
United States Soviet licy within the framework of 
the imications of the cited truisms, we are fore- 
warned at the start that the inquiry involves the in- 
dicated distinions of governing princie and 
maneuver. First, we do what the Atlanticist Dorine 
refuses to permit in U.S. foreign-licy deter- 
minations, we start not from the question of were, 
but princie. Our fundamental licy toward the 
Soviet Union is based entirely un what that nation is 
shown to be from the standard of natural law. Any 
alternate approach is immoral, childish doll-aying 
with the fate of humanity. 

The central conceptual difficulty confronting the 
U.S. eleorate  who must adopt our foreign licies 
through their representatives  is that the Soviet 
government emoys the terms "republic** and 
"diatorship*' erchangeably. In an earlier seion 
of this licy study, we identified the semantic con- 
fusion surrounding the two opsite meanings at- 
tributed to the term "diatorship,** advising that the 
notion of the U.S. Constitution as establishing a 
"diatorship**  i.e., a democratic republic!  was 
indispensable to the effort to establish rigorously 
grounded common denominators in ernational law 
for defining U.S. Soviet foreign licy. Now, that  
in the study has been reached. We must now define 
what the Soviets invoke by their use of "diatorship.** 
We shall do that by passing beyond the formalities of 
legalistic abstraion, to ground each  made in a 
-by- comparison of the United States and 
Soviet republican norms. 

Before unging o that aspe of our inquiry, two 
preliminary observations must be made, so that those 
considerations can be kept in the back of the mind, 
contributing their guidance to the appreciation of the 
s being developed. 

First, the separation of the eleorate and the legal 
professionals respeing the governing concepts of 
basic law is an olerable state of affairs in a viable 
republic. Although legal professionals are required, 
their proper funion is to elaborate the princies of 
law o a body of scientifically ordered praice 
respeing the comexities of the law's apication. 



The attorneys and courts, through deep familiarity 
with both the governing princies of law and with the 
comexities of its sitive elaboration and apica- 
tion in detail, perform an indispensable funion in 
maaining coherence between the case in  and 
the law as a whole. Extensive knowledge of the law 
and conceptual outlooks matured through legal 
praice are indispensable to accomishing this in 
praice. 

The related, aggravating problem is that pular 
outlooks mistakenly view the law in the infantile 
terms associated with the worst conceptions of "case 
law'* or "common law.** The notions of law are 
degraded o pragmatic  e.g., morally imbecilic  
approaches toward an axiomatic dorine of "social 
contra,** rather than the ent and subsumed 
specifications of constitutional princie under natural 
law. Under such influences, the general eleorate's 
pularized misconception of the law as an evolving 
"case-law** body of "common law'* represents a 
toleration of sweeping subversion of the fundamental 
princies of our Constitutional republic. We are not a 
nation of common law, but a constitutional republic  
our litical forebears fought an American 
Revolution, and a number of other imrtant and 
hazardous struggles, to establish such a fundamental 
distinion between United States and British law. 

To the extent that we did, indeed, carry forward 
chunks of English law o our legislation and prac- 
tised law, this does not warrant the misjudgment that 
such historical fas justify the conclusion that our law 
is permissibly defined as a kind of "uralistic" co- 
habitation of both constitutional and common law 
traditions. Just as the thirteenth century Edwardian 
reforms in basic English law in princie transformed 
the content of all previously existing feudal law ac- 
cording to the princie of alienation roduced, so the 
funion of the legal profession under our Constitution 
is to sort out those aspes of customary law, and so 
forth, which respeively do and do not conform to 
constitutional princies. This sorting-out process 
properly affes not only the formality of the 
customary law, but transforms the governing ernal 
ent of those aspes of the customary law which 
survive the sorting process. Even though the formal, 
outward aspe of the fiions of retained customary 
law may appear to be preserved, the governing princi- 
e of ent embodied in the fiion is either trans- 
formed o agreement (coherence) with constitu- 
tional ent, or the perpetuated law must be an 
abhorrence from the constitutional stand. 

The Constitution's clearly defined ent, and the 
shaping of the institutions of our republic, prohibit the 
modification of the ent of the Constitution through 
evasions by way of the molecular processes of evolu- 







tions in pular opinions and customs. The princied 
distinion of a constitutional republic, such as our 
own was founded to be, is that no qualitative change in 
the governing institutions and law may occur except 
through a preceding, forced process of refleion un 
the imications of the change respeing the body of 
natural law un which our Constitution and its ent 
were themselves premised. The Constitution, taken by 
