lic. It is the so-determined perception of national self- 
erest, represented as the prenderant (not the 
only) eleed force within institutions of government, 
which is the essence of the proper funioning of our 

constitutional law. 

As should already be imicitly clear, the con- 
ceptual problem most often encountered, the source of 
the loss of elleual capacity to understand our 
constitutional law and institutions, is the reduionist 
 of view which (heteronomically) mislocates the 
self-erests of the eleorate '^uralistically." 

In such wretched, anti-humanistic outlooks  most 
common to our disoriented liberals and radicals  the 
nation is conceived as a Tory freak show. 

If you are black-skinned, or have a hispanic back- 
ground, or are a woman, or live in a slum, and so forth 
 ad nauseam  it is the perception of neo-Fabian 
dorine that your membership in any such categories 
defines your self-erest in an axiomatically different 
way than that of any other persons not sharing the 
precise set of distinions which are thus defined as 
erseing your condition to be embodied in your 
person. In that specific respe, the neo-Fabian 
dorine is identical with the Nazi dorine of 
Volksgemeinschaft and its corollaries. It was nothing 



but that neo-Fabian*s fascist dorinal definition of 
''democracy" which the unfortunate Representative 
Barbara Jordan presented in her principal address to 
the  New York City Democratic Party Convention, 
Contrary to Barbara Jordan and her mentors, 
neither the human race, nor the pulation of the Uni- 
ted States, is a carnival freak show or a zoo. 

Many of the conditions un which the neo-Fabians 
premise their zoological specifications of micro-con- 
stituencies' self-erests represent conditions 
which  while existing  are abhorrent to us. Shall 
we keep slum dwellers in slums, so as to defend the in- 
tegrity of that constituency? Do black-skinned citi- 
zens, then, desire a separate black drinking fountain, 
a separate black lavatory, a black seion set aside in 
the rear of the bus, so that the separate needs of blacks 
can be thus celebrated? What sort of bestial swill was 
duped Barbara Jordan  however thoughtless- 
ly  prosing in fa? She was prosing, in one re- 
spe, to turn the White House itself o a freak 
show  but let that pass without further comment 
once the lawful conneion is noted. 

The  of considering Barbara Jordan's cited, 
pro-fascist aberrations is that the bestial imications 
of her formulation express in hideous detail exaly 
why Tom Paine defended the constitutional republic 
against the obscenities inherent in the ill-advised con- 
temations of a democracy. It is not ssible to iden- 
tify the rights and liberties of a nation's human beings 
in the form of litical institutions better adapted to 
the perpetuation of a litical freak show. The law of 
the republic respeing the rights, privileges and fun- 
damental self-erests of its citizens is hostile to those 
kinds of distinions among human beings which 
would be proper to the classification of varieties of 
monkeys and baboons. 

On behalf of law, we recognize the industrialist e- 
rest. Similarly, we recognize the farmer erest. So, 
we recognize the erest of labor. So, we recognize the 
rights and erests of our geographic litical sub-en- 
tities, as institutions indispensable to our economy 
and our citizens as a whole. So, we recognize the obli- 
gation to right injustices, to moderate inequities of pri- 
vilege  insofar as such distinions ta the essen- 
tial rights and liberties of the citizen as a citizen. These 

are the essential, derived expressions of our general 
national erest. We do not recognize these ''special 
erests" because they are special erests. We re- 
cognize special erests only as they are a meaningful 
refraion of our national erest according to natural 
law and its constitutional expression. No other sort of 
special erest has any rightful standing before law, 
and it is incompetence and fraud to profess the con- 
trary. 



P^OF-T(o)(Q)llOT. OEM© E^iD©i 



U.S. Soviet Policy 



Our erest, thus, to summarize again as back- 
ground to the Soviet corollaries, is what we have 
set forth before. Our only primary erest according 
to natural law is that notion of progress for which tech- 
nological progress is the most charaeristic and 
determining feature. The only specific erest which 
we acknowledge as fundamental within that context is 
the princie of the constitutional republic as the only 
efficient instrument for the sitive expression of 
litical freedom and for the regulation of toleration 
as agreeable to the praical circumstances of our 
nation and the world at this  in the progress of 
self -development of our species. 

The primary distinion in constitutional law be- 
tween the United States and the Soviet Union is that 
U.S. law defines private ownership of the basic means 
of produion and distribution as an area of sitive 
forms of litical toleration, whereas the Soviet con- 
stitution brings those same areas entirely within the 
dire administration of sitive law. All the other 
proper aspes of essential distinion between the two 
republics are historically determined corollaries of 
that central distinion. 

Not only is that the primary distinion within the 
constitutional law of the two, respeive republics. It is 
the feature of constitutional distinions on which all 
imrtant litical differences between those nations 
have been  rightly or wrongly  premised. Con- 
versely, hythetically or anually, under the condi- 
tions in which the Soviet constitution defends capital- 
ist liberties within the United States, and the United 
States Constitution dires our nation to defend self-in- 
terestedly the alternate litical form in the Soviet re- 
public, all the organic premises for adversary or - 
tential-adversary relationship between the two 

nations evarate. 

Furthermore, if that acceptance of the specific, sub- 
sumed constitutional distinions between the two 
states is mutually accepted, and also the United States 
and Soviet Union are constitutional republics in 



presently efficient ent, under such conditions the 
Soviet foreign licy of the United States is based on a 
