is in no one's objeive net erests  even the Rocke- 
fellers'  over the clearly-defined relatively near- 
term. 

At that , we encounter that feature of Atlanti- 
cism which is pure irrationality, the metaphysics of 
the Dorine itself. 

It is in this respe that the geolitical metaphysics 
and its root, core ideology must be brought o focus. 

Although this analysis demands formal criticism of 
the geolitical dorine itself, such criticism is inade- 
quate to our praical purse by itself. The fa that 
a few lunatics in ruling sitions adhere to such a 
special dorine fails to account for the ability of such 
creatures to mobilize substantial litical forces of a 
nation's people to suprt such monstrous nonsense 
(the liberals and radical fringe) or to tolerate it (a 

large, vacillating if grumbling rtion of the 
Republican and Democratic conservatives). We 

are obliged to examine the conneion between 
the geolitical dorine and susceptibility repre- 
sented by the more widely diffused core ideology 
un which the effeiveness of the geolitical doc- 
trine depends. 

The dire conneion between the geolitical 
dorine and the core ideology was developed and is to 
be best comprehended historically in terms of the 
drastic shift in world outlook which caused a profound 
philosophical differentiation between England and the 
American English colonies over the (predominantly) 



- period. That differentiation was reicated in 
the United States, beginning with the Jacksonian 
period, and was consolidated to the extent it presently 
prevails from, most notably, the last decade of the 
past century. 

The thrust underlying the rise of capitalism during 
the sixteenth century was a conscious, neo-atonic 
humanism concentrated at that time in England, 
France and the low countries. It was predominantly 
Erasmian humanism, but Erasmianism incorrated 
under its broader basis for included faional coali- 
tions, more vigorous  more rigorous  currents of 
epistemology leading through Ficino and others o 
Descartes and Spinoza. Advancing beyond the rela- 
tively prudent representation of Ghibelline humanism 
in Dante Alighieri's De Monarchia  which World 
Federalists and kindred cranks have attempted to 
coopt groundlessly o their hagiolatry  the leading 
English, French, and Dutch humanists envisaged not 
semi-autarkical national economies, but nations 
within a world order based essentially on neo-atonic 
princies. The content of their perception of the 
impulse toward proper natural law appropriate to 
such a world order must be understood as distin 
from the scholastic (Aristotelian) or rationalist notion 
of natural law and universal order based on such law. 

In undertaking this course of inquiry here, we 
cannot be rebuked for going far beyond the ostensible 
range of topics and related arguments on which 
Lippmann and others exicitly depend in articulating 
their Atlanticist Dorine's geolitical axioms. If we 
exse these issues here in an admittedly rigorous 
fashion, Lippman and his co-faioneers insist on 
exicitly preempting the same topical areas 
ignorantly. The distinion between a rigorous con- 
sideration of these topics and Lippmann's superficial 
skidding through the same areas, with a grease of 
sime-minded and false ** truisms," is crucial to 
understanding the praical side of the dynamics of 
Atlanticist and relevant irrational litical behavior. 



P^OF-T(o)(Q)llOT. OEM© E^iD©i 



Humanism and Aristotelianism 



As we have noted above, and have developed the 
 in other published locations, the past eight 
centuries of Mediterranean-European culture  the 
present world culture  are rigorously charaerized 
by the contention among three principal epistemo- 
logical currents. 

The imicit outlook of the first, the scholastic or 
Aristotelian outlook, was already embedded in feudal 
relations, as exemified by Charlemagne's inventory 
of the realm and the Norman Domesday Book. This 
presumed an essentially fixed mode of technology of 
produion and consumption (beast-likeness), in 
which the humanist distinion between man and the 
lowere beasts was dependent principally on the reli- 
gious concept of the metaphysical rationality of man, 
the institutionalized religious aspe of feudal re- 
lations which Thomas Aquinas and others made con- 
scious as the premise for the scholastic dorine of 
humanism. 

Medieval Scholasticism or Aristotelianism devel- 
oped as a conscious outlook after the emergence 
of its immediate opnent, the neo-atonic or 
Averroean or Avicennian (Ibn Sina) influence, as a 
major elleual force in Europe. Avicenna identi- 
fied the creative processes of scientific discovery and 
informed praice as both the fundamental distinion 
between man and the lowere beasts, and also a 
refleion, in his exicit argument to that effe, of 
the fundamental ordering-princie of the universe. As 
typified most early by the case of Franciscan Roger 
Bacon (not the wretched, later Francis Bacon), the 



Avicennian or neo-atonic outlook, true humanism, 
constituted an immediate praical threat to the 
feudal order. Thus, the feudal Inquisition was launched 
against the Avicennians, including Roger Bacon, 
and, in the course of attempting to develop an in- 
telleual defense, an elleual inoculation against 
the experienced were of neo-atonic humanism, 
Thomas Aquinas, ironically a creative elle of 
unusual were in his own right, became the dorinal 
rallying- for the ideological defense of the 
Inquisition. () This Inquisition was litically 
predominantly a feudal counterrevolution against the 
emerging capitalist imications of neo-atonism. 

Despite the feudal basis of the Inquisition, the w- 
erful, objeive impulses of technological develop- 
ment were already under way at the  of the 
launching of that Inquisition. The thirteenth century 
and later institutions of Edwardian reforms in 
England, and the accompanying influx to England of 
the so-called ''Lombard" mercantile bankers, typify 
the organic undermining of feudalism and the were 
of the feudal church in the emergence of the proto- 
