happens miraculously. The mediating source of tech- 
nological progress is the discovery, transmission, 
assimilation, and informing of the general impulses of 
willful social praice of both new scientific discoveries 
and the supementary innovative tentialities sub- 
sumed by such discoveries. This mediation in all cases 
occurs through the creative mental weres and ac- 
tivity of human individuals. Hence, it is individual 
creativity (freedom) which is the aive, immediate 
"driving force" represented by the world-line. Yet, 
the ssibility of individual contributions depends 
un education, and also un those other material 
and social circumstances which foster in individuals 
the were to create and to assimilate new conceptions 
going beyond the range of previously existing know- 
ledge and related praice. Hence, the tential 
material and cultural conditions generated by tech- 
nological progress represent the necessary pre- 







conditions for the individual creative initiatives which 
must be realized as the immediate "ground-source" of 
technological progress. 

Thus, that hythetical simification of the aual 
ordering of our species history and pre-history 
represents in fa a self-subsisting sitive, univer- 
salizing princie. 

This princie is the unchanging princie, the 
charaeristic causality in the succession of human 
technological and associated social progress. The prin- 
cie itself is never altered  the princie of causality 
is unchanging. 

However, the successive societies determined by 
the aion of this unchanging princie, unchanging 
causality, have different "geometries*'  just as 
feudal and capitalist society have different primary 
self-ordering charaeristics in their appropriate geo- 
metric erpretation. It is ssible, without exagger- 
ating the argument by such resorts, to describe feudal 
society's imputable ernal litical-economic geo- 
metry as epistemologically equivalent to the ordinary 
notions of field-particle relationships in Lagrangian or 
Maxwellian physics. Whereas, a society based on the 
humanist princies of industrial capitalism shared 
among Gresham, Bodin, Colbert, Franklin, Hamilton, 
Carey, Marx, is properly comparable to the contrary 
features of higher-order physical space as confronted 
in negentropic aspes of non-linear asma be- 
haviors, as we shall show below. 

In the instance of Aristotelian or scholastic 
epistemology, we have the Euclidean form of Lagran- 
gian physics' imied "geometry" of society (and 
technology) embedded. For these cases, we have a 
pr/ori notions of a linear metaphysical basis for space, 
time, and matter (Euclidean space, time, and matter 
relationships). 

The most prominent feature, and crucial empirical- 
theoretical disqualification of Euclidean-Aristotelian 
systems is that they deny the relevance of negentropic 
charaeristics of reality, either by relegating the 
category of negentropic phenomena to the meta- 
physical or merely by obsessively denying the 
evidence. The religious Aristotelian sets the negen- 
tropic evidence considered o the category of the 
metaphysical, outside the determined system. Thus, 
by such physical-metaphysical dualism, the ap- 
pearance of ernal coherence of the physical system 
is defended. The notion of elan vital (although asso- 
ciated historically with degenerate nominalism's 
sitivist variant), parodies scholastic dorine on 
this . The evasion of the problem of scientific dis- 
covery's creative (synthetic) content is similarly 
attempted by the dorine of "uition." Radical, 
atheistic Euclidean-Aristotelians evade the problem 
by the pathetic formulation: "That hythesis is not 



 

necessary," saving the appearance of what they 
choose to regard as science by the shyster's ruse of 
canonically outlawing all disagreeable empirical 
evidence from consideration within science. 

There is a dire correlation between the emergence 
of German critical philosophy during the - 
period and the French and German development of 
the preconditions for a relativistic physics during the 
first half of the nineteenth century. The most promi- 
nent single elleual influence for both currents of 
correlated development was Immanuel Kant. Kant, 
thus situated, serves as the most efficient reference 
 for errelating the empirical and formal as- 
pes of the notion of a negentropic, relativistic 
physical space as it apies both to physics as such and 
to the distin ernal geometry of industrialist- 
capitalist and socialist development. (Although in- 
dustrial-capitalist and socialist development have 
different geometries in respe to one another, they 
have coherent geometries, and for the moment can be 
treated as subsumed within a common, distin class 
of geometries.) 

Contrary to the various professedly "neo-Kantian" 
empiricists emerging inclusively around influences 
such as Friedrich Lange, Eduard Bernstein and 
others at the conclusion of the past century, the con- 
ceptual breakthrough which defines Kant as the Kant 
was his sweeping refutation of British empiricism, 
with immediate focus un the provocative, objeion- 
able "indifferentist" thesis of David Hume. Kant's 
starting  for his comprehensive discrediting of 
British empiricism was the Aristotelian stand as 
inclusively formally typified by the physics of La- 
grange, also the stand of Leibniz, and the new 
view charaeristic of the Enlightenment  up to the 
 of rejeing categorically the stand 
exemified by Descartes and Spinoza. That is Kant's 
formal source of elleual were, and also his crip- 
ing defeat. 

Kant's achievement and were, relative to most of 
his acknowledged principal predecessors, was that he 
incorrated aively or virtually all of the most rele- 
vant empirical evidence. His defeat was that he at- 
tempted  and was the last competent epistemo- 
logical thinker to originate this approach  to fit all 
the evidence, including acknowledgement of the 
reality of man's creative (synthetic) weres respe- 
ing the realm of causally-situated social praice, 
within the ultimately-stretched limits of the Aristotel- 
ian-Euclidean world outlook. Thus, excepting his 
correlated, criping, categorical rejeion of the al- 
ternative approach conveyed through Spinoza, Kant 
assembled and sed all of the principal immediate 
epistemological problems, and thus described the 
fundamental problem of knowledge in the compre- 


