the - course of the  Presidential campaign, 
and have amified on that since in respe to the 
prosal for establishing a Third National Bank. 

Provided the instrument of national fiscal and 
monetary roles is in the form of a national bank along 
**Hamiltonian" lines, the heteronomic impulses of 
individual capitalist ownerships can be rigorously 
countered by the combination of the national bank's 
categorical credit licies and government tax and 
related fiscal licies. As a praical matter, such a 
government licy is the means for efficiently dealing 
with all of the major aspes of the problem in the 
terms we have defined it. 

Individually, many capitalists would tend to howl 
heteronomically; colleively, they would mely 
cheer. That irony, that difficulty, properly recalls our 
discussion of Federalist approaches to heteronomy 
during the last half of the eighteenth century. It is not 
adequate to attempt to use simy the were of gov- 
ernment to enforce a licy in the vital erests of 
the nation as a whole. This is litically essential to 
transform the viable mere individual impulses of the 
viable litical strata o a conscious form of individ- 



ual corresndence with the proper, universal form 
of expression of such impulses  just as Franklin, 
Adams, Paine, Hamilton, and Madison did in their 
campaigns for unity of erest and aion by the 
colonies, against the heteronomic evils of the Con- 
federation, and for the Constitution and the republic. 
The proper expression of the real universal erest 
corresnding to the viable individual impulse must 
be made conscious, so that that willful impulse for 
praice is transformed from its heteronomic to uni- 
versal form in the individual 

Once that essential litical task is cometed, the 
''repressive" cast of government aion in behalf of 
that princie exists only in respe to the olerably 
stubborn heteronomic exception. 

That is not merely an illustration of a princie. It is 
a statement of a prosed approach to forming imme- 
diate licy, appropriately to be imemented as soon 
as the Congress impeaches the Carter Administration 
 which it will find acceleratingly strong and num- 
erous motives to accomish  and the nation secures 
thus the return of its most precious stolen property, 
the Executive Branch of government. This approach 
outlines what we must do to get out of the present 
deadly mess. 

The systematic monetarist corruption of an indus- 
trial capitalist economy can now be described. First, 
the monetarist institutions establish a foothold of insti- 
tutionalized legality for their praices of extraing 
ground rent massively from the economy. This 
focuses historically un the capitalization of ground 
rent in agriculture, and in urban and other real estate 
speculation. It also focuses historically un govern- 
ment debt. It buys o the government debt, and 
creates a discount market for such debt instruments. 

By seizing control of a government's dire and im- 
icit dependency un ernational financial mar- 
kets, and a national economy's dependency un in- 
ternational credit, monetarist financial were is con- 
centrated at those two erseing s of vulner- 
ability of a national economy's fiscal and credit 
system, which enables those monetarist forces to 
manipulate government fiscal and credit licies, de- 
grading the government to a mere partner  usually a 
junior partner in fa  of the monetarist forces which 
have established control over the spigot of national 
credit. 

By controlling the * 'wholesale" credit markets, 
reducing local credit institutions increasingly to mere 
corresndents of major financial centers in their 
loans to government, industry and agriculture, and by 
creating controlled markets in investment banking 
and the secondary equity and bond markets, the 
monetarist oopus reaches o the gut of industry 
and agriculture. The monetarist money centers are en- 







abled to force accelerated fiitious capitalization of 
industrial and agricultural assets  through such 
levers as loan-asset-ratio licies. By oligoly in the 
operations of investment banking, by controlling the 
flows of capital on which investment banking depends, 
and by controlling the financial licies of mortgage, 
equity and bond markets, the monetarists force a self- 
feeding growth in ratios of debt-linked fiitious 
capitalization throughout industry and agriculture. 

By such means, the debt-equity ratios in industry 
and agriculture are accelerated. This increases the 
rate of monetarist extraion of ground rent from the 
economy in the form of debt service from industry and 
agriculture. By extraing growing ratios of the total 
absolute profit of industry and agriculture in this way, 
they strip industry and agriculture of the margin of 
were decisive in controlling the flows of capital gener- 
ated  the capital goes out increasingly to the mone- 
tary forces, from whom the industrialist and farmer 
must then beg use of that same produion-generated 
capital in the form of a loan, through which to increase 
the ratio of ground rent extraion. 

This aspe of the matter is crucial to understanding 
the **anti-capitalist" licies of the Rockefeller-allied 
Roosevelt administration. 

To make the  clear, we should briefly consider 
how the writer, as President of the United States 
would regard revenues from taxation of produion 
and personal incomes. The revenues would circulate 
through the national bank (e.g.. The Third National 
Bank), and would be the reserve basis for a corre- 
snding mass of loans at prime erest rates in the 
order of a prime rate of two percent to industry, con- 
struion, transrtation, and agriculture. Although 
the writer does not anticipate that he, as President, 
would increase the effeive tax rates ^ he does end 
as detailed in earlier publications, to consolidate the 
federal, state, and local tax praices on a vastly more 
simified basis, and to use a uniform licy of federal 
distributions to state and local governments, together 
with using the national bank to get state and local 
governments  at last  out of the private market's 
security-issuing business. One of the associated 
funions of such a fiscal reform would be to con- 
centrate the flow of tax-related debits through the 
national bank, to make the national bank the major 
credit and monetary were  inclusively preventing a 
fresh, usurpation of government fiscal and monetary 
weres by a syndicate of monetarist erests. 

Roosevelt, monstrously comunding Colonel 
House's offenses, did the exa opsite. His fiscal and 
