agencies and erests of specific classes, groups of 
classes or faions of classes. Immediately, we cannot 
competently comprehend the ernal problems of the 
United States today unless we recognize that the 
republic has been usurped by a diatorship of 
monetarist erests, to the disadvantage of variously 
industrial capitalist, agriculturalist, and labor's 
erests. For the immediate future, we cannot 
establish an effeive foreign licy toward the Soviet 
Union or any other foreign government unless we base 
the proper criteria of our foreign licy viable, 
sovereign republics  on a more rigorous un- 
derstanding of the content of the institutions and in- 
struments of government than current general opinion 
has so far acknowledged. 

A deservedly classic case of heteronomy is provided 
by Wallenstein's army of the Thirty Years War. 

The Hapsburg degeneration of most of Europe  
mediated through the refinanced debts to the Fuggers, 
Netherlands bankers and their kind  had already 
returned Europe, following a period of late fourteenth 
and fifteenth century recovery and growth following 
the Black Death, o the kinds of conditions tending 
toward those which had created the Black Death. The 
previously cited peasant upsurges (jacqueries) in 
France, the Martin Luther-fostered mass-slaughter of 
rebelling peasants in Germany, illustrate how far this 
process had proceeded by the first and second quar- 
ters of the sixteenth century. It was under the more 
aggravated conditions created by the continuation of 
European economic decay that a routine sort of 
Hapsburg dynastic swindle erupted o the general, 
genocidal war which raged in central Europe for 
thirty years from  to . 

The charaer of Wallenstein's army is key to that 
phenomenon. 

Although the protestant leaders who defended and 
led the German peasants of the early sixteenth cen- 
tury were honest protestants, at that  Martin 
Luther himself was not primarily a religious leader, 
but a religious figure who had become also a conscious 
pawn and litical agent of the Fugger and related 
erests. Hence, Luther could earlier opse the 
papacy for looting Germany, and yet, consistently, 
suprt the destruion of entire seions of the Ger- 
man economy by the Fuggers. In that respe, Mar- 
tin Luther of the period following the Diet of Worms 
was consciously a "litical elligence" agent, of 
a monetarist-feudal faion, whose crimes in that re- 
spe rank in princie with those of Joseph Goebbels. 



P^OF-T(o)(Q)llOT. OEM© E^iD©i 








 

As Christopher White demonstrates in his ground- 
breaking study of Colbert in The Political Economy of 
the American Revolution, () the fairy tale told to 
credulous schoolchildren, of ** religious" wars between 
Catholic and protestant ** ideologies*' is fraud. Within 
the process of litical differentiation of faional 
forces, alliances with or against the litical were of 
the papacy or with respe to a national Catholic 
litical faion of the moment, there was an im- 
rtant undercurrent of aual protestant develop- 
ment which asserted itself under the conditions 
provided by the fa of the schisms, but the formal 
sit within Christendom was litical, occuring for 
reasons as varied as the comexities of labile six- 
teenth and seventeenth century litics determined. 
Fundamentally, overall, the schism in Christendom 
was immediately prompted by the circumstances of 
Hapsburg accession of Charles V, and the bloody 
fashion in which Hapsburg looting brought the 
humbled papacy to its knees in a vile parody of 
Canossa in reverse. 

For litical reasons, at the outset of what became 
the Thirty Years War, the Austrian financial situation 
of that moment did not favor the creating and 
deoying of the sort of regular military forces 
required to win the battle over succession to the 
Kingdom of Bavaria against the forces of the 
protestant German princes led by the Count of 
Palatine (modern Pfalz). The principal credible force 
allied with the Hapsburgs was Bavaria, which had an 
acceptable military establishment by the standards of 
the time, but which forces the prudent Bavarian ruling 
house declined to deoy to aces remote from the 
defense of Bavaria itself. In such circumstances the 
Hapsburgs commissioned the adventurer Wallenstein. 

Wallenstein's attempted solution to the problem 
represented by limited regular forces was to recruit a 
rabble of economic decay*s vagabonds as an auxiliary 
force of irregulars to take their pay principally in the 
form of loot from subjugated areas. This Wallenstein 
swarm of looting vagabonds had the military effe of 
destroying the logistical bases from which regular 
military forces could be ordinarily deoyed. The 
fragile equilibrium of the German economy, under 
conditions developed by over a century of Fugger and 
related debt service looting, collapsed wherever the 
Wallenstein's swarm of human locusts overran it. 
They butchered the livestock, gobbled up the seed 
grain, and raped and murdered with dionysiac 
abandon  exhibiting thus the inherent tentialities 
of our contemrary North American and European 
Maoists and similar neo-Fabian human refuse. The 



. Christopher White, **Jean-Baptiste Colbert and the Origins of 
Industrial Capitalism," in Spannaus and White, eds., The Political 
Economy of the American Revolution, pp. -. 



survivors of such depredations themselves became 
looters, and all the armies in the field soon relied un 
similar taical and logistical licies. In the 
destruion of society, the swarms of cannibals 
multiied. Once that process was initiated, it was self- 
perpetuating until rtions of the *'excessed" pu- 
lation were reduced, and France*s Richelieu then er- 
vened to bring the obscene Hapsburg mess to a halt. 
That sort of bestial degradation is what people are 
ultimately capable of  then, earlier, and again  
whenever the princie of governance by a universal 
sitive princie of natural law is overthrown in favor 
of the ultra-democratic *'do your own thing" in- 
stitutions of a litical Wallenstein. That is what law 
properly means by the mens rea, the rinsically 
criminal mind. Weather-terrorist Mark Rudd, for 
exame, is rinsically a criminal mentality by that 
standard, as is the Weather-terrorist group's original 
patron and mentor, Marcus Raskin of the Rockefeller- 
