It is the Executive which remains the monstrous 
problem. 

Aii proper reforms center around tlie princie that 
the President of the United States embodies in his per- 
sonal office all the resnsibilities, authorities and 
duties of the Executive Branch. The President cannot 
be resnsible in fa unless all subordinate funions 
of the Executive Branch are efficiently accountable to 
the President. No ''fourth branch of government/' 
whether so in law or in fa, can be tolerated. 

The proper instrument through which the President 
fulfills the resnsibilities of his office, excepting his 
personal staff, is the Cabinet, comsed of heads of 
regular Departments. These Departments are estab- 
lished by law, and the heads of these Departments are 
aped with the advice and consent of the Congress. 
No other chain of command within the Executive 
Branch maybe tolerated. 

Every other funion and sub-funion of the Exe- 
cutive Branch is assigned to a regular Department, 
and is uniquely accountable, according to the lawful 
execution of its funion, to the Cabinet Department 
head and the President. No other funions of the Exe- 
cutive Branch will be tolerated. 

Although crucial apments to executive 
sitions are either presently filled as permanent 
sitions with the exicit advice and consent of the 
Congress, or otherwise should be filled with aid of effi- 
cient informal consultation with the Congress, the 
President has independent authority to summarily 
discharge any member of the Executive Branch 
within the limits of the procedures defined by la w for 
this purse. Without this authority, the resn- 
sibilities of the President are not matched by subordi- 
nate's accountability. 

Similarly, the President delegates the were of dis- 
charge through his Cabinet members respeing their 
Departments. 

This prescribes relatively great centralized 
authority and resnsibility to the President and his 
Cabinet members. The Tories and their liberal and 
radical camp followeres have made a great, self- 
righteous howling concerning this fa in itself. This 



pressure of Tory opinion  this thrust toward over- 
throwing our Constitution and the institutions of our 
republic  has been the background pressure 
fostering various efforts toward decentralizing the 
executive authority. It is that subversion of the Consti- 
tution's ent and prescriptions which is key to the 

degeneration of the Executive Branch which we must 
remedy. 

The founders of this nation were by no means blind 
to the tential problems incurred by the effort to 
imement the Constitution and dire institutions of 
our republic. Three principal constras un the 
Executive were provided as sufficient to this purse : 
() the imperative of suitable quality of the President 
and legislators; () the duty of the Congress to exert 
its were of advice and consent, and to make laws 
defining the licies and methods of government; and 
() the constitutional-law duties of the Supreme 
Court. The last is clear without further discussion 

H 

here; it is sufficient to consider the relevant imi- 
cations of the first two of the three s. 

There is no remedy but impeachment or resignation 
for a person unsuited to continue to occupy the office 
of President. A **bum in the White House" is in itself 
a violation of the ent of constitutional law. 

The republican form of government was adopted 
inclusively to put efficient impediments in the way of 
the efforts to ace a '*bum" in either of the three 
principal branches of federal government, with 
special emphasis un the need for the highest per- 
sonal qualifications of the President himself. The 
Eleoral College was originally a most imrtant 
such constitutional hurdle. 

The original funion of the Eleoral College's Ele- 
ors was to erse an ermediate step of about 
four months' duration between a general eleion and 
the installation of a new President. The funion of the 
Eleoral College was to serve as a refleive process 
through which duly eleed representatives of the 
general eleorate enabled that general eleorate to 
*'change its mind*' from the heat-of-the-moment re- 
sults of a preference eleion, to make that seleion 
which corresnded in deliberated fa to the com- 
bined ent and constitutionally defined erests of 
the eleorate as a whole. Hence, the constitutional 
were of lawful seleion by the eleorate was em- 
bodied in the Eleoral College, and it was the qualifi- 
cations of those Eleors to deliberate such a seleion 
which was focused as the principal proper concern of 
the individual member of the eleorate in casting his 
preference ballot. 

This arrangement also provided a safeguard against 
the use of massive eleion fraud in parts of the nation 
to attempt the eleion of an undesirable candidate to 
the Presidency. 







Reviewing the consequences of the recent Novem- 

I 

ber through January proceedings overall, including 
the massive vote-fraud (probably between  to  
millions fraudulent Carter votes) and associated out- 
rages, and contemating the manifest result, we are 
now more firmly convinced of the wisdom of our liti- 

' r 

cal forebears in this matter. 

Especially following the  general eleion, the 
Eleoral College hurdle tended to become a very low 
hurdle indeed, and was gradually transformed by 
custom and erosion almost o a mere accounting 
procedure for transforming a pular vote o its 
constitutional eleoral projeion, so that the Ele- 
ors were unconstitutionally degraded in fa to mere 
bearers of a predetermined mandate. Under the 
Roosevelt administration, the constitutional ten- 
tialities of the Eleoral College were substantially 
nullified by accelerating the inaugural date. The 
Kennedy administration gutted the constitutional 
provision still further. In princie, the Eleoral 
