as a whole. 

Comementary to the "captive nations" and other 
nominally right-wing covers, the principal cover and 
an additional operations erface of the Interl 
networks is represented by the neo-Fabian oopus, 
most efficiently identified by McGeorge Bundy's old 
Kennedy days sidekicks, Marcus Raskin and Richard 
Barnet. Here is an aspe of the matter where official 
gross litical imbecility by certain leading Soviet 
Politburo strata comes o sharp focus. 

As a consequence of a very successful elligence 
operation run against top Soviet strata during the 
Kennedy period, as noted by published accounts of the 
writer's associates, the majority line of the Politburo 
switched away from the corre litical elligence 
estimate of the Soviet military elligence  that the 
Rockefellers were the main source of the war danger 
 to the imbecilic dorine that the Rockefeller- 
Fabian lowere Manhattan erests were the 
"realists," and that the U.S. ernal war danger 
emanated from the vaguely defined, so-called "mili- 
tary-industrial comex." The Rockefeller-controlled 
key unit in and around the leadership of the Com- 
munist Party USA is inclusively relevant, as is also 
some of the background of the  Missile Crisis and 
the Kennedy assassination preparations within 
various parts of North America. This change of 
Politburo majority line coincided with the develop- 
ment of an ongoing dire'line of semi-official liaison 
between elements of the Politburo and David Rocke- 
feller and Richard Barnet. 

The termination of the Richard Lowenthal- 
snsored, Eric Gerlach-direed Sozialistische 
Politik "editorial board" during the - period  
an editorial board including notably Trotskyist 
leaders Ernest Mandel and Pierre Frank  coincided 
symptomatically with a sweeping Kennedy reorgan- 
ization of the Anglo-American ernational litical 
elligence, establishing the neo-Fabian network 







 

created by the Rockefellers' Kennedy machine as the 
central coordinating agency globally for those aspes 
of operations run under variously liberal and *ieft** 
covers. 

Principals in this drastic reorganization were 
McGeorge Bundy, Robert Kennedy, and revisionist 
Thurman Arnold of the law firm of Arnold and Porter. 
The key operatives assigned to head up the new er- 
national "liberar' struure included, most prom- 
inently, Marcus Raskin and Richard Barnet of the 
Institute for Policy Studies! Abruptly, a number of 
old right-wing social democrats were transformed 
through ''miraculous conversions" o raving 
liberals or skesmen of newly born left-wing social 
democratic currents  the case of old Allen Dulles 
protege, Riccardo Lombardi of the Socialist Party of 
Italy is exemary. An assassination effort was 
launched against General de Gaulle  by the 
reorganized network. The same ernational deoy- 
ment was the wave of "wetwork" which killed Italy's 
"Gaullist" industrialist Mattel  a Rockefeller foe on 
the petroleum issue  and which same deoyment 
ironically set up the circumstances of the death of 
John F. Kennedy himself. 

These aions of that period, us such affairs as the 
attempted destabilization of the Konrad Adenauer 
faion within the West German government, marked 
a qualitative shift in overall strategic profile by the 
Rockefeller-centered forces, including, notably, their 
operations against the Soviet Union and CMEA 
countries. 

This included a reorientation of elligence and 
related capabilities in the Soviet Union and Eastern 
European countries, premised on the overall effort of 
building up David Rockefeller's "Trojan Horse" 
within the CPSU Central Committee and Politburo. 
Georgii Arbatov's relationship to David Rockefeller 
and Richard Barnet during the recent years is the 
visible erface of what is at present a short fuse 
leading o general thermonuclear war. 

The overall effes of this st-, Interl-IPS- 
centered operation against the CMEA countries was 
ultimately to force the Soviet and allied ernal 
security forces to ensify their surveillance and 
associated aions. Soviet leadership litical 
stupidity concerning the neo-Fabian "realist good- 
guys" and the "industrial-military-comex baddies" 
aggravated the CMEA countries' ernal litical 
security problems through the added feature of chaos 
and confusion contributed by the bungling Soviet 
leadership itself. This feature was aggravated by 
increased ability of the neo-Fabians to "launder" 
black operations through Eastern European capitals 
and Havana  notably the Prague-Havana run, and to 
spin off this successful deception of the Soviets and 



Cubans o numerous developing-seor countries 
with a friendly litical relationship to the Soviets and 
Cubans (e.g. Eldridge Cleaver in Algeria) . 

This latter arrangement went to the  that 
nearly every neo-Fabian left-fascist creep who later 
gained a publicity image as an anarchist or Maoist 
youth-movement skesman during the s and 
early s had his "left" credentials "laundered" in 
significant part through the "Venceremos" and 
related pilgrimages to Cuba. The "trip to Cuba" was 
the cover for various "miraculous conversions" o a 
"left heavy" sture. This IPS-focused operation 
against the Soviet Union and other targeted socialist 
countries was the principal cover for the "un- 
dergound railroad" networks operating to develop 
the Jewish and other "dissidents" ferment in the 
Eastern European nations, using the old Parvus- 
trodden "Northern Route" through Olof Palme's 
Sweden. 

This is by no means to argue that all dissidents in the 
Soviet Union are produs of this Interl-IPS- 
Rockefeller operation. 

First, there are endemic anti-socialist dissidents  
based principally in seions of the farmer pulation 
and the so-called professionals. If the IPS-Interl and 
comementary operations also feature such 
professionals, the operation has thus capitalized, 
lawfully, on the sociological area of greatest endemic 
tential for developing agents. The litical stupidity 
of influential seions of Communist leaderships 
generates several kinds of dissidence by itself and 
aggravates that which would otherwise tend to exist. 

There are also various sorts of pro-Marxist dissi- 
