
appropriate liberties. 
The comement of the notion of freedom is science. 

From the stand of law, new knowledge is not any 
sort of novelty which may erupt from this or that in- 
dividual. There are rigorous, accessible, empirical 
proofs which absolutely distinguish nonsensical or 
destruive novelties from fruitful advances in the 
direion of human knowledge for praice. 

These methods of proof, although rigorous and cer- 
tain, involve the difficulty of princie that it is not 
ssible for a nation and its relevant institutions to 
predetermine in every case the soundness or unsound- 
ness of a novelty at the  of its first presentation. 
Although scientific knowledge enables us to pre-locate 
the areas for new, fruitful conceptions for praice in 
such a way as to exclude obvious nonsense and evil, 
within those pre-locatable areas of fruitful new 
developments, the law does not and must not rude. 
Hence, in respe of novel ideas and praices, the law 
defines areas of toleration, which become the domain 
of corresnding individual and related liberties. 

Toleration has two proper objeives. Since the 
basis for the sitive expression of freedom by the 
individual is self-development, and not obedience, 
individual and related behavior known to be wrong 
and even tentially olerable if broadly extended, is 
tolerated within limits. The guiding princie is the 
same one appropriate to the rearing of infants, chil- 
dren and adolescents. We tolerate as much as the 
public erest can praically endure. This does not 
signify that we withhold efficient criticisms, or that 
we do not express preferences in praical ways. This 
extends to our discrimination among crimes, mis- 
demeanors, and civil offenses. 

Whereas we tolerate, concerning immature citizens 
and eng adults, to allow for imied oprtunities 
for self-development, our toleration (liberties) re- 
speing ideas and praices representing new know- 
ledge concerning forms of behavior and licy has a 
different view. Society is obliged, in its own vital in- 
terest, to discover which innovations have merit. This 







 

requires not only communication of new ideas as 
ideas, but exorations of ideas in terms of praice. 
Hence, while society tolerates negatively a certain 
amount of known sin, it tolerates sitively in those 
areas of innovative aivity, new ideas, set aside for 
the initiation and initial testing of discoveries. The 
sitive content of this aspe of toleration is exem- 
ified by the propriety of funding scientific and anal- 
ogous researches whose specific praical outcome is 
yet unknown. The indicated competence of the effort is 
the basis for defining the scope of the area of tolera- 
tion and privilege. 

The lawful definition of technological progress can- 
not be blind to the thermodynamic erpretation of 

the secular trends of human technological progress 
from the Pleistocene to date. We know, and the law 
would be morally imbecilic if it professed to evade the 
authority of such fas, that human progress depends 
un the following erdependent thermodynamical- 
ly described conditions. 

It is an established historical fa that the notion of 
an existing sperum of essential primary and related 
resources, including man-made improvements in 
nature, is determined by the mode of produive and 
related technology prevailing in each immediate 
ech of society's development. If the technological 
mode is fixed at any preestablished level, the mere 
continued existence of a society in that fixed or ap- 
proximately fixed mode must lead to a relative dee- 
tion of primary and man-made resources, leading 
toward the material and social decay of that society. 

The immediate, overall feature of human progress 
is therefore necessarily those advances in the prevail- 
ing mode of technology which, in effe, increase what 
is conventionally termed the ''reducing were" of the 
society with respe to the existing condition of nature 
as a whole. This is expressed by an increase in the 
average per capita energy flux through both pro- 
duion and household and related forms of consump- 
tion. 

This increase in what is conventionally understood 
to be the relative negentropy of a society relative to its 
preceding, lowere average technological level, in- 
creases the required rate of negentropic further 
development. 

This rate of tential increase in negentropy is ex- 
pressed in capitalist and socialist litical forms of 
industrialized development in terms of the absolute 
profit of national and global industrial and agri- 
cultural produion. 

This profitable rtion of industrial and agricultural 
produion is represented by the comparison of the 
industrial and agricultural tangible and produive- 
labor cost-inputs of produion with the mass of pro- 
du resulting, as output, from produion, on con- 



dition that the produced produ is consumed in turn 
as inputs to the same effe for new produion of at 
least the same negentropic efficiency. The balance of 
input-costs and output-produ in those terms, mea- 
sured in respe to national and global economies 
taken as a whole, is the absolute profit. 

It is the 'investment" of at least the major rtion 
of that absolute profit in the enlargement and techno- 
logical advancement of the produive process which 
transforms tential increases in negentropy o 
realized increases in negentropy. 

The indispensable negentropic results are achieved 

chiefly in two erconneed ways. The allocation of 
absolute profit, and maenance and materials costs 
to emphasize relatively more advanced, established 
technologies increases the resulting average techno- 
logical level of produion. The reenishment of the 
stock of existing more-advanced technologies by still 
more-advanced technologies, contributed through 
science and engineering, is the indispensable basis for 

the continuation and advancement of the process of 
realization of absolute profit to effe sustained tech- 
nological progress. 

This demonstrates the thermodynamical imica- 
tion of effeive new forms of scientific and engineer- 
