historiographical blunder himself. He did not re- 
cognize the fa of the American Revolution: that 
the dominant forms of the Dutch and English 
monetarist-ruled economy of Europe were already in 
their time reaionary forms representing the con- 
sequences of the counterrevolutionary viory of an 
anti-capitalist impulse over the capitalist trans- 
formations most centrally focussed in the English 
Tudors and Colbertian France. By remaining un- 
sensible of such crucial historical fas, Marx tends to 
draw a smoothed curve of the upward process of 
capitalist development through a series of s 
which in themselves represent a grave fallacy of 
comsition. 

Although Marx was corre in respe to all his 
critics and competitors concerning the systematic 
princies of capitalist produion, circulation and 
capital-in-general, he fell o fallacies of comsi- 
tion in respe of those matters which had to be un- 
derstood in terms of the aual historical process of 
capitalist development. 

For exame, if Marx had been informed of the 
litical-economic history of the fifteenth and six- 
teenth centuries, or of the aual imications of the 
fall of the English Commonwealth and Colbert, and 
had also been confronted with the principal fas of the 
American Revolution, he would have criticized the 
despicable Adam Smith from an entirely different 
stand than one reads in Marx*s Theories of 
Surus Value, and would have understood David 
Ricardo much less naively than Capital as a whole 
refles. 

The immediately relevant  demanding such 
parenthetical observation is that the charaeristics of 
the early nineteenth century British developments 
were determined from the top by the massive debt 



 

which the Barings, Rothschilds and others held over 
both England and continental Europe, and by the 
coordinate monetarist charaer of the English 
monarchy. For this reason, the economic relations 
and related social features of English development (in 
particular) during the Naleonic wars and following 
the Treaty of Vienna were not determined by any 
oppressive burdens of industrial capitalist develop- 
ment as such, but by the monstrous tax of debt service 
created outside the ernal mechanisms of industrial 
growth. 

This correlated direly with every charaeristic 
feature of continental Europe. 

Although France of  included a kernel of gifted 
thinkers in the tradition of the sixteenth century 
litiques and Colbert, those able republicans were 
blocked with the comicity of British agents such as 
Danton and Marat, from affording revolutionary 
France the kind of sound economic and related repub- 
lican licies which would have made the French 
Revolution a success on the lines of the existing model 
of the American Revolution's experience. 

This insight is aided by an honest representation of 
the relationship and included difficulties of Federalist 
Tom Paine within the French Revolution. Through the 
litical backwardness of France  relative to the 
higher cultural level of the American workingmen and 
farmers of , the illiteracy of the sansculottes and 
the cultural enfeeblement of the French peasantry  
the related repetition of the worst blunders of the 
English Commonwealth to the most extreme degree 
and the faional viory of a blundering attempt at 
inappropriate Jacobin democracy effeed the con- 
sequent emergence of diatorship. The Naleonic 
France which emerged from the chaos fomented by 
British agents and incompetent revolutionary licies 
was a mixture of capitalist republican thrusts for tech- 
nological development  Colbertism, and so forth  
combined with a tendency for the same errors which 
had defeated the English Commonwealth and had 
caused Louis XIV's undoing of the Colbert effort. 

France's foreign licy under Naleon, rather than 
fostering independent capitalist republics, rather 
than destroying bucolic obscenities  such as the 
Hapsburgs  and outlawing monarchy and 
aristocracy, created the means for its own destruion 
in the form of an effeively monetarist foreign licy, 
and an insane reallitiking approach to alliances 
with these bucolic obscenities which had to be 
destroyed if France's self-erests were to prevail 
against British monetarist licies. 

In consequence, the Hanoverian obscenity and the 
City of London prevailed over the European continent, 
turning the litical clock of history backwards in the 







 

form of the British **agent of influence/* the Holy 
Alliance. As we have noted above, this control of 
continental Europe included not only the litical and 
related military **checks and balances" of the 
^'concert of Europe," but those means, which could 
not otherwise have succeeded as long as they did, 
were regulated by the system of debts which the City 
of London imsed un st- Europe, and the 
manipulation of the debt-strapped regimes of Europe 
through, principally, Rothschild control of the 
availability of credit in respe to the various en- 
terprises of litical and economic licy. 

It was these conditions which produced the specific 
pattern of primitive accumulation in Great Britain 
and on the continent during the early nineteenth 
century. 

The tato crises of the s in Ireland and Ger- 
many are a dire refleion of that monetarist- 
diated licy, and had nothing to do with industrial- 
capitalist development as such. The British 
monetarists' primitive accumulation licy for 
Ireland, the germ-model for the *'deindustrial- 
ization" and related licies of Rockefeller's Carter 
Administration today, involved stripping Ireland of its 
relatively higher-technology form of agricultural 
produion through substituting the ensive use of 
the tato. The same licy was roduced o parts 
of Germany. Through the tato monoculture praice 
in Ireland, and similar effes in Germany, the 
natural results developed. The attempt to use a 
"natural," **lowere energy" mode of cheaper nutrition 
of the pulation through the degradation of much of 
the pulation to "tato-eaters," had inevitable 
effes un the soil and also created the forcing- 
conditions under which the tato disease exoded  
as the Rothschilds* fostering of the slave-antation 
