bourgeois stratum. A descendant of the feudal el- 
leual, the elleual in capitalist society funions 
(exists) modally as a house servant of either the state, 
the industries, finance, commerce, or the labor move- 
ment. The exemary elleual institutions, the uni- 
versities and research foundations, typify that '*house 

servant*' status. 

The contrasting great tential of the elleual  
unlike the ordinary petit-bourgeois  is that, at best, 
his circumstances and requirements of training oblige 
him properly to tend to develop an overview of society 
in its totality, both in extent and historically. Occas- 
ionally, in exercising such qualifications, he or she 
may rise to sitions of great executive were or 
related influence in industry, government or other 
institutions, and may otherwise develop a praical 
independent basis for personal identity in scientific 
work. Historically, as with the elleuals who creat- 
ed the American Revolution and established the 
Constitution and republic, the essential erdepen- 
dency between science and praical litical-economic 
affairs are blended o a praical expression of their 
proper commonality, as the epistemological outlook of 
humanism. 

Without such praical qualifications, the petit- 
bourgeois qualities of Uriah-Heepish house servants of 
patrons and emoyers predominate. Without exper- 
iencing scientific development in ideas and praice, 
the petit-bourgeois exists under the most contemptible 
of psycho-social circumstances, relative to the skilled 
worker, technology-proud farmer, or industrialist. 



 

Short of outright fascism, Old Vienna epitomizes the 
worst of all ssible moral influences for elleual 
life. The prevailing Hapsburg culture embodied in the 
extreme: antipathy to Progress; ground-rent-deter- 
mined forms of reduionism in respe of litical 
and social relations; rabid cultural relativism; and 
the infantile fantasy-life outlook lawfully refleed in 
the banality of Viennese Operettas, There was no be- 
lief in universal law, but only degenerate-Aristotelian 
habits, habits themselves in aggravated moral decay. 
With the eruption of **energeticism,'* science was 
being turned o an immoral parody of itself. Musi- 
cians struggled to perpetuate a culture without the 
moral outlook indispensable either to fruitful original 
comsition, or even a competent performer's insight 
o existing musical comsitions from a more fruit- 
ful past. As Boltzmann, Schrodinger, and the musicol- 
ogist Schenker epitomize, as the abortive efforts of 
Gustav Mahler and Sigmund Freud epitomize, the 
people of Vienna were not yet uniformly morally dead 
overall, but the advanced decay of a culture that had 
lost all purse for existing was sweeping over the 
majority like a moral bubonic epidemic. 

In the effort to rationalize this stink of the moral 
graveyard o Voltaire-Candide's '*best of all ssible 
worlds," decayed British-Viennese nominalism per- 
formed the a of reaion formation which pro- 
nounced moral imbecility a virtue, and thus estab- 
lished logical sitivism and its cognates as a dorine 

of philosophical fascism. 

It was the effluvia of this rotting elleual culture 
of Old Vienna which the Rockefellers transanted, 
one nesting pair of Vienna and Vienna-oriented 
emigres o each crucially situated university in the 
United States, there to a like cholera cultures, to 
spread their specific forms of philosophical fascism 
o every branch of liberal arts and even o the 
physical sciences themselves. This elleual pus 
from Old Vienna, abetted by similar moral refuse 
from the pre- Rothschild-founded and Rockefeller- 
funded Frankfurt School of Karl Korsch circles, is 
presently the hegemonic current throughout academ- 
ic and other institutionalized aspes of the liberal arts 
professions in the United States, 

It is through the sitive infeion with this vile doc- 
trine and its derivatives that an increasing prortion 
of our nation's professionals, and the liberals they in- 
fluence, have been transformed o shock-troops for 
fascist ideologies throughout the res of our leading 
institutions. 



P^OF-T(o)(Q)llOT. OEM© E^iD©i 




Benjamin Franklin, the founder of our country. 



P^OF-T(o)(Q)llOT. OEM© E^^ 



THE NEW 
FEDERALIST 
FOREIGN POLICY 







 

At the outset of this licy analysis, we emoyed 
the Lippmann - U.S. Foreign Policy 
and U.S. War Aims as a most appropriate axis of 

reference for examining the imication of the Atlanti- 
cist Dorine, and for identifying the fraud un which 
the enunciation and rationalization of that dorine 
have been necessarily premised throughout the pre- 
sent century since the reign of Colonel House and his 
mouthpiece Woodrow Wilson. 

We illustrated, in terms of the strongest praical 
relevance, the fa that the  has been reached at 
which it is no longer permissible to regard the Atlanti- 
cist Dorine merely as a grave error. The Atlanticist 
Dorine is, as we have demonstrated, the imsition 
of the special erest of a relatively tiny cabal of low- 
er Manhattan-centered financier erests un our 
nation, an imsition contrary to our nation's most 
vital erests, and which is in treasonous subversion 
of the constitutional princies un which our repub- 
lic was founded. 

Yet, despite that wicked subversion of our vital in- 
terests and institutions, it might have appeared in ear- 
lier times that we could have tolerated this usurpation 
as England so long tolerated the similar subversion of 
its institutions from the - period onwards. 

