streamlining and reorienting of tax and other fiscal 
aspes of government to create an economic environ- 
ment in which the desired shifts toward a high-produc- 
tivity, higher-technology economy will automatically 
occur through natural processes principally within the 
private seor. 

The slogan expressing the economic licy of gov- 
ernment must be** Let *s get it built! Built right  and 
newere, and more, and better." Not more with our 
backs, but more with our brains. 

The means for generating this rapid industrial ex- 
pansion will be a massive increase in high-technology 
exrts. These exrts, insofar as they are direed in 
large part toward the developing seor, will involve 
very low-erest long-term (ten-to-twenty-five year) 
loans through the mechanisms of the National Bank 
and the International Development Bank. By dis- 
counting these loans through the International Deve- 
lopment Bank we shall obtain the credits through 
which to purchase needed increased primary mater- 
ials from the developing seor and obtain imrts 
from OECD and CMEA countries. However, the net 
long-term credit extended to the developing seor 
must come from a rtion of our own national absolute 
profit. This must be above the rtion of our absolute 
profit required for expanding and technologically im- 
proving our domestic produive capacities. There- 
fore, we must proceed rapidly to levels significantly 
above present produive capacities. 

We must effe early and then persisting rates of im- 
provement in the modal real incomes and leisure of 



 

our pulation. That added wealth must come from 
putting the unemoyed and misemoyed o produc- 
tive jobs, and otherwise from capital expansion and 
improvements utilizing new technologies. 

Three comnents of national tangible output must 
increase each year: () The modal level of real in- 
comes and leisure of. the pulation, () The rate of 
capital investment in our industry and agriculture, 
and () The rate of high-technology exrts. These 
gains must come not through ensifying the physical 
labor of our workforce, but through increasing the 
ratio of produively emoyed adults and through 
rapid increases in technological advancement. 

The centerpiece of this program of technological 
progress will be science and energy licies. For the 
short to ermediate term, the emphasis will be on 

high-energy forms of combustion of coal (including 
steel produion) and rapid expansion of fission were 
programs. For the period beginning approximately 
the middle s, we must begin the transition to fu- 
sion energy as the world's new basic energy source, 
while continuing with fission programs. This shift in- 
volves much more than a new energy source. The de- 
rivations of asma physics research associated with 
developing fusion energy sources will produce a quali- 
tative transformation in produive technologies, of a 
type we may broadly term high-energy produion 
methods. Once we have begun that transition, which 
we proje as a matter of licy for the middle s, 
all the various environmental and other threats now 
confronting us for the end of this century with old, 
stagnating technology, will, in princie, forever dis- 
appear. 

The program of high-technology inputs o the 

I- 

industrial and agricultural development of the so- 
called developing nations has the proper overall objec- 
tive: to establish the preconditions required within 
that seor for a worldwide "takeoff" o a new 
technological revolution, an emergence which shall 
begin on a smaller scale during the - period. 
That is the task and the joy of living we give to our- 
selves, the gift we bequeath to our sterity. 

The overall basis for the shaping of the nation's 
foreign licy is the development and funioning of 
the prosed International Development Bank (IDB). 
In this matter, the United States must have a clear 
and * 'hard-nosed*' licy: The IDB will not issue 
grants or credit for the funding of waste and swindles. 
Our nation, once painfully ridding itself of the 
bankrupt institutions and habits of a monetarists' 
domestic and ernational financial order, will not 
promote or tolerate the erosive insinuations of the 
beginning of the same old crap all over again in some 
new form. 

Our domestic and foreign licy are mutually con- 



P^OF-T(o)(Q)llOT. OEM© E^^ 






: .'fa : 







:...-s:-.:-:'"r- 





 







IS- .:: 









 . . ." 




