assassination, while the Baring-Rothschild-controlled 
national leadership of the Democratic Party from  
through   from Martin van Buren's loutish 
Andrew Jackson to August Belmont*s  presiden- 
tial candidate McClellan  had a contrary (pro- 
London) domestic and foreign licy. 

In effe, from  through , excepting the 
French affair, Great Britain was continuously the 
principal adversary of the most fundamental national 
erests and very existence of the United States. The 
expression of that fa as foreign licy under Fed- 
eralist, Whig, and Republican leadership up to  
was the effort to avoid war with this wereful ad- 
versary, Great Britain, hy every acceptable litical 
means. Within the balance of means available, this 
foreign licy in detail meant uneasant concessions 
to British demands and erests up to the  that 
forceful resistance was unavoidable. 

The - struggle of the United States against 
its principal adversary, Great Britain, centered 
around two s. The first, the most speacular, 
was the British (Rothschild) forcing of a reaivation 
of black slave traffic o the United States, and 
British operations, conduited chiefly through New 
York City and New Orleans (e.g., Belmont and Slidell) 
to build up the system of black antation slavery. The 
second, underlined by the naked treason of Andrew 
Jackson's Presidency, was to destroy the tech- 
nological progress of U.S. industry, to wreck the 
United States' national institutions of credit essential 
to the promotion of industrial progress, and to degrade 
the U.S. o conformity with the reaionary North 
American licy enunciated by the vile Adam Smith in 
his wretched Wealth of Nations, Through British con- 
trol of the national Democratic Party  especially 
during the - period, not only were these wreck- 
ing and treason licies significantly effeive on 
balance, but under puppet-Presidents of Rothschild 
Democratic Party kingmaker August Belmont, the 
U.S. government itself was the instrument, during the 
Buchanan administration, for the treasonous work of 
preparing the secession of the Rothschild-influenced 
Confederacy. 

After , the British government finally  eighty 
years after the Treaty of Paris  acknowledged in 
fa the sovereignty and egrity of the United States 
as a nation. In typically Rothschild fashion, the City of 
London financiers did not contribute pioneering 
venture capital to United States st- develop- 
ment, but they did ur mass amounts of capital in- 
vestment o established industrial technologies, 
especially those secured by the wealth and credit of 
the United States government. 







 

The effes of this new British licy toward the 
United States were decisively shaped by the Roth- 
schilds* assassination of Abraham Lincoln, 

Lincoln, a Whig of the Carey persuasion in economic 
licy, was determined to use the viory to transform 
the defeated South, in effe, o conformity with the 
mode of technological development emerging in the 
North and West. Lincoln had an economic develop- 
ment reconstruion licy for the st-bellum 
southern states. New York City's bankers, controlling 
the Democratic Party and with a major foothold in the 
leadership of the Republican Party, had a licy of 
looting the southern statel. The licy difference was 
settled  with the aid of a series of crucial aions by 
New York City-linked Secretary of War Stanton  by 
Lincoln's assassination, and pinned down by the 
**Watergating" of Lincoln's successor. 

The carpetbagging licy won, and by  many of 
the sitive features of Reconstruion were undone, 
to be cometely undone by the Democratic Party^s 
Jim Crow licies of the s and first decades of this 
century. The southern states did not begin to ap- 
preciably recover from British-instigated and New 
York City financier-instigated backwardness and loot- 
ing until the recent stwar period and the emergence 
of the ^'runaway shop." The role of British finance 
under the litically credulous Grant and his im- 
mediate successors prevented Lincoln's revival of 
Federalist licies from being firmly reestablished. 
Around the influx of British finance, New York and 
other centers produced new monetarist-oriented 
financial weres in imitation of the City of London. 

Despite growing monetarist hegemonies of the 
London-allied financial houses, the Federalist-Whig- 
Republican current expressed by Lincoln fought on 
stubbornly under conditions of our great agricultural 
and industrial development leading up to the turn of 
the century and slightly beyond. As Lippmann knew, 
but declined to rert, the "Whig" impulse for a U.S. 
war with Great Britain did not ebb away until the 
middle of the s, although by that time the impulse 
itself had assumed forms which would have been alien 
to the British-adversary perceptions of the Federalists 
and would have disgusted Lincoln. 

That is the setting in which the **Monroe Dorine" 
was adopted, at the instigation of a menacing Great 
Britain, at the  of the United States' greatest stra- 
tegic vulnerability since . It was at a  when 
Britain had almost conquered the world by the Treaty 
of Vienna and the banking arrangements involved. 
The United States could no longer maneuver between 
Britain and France, and had no strategic alternatives 
of that sort present or in immediate view. Adams' 
view of the dismal affair of the "Monroe Dorine" 
properly reminds one of Lenin's insistence that the 



Soviet republic would have to capitulate to the Ger- 
mans' Brest-Litovsk peace terms  giving Ger- 
many virtually everything but Great Russia  
stipulated under the hideous "Parvus Plan." Who 
would then say that Lenin prosed to make the 
"Parvus Plan" a Soviet foreign licy convention? 
The legal standing of the  "Monroe Dorine" has 
the same sort of disqualification. 

Now, return our attention to Lippmann's coma 
about the lack of a consistent U.S. foreign licy dur- 
ing the - period. As we have already indicated, 
the truth of the matter, direly contrary to Lipp- 
mann, is not that the U.S. lacked a foreign licy, but 
that it was divided by what were ultimately irrecon- 
cilable differences over foreign licy. Nor was this 
merely a foreign licy matter; the differences 
concerning foreign licy were inseparable from 
equally irreconcilable differences concerning domes- 
tic licy. Although the form had been much distorted 
by st- developments, the root of the confli on 
both domestic and foreign licies was rooted in the 
same differences which separated Americans and 
