illustrated by the case of a failed dorine known as 
**information theory.*' Overview of this bankrupt 
dorine and its derivatives s toward the rigorous 
apparatus of formal analysis appropriate to under- 
standing the profound distinions among the three 
epistemological currents, and hence to establish a 
rigorous analysis of that nominalist outlook which is 
the essential feature of Atlanticism*s core ideology 
today. 

The dorine known as information theory 
developed ostensibly as an effort to reduce to systems 
of linear equations the processes of negative feedback 
used in control devices in military and other tech- 
nological apications typified in the form of self- 
correing aiming-control. The mathematical ap- 
proach was essentially standard on princie since the 
work of Gauss and Fourier during the early nineteenth 
century. Provided a non-linear funion, even of some 
comexity, is pre-defined, it is in princie feasible, 
by curve-fitting methods, using systems of linear 
equations, to approximate any ordinary sort of non- 
linear funion to as fine a degree of approximation as 
considerations of cost and other effort permit. From 
this Weaver and Shannon, leaning heavily on the work 
of those such as MIT's Norbert Wiener, abstraed a 
linearized dorine of information theory. 

Norbert Wiener, during the same immediate period, 
published a now-famous work, first abroad and then in 
the U.S., Cybernetics. This kernel was ermeshed 
with the reduionist methods known as * 'operations 
research," first tentatively developed during the 
period of World War I and extended considerably by 
first the British and then U.S. teams during World War 
II. Collaboration between the twentieth century's 
most rabid well-known sitivist, John Von Neumann, 
and Vienna-School economist Oskar Morgenstern, 
produced during the same approximate period the 
notorious Theory of Games and Economic Behavior. 
Out of such various ingredients, all soon centering for 
praice around the dorine of information theory, 
the stwar Atlanticist Utopians' dorine of 
^'systems analysis" was evolved. 

Relative to processes which conform epistemo- 
logically to the *'curve-fitting" apications of Gauss, 
Fourier, et aL, systems analysis works. Relative to 



 

either, notably, human behavior (except of special 
psychotic varieties), or to negentropic non-linear 
asma processes and related subje-matters, the 
methods of systems analysis are inherently bankrupt. 
The root of the inherent bankruptcy of the apication 
of ''systems analysis" to charaeristically non-linear 
processes is rooted in the rabid metaphysical ab- 
surdity of information theory itself. 

Through methods first defined chiefly through the 
work of Karl Weierstrass and Georg Cantor, it is 
ssible to reduce any system of linear equations to a 
system of denumerations, such that the location of any 
element in a "universe" determined by such sets of 
equations can be uniquely "mapped" by treating 
arrays of numbers and the sequences within such 
arrays as "mapping codes." Insofar as the elements 
and occurrences within a "domain" analyzed are 
inclusively determinable by an appropriate set of 
linear equations, the mapping-system developed can 
establish a corresndence between every ssible 
such element and occurrence and configurations of 
the coding sytem. No matter how elaborate the 
mapping system so developed, the basic epistemo- 
logical princies remain the same, and no amount of 
added sophistication or comexity within the map- 
ping system can exceed those "hereditary" epistemo- 
logical limits. 

Information theory attempted to extend this 
capability beyond its original praical basis in 
hydraulic and eleronic networks, to reduce human 
communication to the same regime. This effort was 
not predominantly the crankish inspiration of some 
few reckless eleronics specialists, but represented 
an attempt to further a proje, now commonly known 
as "linguistics," by Bertrand Russell, Karl Korsch, 
Kurt Lewin, Rudolf Carnap and others, notably during 
the s. () 

Linguistics, whose computer simulation not ac- 
cidentally corresnds only to special types of schizo- 
phrenic behavior in aual human beings (), is the 
abstraed feature of systems analysis in its at- 
tempted dire apication to human communications. 
Hence, scrutiny of the embedded fundamental 



. This Russeli-Korsch linguistics proje was nested at a number of 
thus-isoned American universities, including the Cambridge, 
Mass., area, where Korsch was principally based during that period, 
and around the University of Pennsylvania. (If Benjamin Franklin 
had lived to see Bertrand Russell and Russell's proje lluting the 
University of Pennsylvania  which Franklin founded  old Ben 
would have vomited, or, better, taken prompt remedial aion.) It is 
notable that one of the Rand Corration's associated systems 
analysts, Noam Chomsky, of linguistics and the "Pentagon Papers'* 
Nixon-destabilization-hoax notorieties, was educated in linguistics at 
the University of Pennsylvania, and is a rabidly Korschite, neo- 
Fabian MIT professor and litical elligence operative, based in 
the Cambridge, Mass. area. 

. R. Gallagher, "Artificial Intelligence," The Campaigner, Vol. 
VIII, No.  (July ) , pp. -. 







 

epistemological absurdities of linguistics exses the 
pervasive fallacies embedded in the entire Rand 
Corration and related institutions* **systems- 
analysis" approach to Questions of U.S. strategic 
sture and other topics involving human and other 
negentropic subje-matters. () 

Contrary to '^systems analysis/* the effe of tech- 
nological innovations on the development of societies 
is to transform those societies in a manner analogous 
to the kinds of concepts associated with the emergence 
of negentropic non-linear phenomena in asma 
regimes. () 

The process of social evolution  technological 
progress  readily admits of a rigorously descriptive 
thermodynamical erpretation, such that progress 
is coherently described as negentropy, an increasing 
per capita '^reducing were'* of society relative to the 
universe around it, with a necessary concomitant of 
rising energy flux per capita in both produion and 
consumption. Hence, the inventions which are the 
basis for this progress represent the crucial content of 
