
emphasis under the terms made ssible by a new 
monetary system. However, there is a stratum within 
the Soviet leadership which foolishly views this same 
remedy in a way direly opsite to the analysis and 
prosals made by this writer. 

Oblomov denies reality  because Oblomov, a 
Russian kulak in his sociological heart, is Oblomov. 
Oblomov says: "Forget all these litical-economic 
realities of the outside world  which, since I do not 
choose to understand them, cannot be of much prai- 
cal imrtance for Great Mother Russia's ernal af- 
fairs." Oblomov insists: "We must ignore such mat- 
ters  which are above my head  to the extent s- 
sible. Great Mother Russia must deal with the agricul- 
tural problem as a purely ernal matter." It is essen- 
tial to smell the stink of the kulak mentality in this, to 
thus comprehend how deey this streak of narrow, 
heteronomic kulak "shrewdness" penetrates o cer- 
tain Soviet strata. 

How, then, does "shrewd," fantasy-ridden Oblo- 
mov see the problem of the projeed Soviet an? 

Kulak-Oblomov sees the agricultural problem as a 
matter of competition against the Soviet industrial de- 
velopment programs. Since Soviet industrial develop- 
ment has been enslaved not only to military impera- 







lives, but also the associated economic-strategic cir- 
cumstances of Soviet life, it is these two aspes of 
Soviet development which Oblomov sees as his fac- 
tional obstacles within Great Mother Russia. These 
military programs and the stress un technological 
progress of industry are what shrewd," stubborn, 
foolish, heteronomic Oblomov views  oh, so kulak- 
shrewdly!  as his faional problems. 

Oblomov is all the more deey embittered by the 
comas which the military and industrial forces 
say  most uncharitably  concerning the admini- 
stration of the agricultural seor. 

The industrialist  of view says : * 'What good is it 
to simy increase your allocation under the an? We 
agree with the objeives and the imperatives; there 
is no issue on that part of the matter. It is your bun- 
gling litical maladministration of the problem to 
which we obje. You have made your incompetence a 
bottomless sinkhole o which we ur tens of billions 
of rubles  and what do we get? 

**We give you traors. We have spent billions devel- 
oping traors with the same technology we use for 
Soviet tanks, which tanks are the best in the world. 
What then is the fate of these traors, once we deliver 
them to you? It is the same thing with everything else. 

'*Do not instru us that the peasant is stubborn. We 
know the Soviet peasant better than you do; from 
where do you imagine that Soviet industry recruited 
its labor force  perhaps from the pages of Das Kapi- 
taI 

**And what do you do? How do you attempt to induce 
the peasant to improve his produion on the state 
farms? You turn him o a NEPman! You transform 
the cooperatives and colleive farms o a grotesque 
parody of feudalism  you dire the peasant to work 
so many hours on the colleive's **estate," and so re- 
tain so many hours for his own, private, NEPman's 
patch. Is the traor maained then? No, our pea- 
sants, who you in your idiocy have turned back o a 
caricature of feudal agricultural relations, flee from 
the state seor as quickly as ssible, to save their 
time and energy for their little serfs* patches. What do 
you know of socialist produion? You have not yet 
reached the level of capitalist produion ! " 

The military skesman echoes this! '*The same 
peasant who can not maain a traor under your di- 
reion is an excellent tank operator and maenance 
specialist, and does many similar duties very well in 
the Red Army." 

Oblomov seethes with bitterness. He is enraged, not 
because such justified insults are often said publicly, 
but because he knows that the industrialist and mili- 
tary skesmen are thinking such cruel things. 

Oblomov is a Bukharinite. Not necessarily, in the 
main, because he is a conscious descendant of the 



 

- Bukharin-Tomsky-Rykov faion, but be- 
cause his sociological outlook makes him a spiritual 
heir to that tradition. 

This is relevant to that fa that Soviet ''hard-li- 
ners" are self-identified as Stalinists, The thematic 
key to that self-identification is the Stalin-Bukharin 
sit over the First Five Year Plan. Sociologically, 
from a ''Western" stand, Stalinism is viewed 
mainly in terms of the hystasized resultant of the in- 
termixture of confliing sociological tendencies with- 
in the Soviet leadership as a whole. Throughout the 
shifting patterns of correlations of social tendencies 
within the Soviet leadership, what the foreign obser- 
ver tends to see is not the process, but its expression in 
the shifting patterns of a kind of overall Soviet "bi-par- 
tisan foreign licy." To the shallow-thinking obser- 
ver of the "Western" world, the significance of today's 
Stalinism is locatable in the Stalin-Trotsky fight. To 
understand the reality of the matter from the inside of 
the Soviet Union, one must see the issue in terms of the 
underlying fight between E. Preobrazhensky and N. 
Bukharin. The methodological blunder we are exs- 
ing in this conneion is the blunder of taking a deter- 
mined phenomenon as if it were a distin thing-in-it- 
self, and making the result an attributed consequence 
of a corresnding, fiive homogeneous causal im- 
pulse. 

It is that duality within Soviet leadership which has 
determined to date the lawful recurrence of patterns. 
In this respe, the Bukharinite - period's 
succession by the ferocity of colleivization, and the 
succession of wishful confidence (that Hitler was not 
yet ready to attack) by the - launching of the 
Red Army's juggernaut counteroffensive, typify the 
same pattern which lawfully operates today. It is the 
wishful stupidity of the overconfident Atlanticists, 
who imagine that David Rockefeller and Richard 
Barnet have the Soviet Politburo permanently by the 
nose, that will inevitably repeat the old pattern as 

World War III. 

Oblomov's essential charaeristic is to attempt to 
deny the existence of erconneions between Mother 
