feudalism. 

Materially, the number of religious holidays 
specified for the serf (in particular), and the increase 
in the number of the canonical holidays refles at one 
phase of feudalism a growing tendency for leisure, 
and cultural development within successful feudal 
orders. Crucial to this is the fa that those holidays 
principally were religious celebrations. It was only 
through the Catholic religion that feudal man essen- 
tially distinguished himself in social praice from 
mere beasts. This Catholic order was also humanist in 
stipulating and, according to law, supervising the 
obligation of the feudal order to the serf, as well as 
other aspes of rights and obligations within the 
feudal order as a whole. 

Hence, the spread of the Catholic religion to the 
heathen barbarians was in that respe a magnificent 
(in effe) litical and moral revolution in the affairs 
of heathen Europe. It created, imperfely in praice, 
that universal order of perceived natural law which 
was essential to preserving the very humanity which 
feudal forms of social praice otherwise denied. 

Hence, lest some nitwit in the tradition of 
revisionists Thurman Arnold or William A. Willams 
should arise to llute the public consciousness with 
the allegation that Catholicism was merely a folklore, 
a mythology, we must emphasize that feudal Catho- 
licism was a genuine system of universal law, rooted 
in a corresnding body of social praice, and 
eminentally praical and necessary in the most vital 
erests of humanity under those feudal conditions in 
which it developed. Moreover, although it was 
relatively anti-humanist on account of the basic mode 
of social praice, the basic constitution of the social 
order to which it was allied, and which it condoned and 
perpetuated, it was humanist in respe to maain- 
ing the conscience of the individual above that of a 







mere beast  in the religious side of feudal praice  
and through Catholicism's role in imsing the rights 
and obligations of a human identity within the praice 
of feudal social relations. 

The old feudal Catholicism failed because the social 
order to which it had egrated itself failed, and a new 
Catholicism persisted, through a neo-antonic 
humanist transformation effeed most emphatically 
within the ranks of the regular clergy and associated 
institutions of feudal elleual life. Thomas Aquinas 
has the double role in this process of being at once the 
rationalizer of the feudal Inquisition and also the most 
thorough articulator of those rationalist premises 
through whose correion Catholicism developed a 
humanism adapted to the social praice of emerging 
capitalist society. 

That is not merely an historical fa respeing 
Catholicism itself, but is crucial to European culture 
as a whole. 

For lawful reasons, the development of the neo-a- 
tonic humanist notion of universal natural law defined 
itself by adducing the epistemological charaeristics 
of the feudal Catholic law and social praice, and by 

stating Catholic universal law in that form, made a 
deliberate and fundamental epistemological revo- 
lution in the axiomatic premises of that law, to ar- 
rive at a new body of universal natural law. That is 
not merely a formal description of the elleual 
process as such, but is an historical fa of the prac- 
tical way in which Tudor England willfully initiated 
capitalist industrial development and industrial-cap- 
italist national economy. The neo-atonic humanist 
conceptions of the Erasmians associated with Thomas 
More were the knowledge, transformed o the im- 
pulses of willful praice through, most prominently, 
the instrument of those circles, which deliberately 
prescribed and instituted in praice the conceptions 
un which the Tudor institutions of industrial-capita- 
list development were premised. 

The failure of feudalism was lawful. The lawful 
failure of feudalism begged recognition of the funda- 
mental, axiomatic fallacy of the notions of universal 
natural law embedded within the ideal of feudal 
praice. 

The descriptive, approximately-defined basis for 
the collapse of feudalism is a princie which has ruled 
human existence praically since our species first 
crawled significantly above baboon-like modes of 

I 

existence of Pleistocene man. Once man ascends, 
through advancement of his deliberate were over 
nature, above the condition in which he appeared as 
but another form of animal life, man's continued exis- 
tence on the basis of so-called "natural ecology** 
ceases to be ssible. Lifting himself above the con- 
dition of beasts, he can no longer survive as a species 
by depending, as beasts do, un so-called **natural 



 

ecological" relations. Man's existence then fatefuUy 
depends un man-made conditions, un sitively 
transforming the ecology in conformity with the 
requirements of his continued existence. () 

Since the ecology man encounters at each  in 
his existence involves an essential relationship to geo- 
physical and other ecological conditions which by 
themselves afford only the preconditions for the exis- 
tence of lowere beasts, man mistakenly appears thus to 
be in desperate confli with his environment. 

This problem takes the essential form of the relative 
finiteness of what each mode of human technology de- 
fines as primary resources, Man must supersede 
these technological limitations, or the attempt to 
maain human existence at some fixed level of tech- 
nological progress must lead to exhaustion of 
relatively-finite primary resources, and the genocidal 
collapse of society through the exhaustion of the essen- 
tial conditions for maaining mankind in that fixed 
mode. 

As we have stipulated above, this technological 
progress takes the form of a negentropic progress in 
man's (descriptively) thermodynamic relationship to 
nature, for which the aive source of such technologi- 
cal advances is that creative (synthesizing) mental 
aivity associated with the discovery, transmission, 
assimilation, and transference to impulses of willful 
social praice of those discoveries which conform to 
increasing comprehension of the universal lawful 
ordering of that material universe which we must 
