praical perfeion of a supra-historical spirit of 
purely abstra law, represent successive societies 



 

which are separated from one another by sweeping 
revolutions respeing precisely the most funda- 
mental ordering princies of constitutional and 
subsumed law. 

Roman and feudal law have fundamentally different 
generative axiomatic premises in the law as a whole. 
The thirteenth century Edwardian reforms represent 
a breaking , separating the generative princies 
of preceding feudal from those of subsequent 
medieval law. Tudor law represents, similarly, an 
axiomatic break with the most essential features of 
pre-Tudor law. Although the generative law em- 
bedded in the American Revolution is most 
significantly rooted in Tudor and Commonwealth 
legal revolutions before it, the reason for the 
American revolution was that the st- degenera- 
tion of English law in its axiomatic features had pro- 
duced an irreconcilable separation between the funda- 
mental generative conceptions of law between the 
separating litical bodies. 

There is of course a different sort of genuine con- 
tinuity in law than is recklessly prosed by radical 
scholastics and revisionists. The most efficient 
method of accounting for this is provided by our 
conception of the causality bridging successive geo- 
metries. A revolution in respe of the '^axiomatic" or 
charaeristic ordering princies of social praice 
does not abruptly dissolve the old world and create an- 
other de novo. It rather seizes un the salvageable 
and useful institutions of the old order as it, in a 
parallel, if epistemologically dissimilar fashion, 
appropriates the material domain it has inherited 
from the old. 

Karl Marx's classical analysis of this fa respe- 
ing his professional background as German door of 
law is his treatment of the effes of the transforma- 
tion from feudal to capitalist law on estates which 
continued a feudal form of local relationships within 
the context of a capitalist ordering of law. The ro- 
duion of the princie of alienable property, pro- 
hibited in that form by feudal law, broke asunder the 
rights of the serf with respe to the obligations of the 
lord, and transformed both the praical and legal 
relationship of the estate itself to the society as a 
whole. During the process from the early medieval 
roduion of the proto-capitalist princie of 
alienable property forms, to the recent obliteration of 
all notable feudal relics but the transformed vestige of 
**rent," at each  feudal vestiges of law have 
existed in statute and custom, but the constitutional 
princie governing the settlement of conflis be- 
tween capitalist and feudal erests has determined 
the capitalist erest (predominantly) as the ordering 
princie governing the evolution of the law in general. 

Under feudal law, the governances of the relations 
of produion and persons were comementary, and 







 

essentially concentrated, within the relative autarky 
of the estate. The estate was bound to regularly 
deliver a fixed rtion of its produ as detailed to the 
overlord, and to supy from the estate's surus pro- 
duion military and other services. With the ro- 
duion of lawful usury, and an increased demand of 
the estates for commodities produced outside the 
estate, notably for military technology, and the in- 
creased dependence un permanent bodies of hired 
armed men, the maenance of the estates depended 
increasingly un funding enterprises through debts 
to bankers. Although this had been endemic under 
feudalism, including Charlemagne's institutionalized 
use of the Jews for this funion, the process of ex- 
pulsion of the privileged Jewish usurers in behalf of 
the Lombard bankers charaerizes the breaking 
 at which the egrity of feudal law was qualita- 
tively overthown. The dependency un financing 
of feudal debts to Lombard bankers and similar 
finances, transformed the ordering princie of the 
economy of the feudal estate from a fixed system of 
the feudal type o an estate governed by the prin- 
cie of profit, profit in the disguise of (principally) 
military enterprises and the debt service obligations 
aced un the estate by such praices. 

This was the general circumstance in which the 
heteronomic phenomenon of the Bardi and Peruzzi 
occurred. 

Restriing our view of feudalism to those 
charaeristic features which are generative both 
with respe to its breakdown-crisis and the con- 
trasting circumstances of capitalist development, the 
significant s are summarily these. The feudal 
social surus produ was charaeristically em- 
bodied in the role of a surus pulation of estates in 
military and associated enterprises establishing new 
estates. 

This was not a tentiality of the feudal system, but 
its driving charaeristic. The technology of feudal 
produion essential to maaining that system, to 
maaining feudal estates, was a mode of produion 
which produced and required a charaeristic surus 
produ for its continuance even on a relatively fixed 
scale. This surus produ was embodied signifi- 
cantly in an enlarged feudal pulation. 

Economically, an eighth century "Club of Rome** 
would have prescribed, the way to avoid growth of the 
feudal system would have been to keep the feudal 
pulation at a fixed level by eating up the surus 
rtion as meat. The feudal system was not only an 
economic system, but a form of human society  
which could not tolerate such inhuman praices or 
their equivalent within Christendom without first pro- 
scribing the viim as a heretic or other * 'felonious" 
lawbreaker. 



The fixed range of rates of technological advance- 
ment allowed within feudalism, combined with the 
relatively finite external and ernal boundaries for 
expansion of the European feudal system represented 
historical boundaries which, when closely ap- 
proached, inevitably precipitated a breakdown of 
feudal society itself. The Crusades were the form of 
this breakdown. Although the puerile, romantic litera- 
ture and aneotes covering that period emphasize 
the Palestine Question, the Crusades, as an institution, 
represented the degeneration of the feudal process of 
expansion o an orgy of economic cannibalism and 
