




 

hensive form it could then be fruitfully attacked by his 
notable successors. 

The central, and for present purses also most 
relevant feature of Kant's Critiques is that he acknow- 
ledged the formal existence of a continuous princie 
of creative (synthetic) were in man, in human be- 
havior, as charaeristic of human behavior. This was 
his stroke of genius relative to that time, the crux of 
his entire refutation of the British nominalist degen- 
eracy typified by Hume. Furthermore, Kant formally 
acknowledged the role of this charaeristic feature of 
human thought as an efficient cause in the real uni- 
verse, through the instrument of informed impulses 
for willful praice. 

However, this central fa, which properly led to the 
formal repudiation of the entire Euclidean-Aristotel- 
ian system, was then arbitrarily confined within the 
general Aristotelian-Euclidean epistemological basis 
with aid of two comementary ruses. First, Kant 
fitted the creative princie o the system he was 
attempting to repair and save by locating the origin of 
the creative (synthetic) princie as an additional a 
priori quality of the Aristotelian-Euclidean basis. 
Second, he attempted to save the notion of Aris- 
totelian-Euclidean determinism ultimately by a re- 
direing of the same ruse emoyed in the late fif- 
teenth century Marsilio Ficino's Five Questions, 

Acknowledging that the efficiency of creative 
knowledge for praice invalidated axiomatically the 
Aristotelian-Euclidean ontology, Kant created the 
empty constru of an unknowable thing-in-itself as 
the ultimate reality underlying the relatively false, 
knowable, phenomenal thing. Thus, he saved the 
Aristotelian-Euclidean system in respe to the 
knowable. Then, on the basis of this metaphysical 
trick  albeit an epistemologically rigorous trick of 
almost unprecedented elleual force  Kant 
proved, formally by means of the stulated unknow- 
able domain of the thing-in-itself, a constant state of 
non-aesthetic space-time, in which unknowable in- 
finity, the universalizing ultimate imications of effi- 
cient creative praice were resolved, in an incompre- 
hensible state which must be conceived of aestheti- 
cally as comparable to a state of the universe as if at 
rest. 

The first major elle to attempt to solve this 
fallacy of Kant direly with respe to physics as such 
was Riemann. Riemann makes this exicit through 
his purrtedly *' metaphysical commentaries** on the 
Kantian Herbart. It is traditional among commen- 
tators on Riemann to pretend they are unfamiliar with 
those **metaphysical commentaries*' or to pretend 
that such material has no dire relevance for Rie- 
mann*s * 'other work" as a mathematical physicist. 
However, as a rigorous consideration of the notion of a 



self-expanding n-dimensional manifold requires, es- 
pecially with the aid of light retrospeively con- 
tributed by Cantor, these **metaphysicar* gropings of 
Riemann's are coherent with and key to the under- 
pinnings of the greatest single physicist's discovery of 
the past two centuries. 

The Sunday-supement representation of so-called 
non-Euclidean geometries centers around a dis- 
cussion of the * 'parallel axiom" and hereditary 
features of the Euclidean system, and compares 
Gauss, Lobachevski, Bolyai, and Riemann from that 
stand. If such discussion is ended to imy that 
a relativistic physics involves a non-Euclidean geo- 
metry in that sense, then the discussion is nonsensical. 
Any non-Euclidean geometry based un such sime, 
formal alterations of the axiomatic premises of 
Euclidean geometry caes forward all the **heredi- 
tary" defes which prevent the Euclidean system it- 
self from providing the conceptual-formal basis for a 
truly relativistic physics, or from successfully 
delineating the charaeristics of the geometry of an 
aual Riemannian relativistic physics. 

It makes no difference that the formal problem so 

sed has not yet been exicitely solved, but only 
imicitly solved. The defe of the Aristotelian- 
Euclidean system and its non-Euclidean derivatives is 
that it cannot satisfy the specifications set forth, for 
exame, in the famous Cologne leure of Hermann 
Minkowski. To the extent that time, space, matter are 
conceptually defined apart from the ernal reality of 
the physical process, are defined in any respe in an 
axiomatic aprioristic way, the effort to use a non- 
Euclidean geometry to describe a relativistic physics 
is simy an extension of inherently linearized 
Aristotelian-Euclidean methods of * *curve-f itting. ' * 
As, for exame, the Einstein-Weyl program. 

The conceptions of space, time, and matter in any 
aprioristic system of qualitatively independent 
degrees of freedom (self-evidence) for an arbitrary 
geometrical (including ultra-exotic tological) 
model require that the notions of **dimensionality" or 
any equivalent notion one might wish to substitute in 
their ace, are rinsically linearized. Hence, such a 
space caes forward the crucial, **hereditary" axio- 
matic fallacy of the Aristotelian-Euclidean system. It 
cannot, inherently, for this given reason, **carry" the 
causality associated with negentropically "deter- 
mined" physical processes. 

The praical solution to the difficulty involved is 
presently provided only through dire apications of 
the notion of primary causality we have set forth 
above. Although this involves a kind of sophistication 
which stands formally outside the formal arguments 
of a Benjamin Franklin et al., it must be emphasized 
again, and understood that what we are analyzing in a 



PEF=T(o)® i()X. E)EM© E^S 



relatively more sophisticated frame of reference is 
identical as a working princie to the humanist 
notions of freedom, universal natural law, and the 
erconneions of the two, which were not only the 
guiding conceptions of our American Revolution, but 
conceptions then and since validated in praice. 

In a true relativistic conception, the only "axio- 
matic** princie of the conceptual system as such is 
the kind of notion of negentropy we associated with the 
notion of the world-line. We compare the rate of in- 
crease of negentropy with the required rate of in- 
crease of negentropy to maain the process as 
**simy'* self-subsisting. The relationship between 
