will have assembled the apparatus to direly attack 



. White, op. Cit, pp.  ff.,  ff.,  ff. 







the imications of Roosevelt's geolitical meta- 
physics. These two s are: by what weird process 
does a Rockefeller become a capitalist, and what is 
the way in which this heteronomic monetarist current 
both unconsciously and consciously aves at its per- 
ception of its vital self-erest in propagating empiri- 
cism as the ideology of monetarist brainwashing of the 
ruled? 

Although the Rockefeller monetarist erests, like 
the Rothschilds, Barings, Fuggers, and Bardi before 
them, are not an outgrowth of industrial capitalist im- 
pulses, the cuckoo's egg, the Rockefeller current, is 
for the moment litically and economically a part of 
the capitalist litical class nest. The monetarists 
represent a lawful, anti-capitalist tendency 
established within the capitalist litical class. This 
paradox is not an outgrowth of the princies of in- 
dustrial capitalist development, but an outgrowth of 
the way in which capitalism has in fa developed 
through monetarist diatorship over the credit and 
the governments of the dominant capitalist nations. 

This problem has two erdependent features. 
Accounting for the exa location of that erdepend- 
ence resolves the apparent problem. 

In the first aspe, monetarism emerged in 
European history as a pre-capitalist institution, with 
all its independently charaeristic praical and ideo- 
logical features formed prior to capitalist develop- 
ment. Furthermore, there is an unbroken continuity of 
institutional development of monetarism from the 
thirteenth century through the present time. Hence, 
monetarism, both in princie and in institutional fa 
cannot have emerged out of natural forms of in- 
dustrial capitalist development, () 

However, in its governance of proto-capitalist and 
capitalist economies, monetarism as a form of litic- 
al subversion and diatorship has seized un an 
ernal feature of industrial capitalist forms of accu- 
mulation as the major added source of monetarist 
wealth and were. That conneion is the erseion 
and erdependence of the two distin processes 
under conditions of monetarist forms of capitalist 
society. 

As we have emphasized earlier, above and in other 
published locations, the charaeristic stand of 
monetarism is not profit in the industrial capitalist 
sense, but rent in the sense of the alienation of feudal 
wealth  ground rent. The aion of monetarist instit- 
utions un the capitalist system is to convert capital- 
ist income o that feudal-decay form of rent. 

The principal means by which this transformation 



, E.g., the historical fallacy of the conventional dorines con- 
cerning capitalism as growing o imperialism. 



 

of profit o ground rent occurs is through a major 
aspe of debt service. 

The formal problem initially confronting most 
readers is that two funionally distin kinds of debt 
service occur in fa in the same apparent and law- 
fully institutionalized form. 

Industrial capitalist finance extends credit and 
equity capital as ^'venture capital*' for the develop- 
ment of the produive forces. In the industrial 
capitalist form of capitalist economy, the combined 
repayments of that advanced credit and distribution 
of profits originate from the gross profits of newly 
produced real wealth. Excepting that rtion of in- 
terest and ^'dividends'* absorbed as personal con- 
sumption of the capitalists, the repaid loans and 
profit-distributions are normally recirculated by 
capitalists as new venture-capital loans and equity 
investments. In this aspe of the matter, there is no 
determined conversion of wealth o ground rent. 

However, the same ostensible juridical features of 
capitalist law prote that further aspe of total debt 
service and related payments which are a conversion 
of wealth o ground rent forms. 

The feudal, or ground rent moment of debt service 
and nominal rent as such, is epistemologically and 
analytically associated with the creation of fiitious 
capitalizations. For this purse, the usage of '*fic- 
titious*' in Spinozan ethics and the usage of the term in 
monetary-economic analysis are epistemologically 
identical. This usage of '^fiitious'* is rigorous, and by 
no means merely descriptive, or approximate. 

To define the concepts used in a preliminary way, 
we now first consider the problem of fiitious capital 
in its localized aspe. The preliminary definitions we 
reach in this first step are rigorous in princie, but 
the notion of the scope of the conception of fiitious 
capital so attained is merely an approximation of 
what we then must define comprehensively. 

Fiitious capital most narrowly and immediately 
signifies that the magnitude of a capitalist society's 
total nominal wealth has been enlarged by a margin 
fur which there exists no corresnding prortional 

value of real wealth in the form of existing or con- 
sequent tangible commodities of capitalist and house- 
hold and related consumption. For exame, it is 
properly axiomatic that a venture-capital advance of 
loan or equity capital which fails to mediate the ex- 
pansion of produion of tangible commodity wealth is 
destroyed in value by that failure. It must be written 
off. To retain such capital **on the books*' is to create 
fiitious capital. 

Our investigation verges closer to the most relevant 
feature of the problem for the case of resale markets 
in real estate. In the industrial capitalist form of 
rental (and equivalent) income from produced and 







 
