generates self-organizing aivities as * 'entities/' 

Thus, in the negentropic space of the higher-energy 
domain, we have inclusively the particles and so forth 
which are also existent in the lowere order of physical 
space, but in addition, particles share the experi- 
mentally-defined sition of being determinate en- 
tities with other metastable configurations, and 
under new sets of special laws such that the perceived 
as determining "field-particle" relations of the lowere 
order of space are not experimentally appropriate to 
the higher order of space. 

Looking backward from this to the work of 
Schrodinger and others on the problems associated 
with the psi-funion, a new world of physics begins to 
open up to our consciousness. Moreover, the special 
laws of the higher-order physical space  even as we 
are now only beginning to exore them  conform to 
the kinds of notions of negentropy we are compelled to 
adduce by regarding the very existence of living 
processes, and the realized creative impulses of the 
history of human creative (synthetic) thought as 
crucial evidence respeing the necessary funda- 
mental lawful ordering of our universe. 

More narrowly considered, this does more than 
exse the significance of the thuggery done against 
the progress of science by Rothschild and Rockefeller 
proteges such as Niels Bohr, and by John von 
Neumann and others. It has a coherent, ironic bearing 
on the emerging tential hegemony of basic Soviet 
science over relatively stagnating overall scientific 
progress in the OECD countries. 

Following Versailles, during the period the Roth- 
schilds and Rockefellers were direly and deliberately 
attempting to wreck the foundations of fundamental 
scientific progress in the capitalist seor, a tiny 
kernel surviving from the greatest nineteenth century 
scientific traditions was providing the kernel of the 
future development of Soviet physics. The emphat- 
ically distinive advantages in impulse of Soviet 
basic physics work over the capitalist seor today, 
are not only, as General George Brown observed, the 
prortionately greater emphasis on scientific 
progress and development of cadres in the Soviet 
Union, () but, respeing their ernal, epistemo- 
logical features, the most notable Soviet physics 
breakthroughs known to us are crucially traceable to 



. George S, Brown, United States Military Posture for Fiscal Year 

: Statement by the Chairman of the Jo Chiefs of Staff to the 

Congress on the Defense Posture of the United States (n.p., Jan. , 

) , pp.  ff. ; cf. Lyndon H. LaRouche, ''The Political Economy of 

Military Posture," Executive Intelligence Review, Vol. IV, No  (Feb. 
, ), pp. -. 



the specific epistemological approach transmitted 
and amified by academician Vernadsky. 

It is certainly. relevant  if not all decisive  to the 
fa that Soviet physics is so excellent, while Soviet 
psychology is a reaionary shambles, that the leading 
figures the Soviets inherited from the previous regime 
in developing these two fields were Vernadsky for 
physics, and the pathetically reduionist, bestialist 
LP. Pavlov for psychology. 

Vernadsky, whom Rand think-tankers' memoranda 
correly described once as one of the greatest in- 
ternal Soviet threats to the Atlanticists' erests, was 
a student of Curie within the subsuming outlook of 
Louis Pasteur. It was this same current which 
provoked the famous s origin of life thesis of 
Oparin. Moreover, Vernadsky correly adduced the 
imications of Riemannian physics  the real 
Riemann, not the Einstein-Weyl program*s carica- 
ture-Riemann  for a coordinated breakthrough in 
biology and physics. In classical epistemological 
terms, Vernadsky's view was hylozoic in the true 
sense, rather than in that modified-Aristotelian 
reduionists' notion of '^materialism" regrettably 
predominant in ^'official Marxist-Leninist" literature. 
Indeed, ironically, like Lenin himself, Vernadsky's 
Russian philosophical roots are best traced (at least 
imicitly) in terms of Chernyshevsky's voluntarist 
(hence, also hylozoic) precedent. Accessible writings 
of Vernadsky () show that he consciously and 
competently apied this Riemannian-hylozoic 
overview simultaneously to biology and physics, and 
to the exoration of the erconneion between the 
two. It is also established that Soviet efforts to develop 
nuclear fission as a basic energy source were already 
embryonically under way as a state licy-commit- 
ment during the middle s(!), and that Vernadsky 
was key in this at that time. 

Hence, despite the other accomishments of 
physicists within the capitalist seor since the - 
 crisis in science, in respe of the most crucial 
frontiers of basic physics research capitalist-seor 
funding of progress was virtually stopped to the extent 
that existing Rothschild and Rockefeller licy dared 
and could effe this. Whereas, starting with the most 
considerable relative disadvantages in respe of 
numbers of scientists and objeive material circum- 
stances of development, Soviet physics around Ver- 
nadsky launched itself forward with an ongoing, in- 
cluded methodological focus un the very crucial 
problems whose solving was predominantly **for- 
bidden" in the capitalist seor. The epistemological 



 It has been rerted to us that only recently Vernadsky's work 
has begun to be republished in Soviet colleions  but we do not, 
unfortunately, yet have dire access to that larger body of in- 
formation on this subje. 



Mp;//www.d)®(Buirgi(gfe.(S®[ffli/ 



PEF=T(o)® i()X. E)EM© E^S 



imications of the now-famous  disclosures of L. 
Rudakov in the U.S., taken in the context of 
predecessors such as Vlasov, are in no respe a 
fortunate accident, but predominantly a lawfully 
determined outgrowth of the bias Vernadsky built o 
the foundations of Soviet physics  a bias which 
happily persisted despite the relative obscurity to 
which his reputation was relegated during part of the 
period following his death. 

The dire correlation between these crucial aspes 
of physics and litics is ironically, and devastatingly 
