the Law Enforcement Assistance Administration, the 
Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms unit of the U.S. 
Treasury, or the Kennedy, Clark, Katzenbach, Levi, 
or Bell Justice Department, could preserve under 
such circumstances even the vestiges of morality? 

Gifted individuals gripped by cruel neurotic 
problems have been otherwise creative; moral im- 
beciles of the Trilateraloid varieties, never. Moral 
imbecility, by destroying the individual's linking of his 
or her sense of personal social identity to some sense 
of a lawful causality in the universal consequences of 
individual willful praice, destroys the mental 
processes indispensable to tracing through the con- 
neions of isolated strategies and taical recipes to 
their universalizing consequences. 

Some moral imbeciles prevail as they wield vast 
weres like a berzerker's axe, and as saner men and 

women manifest the cowardice not to bring such 
lunatics to cage. 



P^OF-T(o)(Q)llOT. OEM© E^^ 






INH AB IT ANTS 



O F 



A M E R I C A, 



Oo the f jllowicg mtfrt)fi*j 



S U B J E 



S. 



C T 

L Of the O'lglo and Dcftgn f*f G^vf rnmrni in g*'neri!( 
with coRcife Rtjnjirki op (he En^Tiih CofiflitJ-iocu 



n. Of Man«ch)f lud Hcrf dUary Sucflii^ii. 
TTI. Thojglin <Mi (he prff^ni Sf*t< of AmtfUan AfF^irt^ 
IV, Of the prerem Abiliiy of Amlcft, w'lih Tvinc dT-* 



Min kmwi no Matter fjve ei irt^HrAVtN, 
Or thn(e vvliom cboke an couiipufi ^u jU ui-d^io. 



PHILADELPtlfAt 
Frmttd, iiKl Sold, hy R B R i ia 



S If eft* 



DCC LXXVf. 





' 





Federalist Tom Paine, author of the  pamphlet Common Sense, was a vigorous advocate q 
form of government as opsed to Tory "pure democracy, " 




P^OF-T(o)(Q)llOT. OEM© E^iD©i 



Three Atlanticist World Wars 



Exemary of the profitable present-day uses 
of the  Lippmann text is a comparison of his 
analysis of the licies impelling the United States 
o two world wars against Germany. What he states, 
which is in fa a fair if elliptical summary of the 
aual licies involved, affords an effeive basis for 
identifying the crucial methodological blunder of 
Atlanticist dorine presently impelling the Carter 
Administration  despite its consoling delusions to 
the contrary  on the track toward a general ther- 
monuclear war as early as . 

In a footnote to the text, Lippmann footnotes an 
excerpt from his own Feb. ,  New Republic 
editorial, **The Defense of the Atlantic World.'* To the 
quotation, he adds a parenthetical: "When I wrote this 
article I had the oprtunity to know what Colonel 
House and others among Wilson's advisors were think- 
ing.** From the footnoted excerpt of the  editorial, 
we sele the following most pertinent passage: 

. . . Had she (Germany) stood on the defen- 
sive against France and Britain, had she 
limited the war to the Balkans and the eastern 
front, and thrown in her lot with the western 
nations, she would have had their neutrality 
and probably their sympathy. But, when she 
caed the war to the Atlantic by violating 
Belgium, by invading France, by striking 
against Britain, and by attempting to disrupt 
us. neutrality of spirit or aion was out of the 
question. 

This compares direly with his summary of the 
balance of U.S. (Roosevelt administration) licy con- 
cerning Nazi Germany prior to May-June . After 
citing the list of notable preceding Nazi aions in 
central and eastern Europe, he states: 

. . . The Nazi agression appeared to be 
direed toward the east, away from the 
