discounted through the credit of the International 
Development Bank. That is the indispensable, prin- 
cied method by which we maain the erface 
between U,S, domestic capital exrt and  most 
notably, but not exclusively  those nations which 
have socialist constitutions. 

Second, as was done badly during World War II, 

whenever the nation is obliged to secure capital from 
those categories of total national income representing 
modal levels of prime-cost (e.g., wage-incomes), this 
sacrifice (primitive accumulation) can be regarded 
as ** borrowing" in whole or part  if forecastable la- 
ter rates of national economic growth and other 
considerations of national erest warrant this as 
praicable. The princied purse of such measures 
is to defend the egrity, in princie and in fa, of 
the modal levels of income which have been tem- 
rarily reduced. How and when this is done is for each 
occasion a praical question, but the prosition to be 
praically so considered is admissible for deli- 
beration according to the proper ent of the consti- 
tutional law of a capitalist republic. 

These same princies of **hard currency*' licy 
apy to the International Development Bank, and 
represent the included feature of foreign licy of the 
United States concerning the IDB and all related and 
comparable relationships with other nations. 

The scare word which immediately arises as ob- 
servers note the praical imications of such foreign 
and domestic licies is *'dirigism." 

The case of that abomination which has become the 
National Environmental Policy A in praice, is 
perhaps the most efficient starting  for getting 
o the core issues of licies affeing the fear of 
**dirigism." 

Granted, the condition of the biosphere (''ecology") 
is a matter of princied concern, and related vital 
erest to the nation. However, the NEPA, as an 
imicitly and efficiently zero-growth approach to 
both the definition and treatment of such matters, is 
contrary to natural law and to the ent of our con- 



stitutional law, and is therefore abhorrent and most 

fundamentally unconstitutional. The problem of 

NEPA is not merely that it represents a **dirigist" 

rusion o a privileged area, but that it represents 

an incompetent and destruive rusion, both in 

ent and method emoyed. 
The cases of the steel and automotive industries 

adequately illustrate the general problem. 

The problem of industrial and related forms of 

llutant emissions is in the main categorically a 

by-produ of insufficiently advanced technology. As 

the efficiency of combustion is increased, the ratio of 

i 

thermal and other waste by-produs is corres- 
ndingly reduced. That is step one. Such thermal 
efficiency is charaeristically effeed by operating 
those produive processes at corresndingly higher 
temperatures. This higher temperature not only 
enables thermal efficiency (step one), but brings new 
physical chemistries within the range of efficient, 
economical emoyment. This enables us to deoy 
secondary, egral features of the produive (or 
other) process to dire the shaping of the net by- 
produ o forms which are either new produs 
(consumable by-produs), or harmless forms of 
waste. That is step two. 

The apication of NEPA has attacked the problem 
of emissions by violating our fundamental national 
erests direly (reducing the produion of wealth) 
and by mis-direion (diverting limited and. 
diminishing supies of capital to costly after-the-fa 
emissions control, away from the produive invest- 
ments which would have followed the two-step ap- 
proach toward a real solution, as we summarized.) 

The remedies broadly indicated for steel are these. 
Environmental concerns properly diate accelerated 
infusions of capital o steel and related processes 
for fulfilling the two conditions stipulated as a sub- 
sumed charaeristic feature of such capital invest- 
ment. For the automobile itself, the solution is not 
costly emission control devices and other attached 
gadgetry, but accelerated flows of capital toward 
more technologically advanced and better maained 
motive devices, and more human-safe forms of auto- 
motive design. 

The problem associated with steel capitalization has 
been that the available capital has been insufficient 
(and that existent entirely diverted to NEPA-mis- 
direed nonsense), and that the capitalizations for 
higher technology imy a demand for steel  to  
percent above the currently prevailing and previously 
forecastable levels of recent periods. However, both of 
these economic problems are principally by-produs 
of monetarists' diatorship over our government and 
economy, and the correlated lack of a competent 
sitive national domestic and foreign licy. 



PEF=T(o)® i()X. E)EM© E^S 



The problem of the automobile is not the auto in and 
of itself, but as with the crisis situation generated in 
commercial air traffic by proliferating -mile-range 
short hauls, includes the failure to establish efficiently 
modern forms of erurban and metrolitan-area 
mass transit systems, all of which is aggravated by 
the monetarist-determined decay and autarchy of our 
transrt and urban areas. 

There is only one approach to the "^environment" 
which is not rinsically incompetent or downright in- 
sane. The time has come at which we must regard the 
biosphere as a whole as an elligent, modern Ameri- 
can farmer and his agronomist-advisor regard the 
farm. Nature itself must be defined for licy and 
praice as man-made. For purses of national 
domestic and foreign licy, we must extend the 
notion of fixed capital (as industrial capital) from the 
particular farm, the particular ant, to nature as a 
whole. 

For that reason envirnomental scientific licy- 
