many of the areas to the present day. Ferdinand of 
Aragon ranks as perhaps more evil than Adolf Hitler 



in the properly written annals of modern history. It 
was the Castilian institutions assembled and set o 
motion by the evil Ferdinand which made the name of 
Hapsburg Spain so justly, so profoundly despised by 
every informed person of conscience from that day to 
the present . . . especially those of Spanish cultural 

descent. 

Charles V, the focus of a kind of animal cross- 
breeding of the pedigrees of Austria, Burgundy, and 
Castile, bequeathed to his house's immediate 
sterity the institutional qualities thus dragged in 
with the dynastic bedroom antics. This was the 
dynastic self-image which settled un Vienna, and 
remained there even after Richelieu and Mazarin 
undertook to resume remedial aions left undone by 
Louis XL 

As Christopher White details the crucial problems 







 

involved, Richelieu and Mazarin moved in the right 
direion, as did Colbert more emphatically and with 
profoundly better understanding after them. Unfor- 
tunately, the subsidence of the Fuggers and the 
collapse of Antwerep, while eminently deserved and 
useful in itself, merely produced the continuation of 
the monetarist problem in the personages of the 
Amsterdam bankers. The ague of monetarism 
undermined the English Commonwealth  attacking 
from Cromwell's blind side  eroded England under 
the Restoration Stuarts, and direly took over the 
British throne with the accession of the morally 
decayed House of Orange, The continuity of Austria*s 
relationships to European monetarist were persisted 
throughout these institutional adjustments. 

In the **x-rated" imate relations between the 
monetarists and ducal and royal bucolics, the titled 
obscenities depended un the monetarist financiers 
for their debts and the additional credit for dynastic 
enterprises. The financiers depended, in turn on the 
'^patents" and analogous privileges through which to 
pursue their erests within sundry domains, and 
un the funions of the debtor tentate as an armed 
debt-service colleor. This arrangement erlocked 
the two weirdly-mated creatures in a special sort of 
litical-economic symbiosis. The atavistic litical 
and social features of the dynastic order became the 
ernalized self-erest of the financiers. 

The case of Hapsburg Austria epitomizes the lit- 
ical basis for the emergence of what later became the 
geolitical dorine. The heritage of Hapsburg rule 
led, subsequently, to the lawfully developed pre- 
conditions most favorable to the special form of 
philosophical fascism suppurating from within the 
ranks and peripheral orbit of the "Vienna Circle.'* 

Economically and litically, the alliance of bucolic 
relics and monetarist financiers reduced the defini- 
tion of nations to the same "geometry" confronted in 
the infantile mind's heteronomic fantasy-perception 
of family and family-orbited relationships, () 
Nations, to this infantile outlook, have no acknow- 
ledged significant ernal qualities but those required 
for the fantasy scenario. The mental outlook of the 
monetarist financier is comparable to pre-adolescent 
girls aying with a set of dolls, building a doll-ay 
scenario. The result is broadly analogous to a kind of 
"uralist" or "social contra" image of nations, in 
which the monetarist-aristocratic agreement is the 
underlying aive element of the "contra" involved. 
Heteronomic nations' qualities are deemed those of 



. A clinical study of the Rockefeller family meetings during the 
lifetime of John D. II, including the kinds of clinically significant 
influences contributed by the boys' mother Abby, would be instruc- 
tive to similar effe. 



agreeableness or disagreeableness to the purses of 
the "contra." Once the aive princie  the 
ground rent princie  is put out of view, and one 
then attempts to account for the order determined by 
the ground-rent-generated licies, the reduionist 
approach to describing that abstraed order is the 
geolitical dorine. 

The lawful comement to the metaphysical doc- 
trine of geolitics is cultural relativism. Formally, 
cultural relativism is pure empiricism: it is moral in- 
difference respeing the ernal qualities of cultures 
as modes of attempted realization of vital human in- 
terests. The praice of British foreign licy, most 
emphatically beginning with William Pitt the Young- 
er, was defined in the reaionary Adam Smith's 
Wealth of Nations  a feature of that book which lurid- 
ly exses the dishonest motives governing its overall 
elaboration of contents. The confli between the insti- 
tutions of industrial progress and semi-republicanism 
which the British urban classes predominantly prized 
for England and Scotland, were totally out of 
corresndence with the conscious foreign licies of 
the British government. The stench of Pitt's adopting 
the tentate of Zanzibar as the "British agent of in- 
fluence" for the East African littoral, the restoration 
of collapsing relics of barbarism throughout the col- 
onies and semi-colonies, are exemary of the im- 
morality of British foreign licy. The attempted 
justification of propping up such hideous relics with 
aid of British naval and other forces is the praical 
basis for the dorine of "cultural relativism." 

The odious foreign licies praiced by Pitt and 
defended by Adam Smith  the foreign licies 
against which we fought our American Revolution  
were turned, by reaion formation, o the dorine 
of cultural relativism in the same way that nominalist 
heteronomy is transformed o fascism. It is not sur- 
prising that all fascist philosophy and litical doc- 
trines are axiomatically cultural relativist  doc- 
trines of the axiomatically genetic or cultural- 
traditional determination of "national charaer- 
istics" and "racial charaeristics." 

The ground-rent outlook projes o the view of 
nations a quality which the reduionist metaphys- 
ician purrts to discover in that nation once the fa 
of the ground-rent determination has been ignored. 

Since the monetarist denies in governing licy that 
technological progress is the source of wealth, he 
erprets all aspes of economy from the stand 
