of Congress, and Federal Courts was to ensure that the true erest of 
the whole society and its sterity was enforced, not by any arbitrary 
standard, but according to the standard of the humanist Idea of 
Progress. 

The proper heart of U.S. constitutional law is truth. By enforcing a 
standard of refleive search for truth in the highest institutions of 
Federal republican government, the decisions reached in smaller 
matters are supied a yardstick and method by which their ap- 
proximate agreeableness to truth is imsed. The sovereignty of a 
humanist republic is not a mere thing, an entity, but a process; it is 
the egrity of that process which is the only rightful location of the 
rights of sovereignty in its momentary aspe as a thing. 

The aive bearing of the Holmes "force" perversion un the in- 
capacities of the s Whigs is that, although at each moment those 
things to be defended have the momentary appearance of something 
which is or should be a norm for corresnding, indicated praice, 
these norms are not permanent, self-evident existences. To fail to 
comprehend that is to fall back o feudal-aristotelianizing or the 
relatively bestial monotony of a more primitive or degenerated form 
of society. The distinion of living processes from their corresnd- 
ing, non-living chemical imitations, is that the living process is 
essentially charaerized by negentropy. This is expressed in the 
extreme by the creative capabilities of human thought, the fun- 
damental distinion between man and the lowere beasts. Human 
thought, like any lawful negentropic continuum, is causally rigorous 
respeing the chain leading from the a, through ripes radiating 
from the a o ultimately universal consequences. However, just 
because the cumulative effe of successful sitive innovation is to 
change the geometry of efficient relations, the sets of rules of 
relationship which are properly determining for one ech of develop- 
ment are different from those of the receding and succeeding echs. 
Ho wever, the causal lawfulness joining those successive echs 
through human praice is coherent throughout. Such lawfulness is 
properly expressed not in terms of its specific form in any echal 
state, but in respe of its determination of the successive ordering of 
echs. 

Hence, the proper simicity of the U.S. Constitution. Prudent 
compromises refleed in the comsition passed by, the Constitution 
defines essentially the Federal State as the sovereign instrument for 

I 

realizing the princie of the Idea of Progress. Taken in that essence, 
the Constitution and subsumed development of U.S. law has a funda- 
mental and corre distinion of princie from the notion of a body of 
common law, from Roman law, and is in absolute opsition to princi- 
es of feudal law. 

The Whigs' insensibility of the fa that Holmes, in particular, was 
tearing the Constitution to shreds, refleed their insensibility of the 
nature of the praical erest of the nation which was thus and other- 
wise being aced in peril. 



Mp;//www.d)®(Buirgi(gfe.(S®[ffli/ 



P^OF-T(o)(Q)llOT. OEM© E^iD©i 



 

Wilson, Roosevelt, Kennedy, 
Carter and War 



There is a crucial feature of the twentieth cen- 
tury history of the Democratic and Repubfican 
parties which must be considered in analyzing the pre- 
sent century's foreign-licy problems. Since the 
Spanish-American War, it has been the Democratic 
Party White House which  rightly or wrongly  has 
sent the nation to war. Wilson got us o World War I 
and laid the broad preconditions for World War II. 
Franklin Roosevelt's administration's licies 
created the immediate conditions under which we 
were impelled o war against Japan and Germany, 
and then gained acclaim for fighting the war imsed 
un us. A Rockefeller-influenced State Department 
under Truman set up the Korean War. A Kennedy 
administration unleashed a wave of horrors  the 
Congo adventure, the Bay of Pigs, the  missile 
crisis, the Berlin affair, attempted and aual assassi- 
nations of nominal adversaries and allies alike, 
Vietnam, and had Kennedy lived, a continuing, 
escalating wave of confrontations leading o a  
Kissinger '^brinkmanship" dorine unge toward 
World Warm. 

Going back o the nineteenth century, although 
Lincoln led the nation in the Civil War, it was the 
treason of the Rothschild protege, the Buchanan White 
House, capping the aions of a series of Democratic 
Party administrations beginning with Andrew Jack- 
son, which created the Confederacy and the asso- 
ciated British effort to destroy this nation. 
The role of Rockefeller proteges  Dean Acheson, 

John Foster Dulles, Dean Rusk, Henry Kissinger, and 
others  in the U.S. State Department, and Rocke- 
feller proteges  Allen Dulles, McGeorge Bundy, and 
others  in direing the evolution and licies of the 
elligence establishment  is most relevant to the 
problem. The Rockefellers' role in creating the 
Kennedy administration with the aid of eleion fraud 
and in creating the Carter Administration by means of 
a monstrous eleion fraud, combined with relevant 
blackmail threatened against an incumbent President 



 sheds most essential light on the conneion be- 
tween the Democratic Party White House and wars. 

Globally, in the history of modern European culture 
going back o the Renaissance period, it has been the 
vigorous pursuit of a licy-aim governed by what we 
today describe as a monetarist licy, which has been 
the predominant cause for nearly every period of war- 
fare and major war in modern history. Nationally, it is 
the fa that since Andrew Jackson, the so-called 
'iiberal" faion of the national Democratic Party has 
been the Tory instrument of a purely monetarist 
licy, which is key to the correlation between that 
Party in the White House and getting our nation o 
wars. 

It is that conneion and the way in which mone- 
tarist and pro-industrialist faions and tendencies 
have conflied and compromised during this century 
(most notably), which is key to proving and under- 
standing the lawfulness of that correlation. 

Genuine economic development is in the most 

fundamental self-erest of every nation. Moreover, 
the genuine economic development of every other 
nation is in the fundamental erest of each nation 
and the human race as a whole. Consequently, to the 
extent that the U.S. or any other dominant were pur- 
sues a combined, mutually consistent domestic and 
foreign licy of global genuine economic develop- 
ment, of technologically veored expansion of in- 
