


... 











 f..-..r-- 








mmmsmmm 



'i: 



:(. -^. 





  V : 'i" . ^ .:::: '?  .v.i v j' - ^ 




: 



^j-.V ^j-.. 






:;:^v:;:::V^::;--::-;;|--:?^ 

' /y--y. . : ': yi- ' 




Federalist Tom Paine, author of the  pamphlet Common Sense, was a vigorous advocate of the republican 
form of government as opsed to Tory '*pure democracy. " 



tinuous and coherent on this . The following key 



weres of the government in such a way as, for exam- 



s of domestic fiscal licy foreshadow the gener- pie, to make slum-like rental property highly unprofit- 



ative corresnding features of our foreign licy. 



() The notions of negative and sitive forms of 
toleration are properly governing in the deter- 
mination of the way in which the revenues of the 
nation are disbursed and in the categorical 
distinions of relatively punitive and offsetting 
reduced rates of apication of an average rate of 
taxation. 



For exame: Speculative gains and undesirable 
praices which the law otherwise negatively 
tolerated must be taxed at relatively **punitive" rates. 
This must, in approximation of the fiions of law, 
offset the compensating, relatively reduced rates of 
taxation on income which is direed toward reinvest- 
ment in real economic expansion and technological 
progress. 

A federal tax on illegal gambling is one of those all- 
too-clever perversions of sitive law which any 
competent federal court aion should have denounced 
and nullified as an abhorrence in the eyes of constitu- 
tional law. However, for aivities and entities which 
exist within the bounds of toleration of the law, federal 
tax licy is obliged, for exame, to use the taxing 



able relative to maaining quality real property in- 
vestments and quality new construion. 



() (The presently existing tax and related fiscal 
licies and praices of the nation are immoral 
overall, and in some aspes clearly obscene, 

I 

respeing the clutter and comexity they 
represent.) There are two categorical aspes of 
the design of national tax licy: (a) the 
analysis of the principal, categorical comnents 
of national income, (b) the apication of 
discrimination respeing sitive and negative 
toleration, as the means for determining the 
relative weight of taxation un equal amounts of 
income within the areas of income so defined. 
This should be apied as a national taxation 
licy, with the federal government aing in 
partnership with state and local government 
according to a uniform tax licy for all aspes 
of government. The relationship among the 
federal, state and local governments should be a 
division of labor among those litical entities 
respeing the categories of taxation delegated to 
each, within the bounds of a uniform national tax 
licy. The tax methods and procedures should 







be simified and direly aimed at their ob- 
jeives in the simest way. 
