ogy. That is sime historical fa, whatever wishful 
fraudulent mythology says to the contrary. 

This great culture, which built un the salvageable 
elleual relics of the decaying Hellenic-Roman 
order which had preceded it, was the great civilizing 
force of the period of its dominance. It is that achieve- 
ment which remained embedded in Arab culture, even 
after the combination of Mongol invasions, Turkish 
conquest, and the European crusades had broken the 
back of Arab civilization, and, one by one, unged the 
parts of that Arab world o atavistic parodies. 

When an Arab is awakened to the hope of becoming 
a part of a process of the onward development of civili- 
zation, it is not the miserable circumstances of the 
fellahin and bedouin that provide the wellsprings of a 
renaissance. It is certainly not the miseducation doled 
out to the "little brown brothers" at LSE, Cornell, or 
Berkeley which provides that basis. What, then, can 







he seize un in himself and in his fellow Arab to make 
that renaissance? There is only one common well- 
spring available to that purse, the humanist tra- 
ditions of the Caliphates. 

The commonality of language permeating the Arab 
diales is an imrtant praical consideration. It is 
that humanism, which developed to its fiercest and to 
its greatest heights in the struggle against the Mon- 
gols and their Turkish comnent (Ibn Sina) and the 
Ottoman Turks (Averroes' Destruion of the Des- 
truion), un which they legitimately and usefully 
draw in the struggle against heathen monetarist bar- 
barians of today. 

The commonality of language as language is of 
praical significance  especially for purses of 
economic development, and  with some mentionable 
degree of efficiency  for unified litical aion. The 
wellspring of that unity is the commonality of the hu- 
manist heritage, without which  in every empirical 
instance  *'Arab nationalism" degenerates o a 
bad diomatic joke. Peoe are not what they are, but 
what they are efficiently dedicated to becoming. A 
nation constituted on any other basis today is only 
some degree doomed toward becoming a totalitarian 
swindle. 

In the course of the first phases of the period before 
us, the United States must face the tential problem, 
that this or that developing seor nation or group of 
nations will return to us one of the noisome packages 
circulated among their ranks by such U.S. monetarist 
creatures as C. Fred Bergsten. Some vestiges of the 
Kissinger (Brookings Institution) * 'International Re- 
sources Bank,** the **Common Swindle,** or kindred 
feudal-Physiocratic nonsense may crop up. 

With one eye toward the lessons of the Soviet agri- 
cultural mess, we are forewarned that such noisome 

V 

eruptions will tend to occur whenever a developing 
seor government faces acute ernal litical-eco- 
nomic problems arising either from its own bungling 
or its inability, for one reason or another, to advance a 
remedy it deems performance*credible for the 
problem at hand. Under such circumstances, many 
governments are known to turn, in their desperation, 
to seek some gimmick, some single a that will some- 
how ^'miraculously*' offset the ernal pressures. 
Their borders with this or that neighbor tend to ac- 
quire uglier hues, and so forth. Frequently, some 
grand gesture  or what natural law regards as a 
swindle  is then militantly, self-righteously prosed 
by the desperate government in question. Given the 
psychological-litical profile of some traditionally 
primary-commodities-exrting countries and the 
seeds of folly distributed by Bergsten and Kissinger, 
one or another primary-commodity oligoly may 
crop up. 



 

How then shall the United States resnd? Let us 
presume the case in which a cabal of such foolish 
governments attempts to skyrocket the world-market 
price of a primary commodity, what shall we do? 

Very simy: ''Gentlemen, since you have imsed 
fiitious price levels on this commodity, we shall de- 
du from your ernational credit, to the advantage 
of your customer, the exa amount of the difference 
betv/een your fiitious price and the world-market 
price. You see, we do not deprive your nation of a 
penny of its rightful net benefits, but we shall not bow 
before a swindle which threatens to disrupt the 
economy of the world as a whole.'* 

The imications of that exame for how the United 
States will deal with analogous expressions of oler- 
able heteronomy among nations ought to be suffi- 
ciently defined by the exame itself. 

As a "new Federalist** government assumes the 
Presidency, it is confronted with a pattern of ugly to 
hideous regimes in various nations. The majority of 
these obscenities, such as the present regime in Chile, 
were created by such as Mr. David Rockefeller and 
his associates. Hence, these represent a double re- 
snsibility for the government of the United States: 
we are a great were and they are evil, and during the 
past our government has in various ways fostered 
their creation and perpetuation. 

In one way or another, the United States is going to 
shape the global environment so that such atrocities 
are soon terminated. 

In a number of cases, such governments will eva- 
rate without any necessary specific aion but the 
installation of the new U.S. President. (The relevant 
slogan covering this is, "Scram, guys, the jig is up!**) 
The principal deterrent to such flights will be the want 
of suitable host countries to which such tyrants might 
wish to seek asylum. () 

Let us consider a sufficient range of ssible 
variants so as to define the licy involved. 

Let us take the nasty one first. Should the United 
States emoy military force? Let us consider a clear- 
cut case in which we should. 

Pinochet's Chile invades Peru. Do we take a spec- 
tator role for the imbroglio? By no means. With all its 
recently developed faults (diated direly by David 
Rockefeller et al.), the United States has a princied 
sition concerning the tattered but still real viability 
of Peru as a sovereign republic. Prior alliance with 
