cational-litical campaign was launched by 
Franklin and others to bring the majority of American 
farmers of that period o suprt of the urban 
"Whig" alliance of industrialist and labor forces. It 
was that sort of marginal farmer, us lumpenized, 
hence more viciously heteronomic, strata of our urban 
pulation who have represented the tential 







broader base for Toryism in the eleorate. () 

For millions of tential readers who are in their 
middle fifties or older at this time, it is ssible to pin 
down the litical image of the American farmer and 
related matters by drawing un the writer's own 
autobiographical resources in a way which direly 
echoes knowledge to the same general effe among 
millions of mature citizens throughout the nation 
today. 

Those of us with this source of knowledge from 
within family and related experiences, to the extent 
that we leap above the fiitiously defined prejudices 
and so forth of more narrowly perceived family 
outlooks as such by comparing the inside knowledge of 
family experiences with source materials and 
relevant knowledge of the litical history outside the 
family experience, have a tential special advantage 
in direly accounting for the way in which the Whig 
impulse was embedded in our own generation, and 
thus, imicitly also of the way in which our 
generation variously did and did not transmit that 
same organic outlook to the next generation coming 
after us. 

Although the writer rightly abhors the methods 
emoyed in the "oral history" efforts  because the 
CBS and other apications of that method are 
heteronomic and in fa anti-historical in the mode of 
prompting recolleions  it is one of the uncometed 
duties of our mature generations to our sterity to 
capture and convey their special access to the inside 
of the life of the American pulation during the 
period from the middle of the nineteenth century o 
the s and s. 

The following remarks are direly to the  of 
the above paragraph of the text in that way, and illus- 
trate the more general  imied by this autobio- 
graphical footnote. 

Like many now mature Americans born during 
approximately  or earlier, the writer*s ernal 
family experiences as a child and youth immediately, 
consciously reached back o approximately the 
s and s  to our grandparents* grandparents. 
Although memories transmitted of great-great- 
grandparents are inevitably colored within the ac- 
counts embedded in family licies and related 
considerations, on condition that such transmitted 
information was checked by some objeive research 
of a source-material sort (letters, daguerreotypes, an 
alertness concerning the existence of official and 
semi-official records from statistical records, 
newspaper files and so forth bearing un the period 



. Nancy B. Spannaus. ''Uncovering the Treason School of 
American History," in Spannaus and White, eds., The Political 
Econom yoftheAm erica nRe volu Hon , p p .  - , 



 

of the s forward), and this combined, cross- 
checked material with some rigorous historical 
knowledge otherwise, what is transmitted within the 
family provides the sensuous element which makes 
that rtion of our history real to those who maain 
the habit of situating it in the context of broader 
sources of knowledge. 

One of the dominant figures in the writer's childhood 
and early youth was a paternal grandfather, Joseph 
LaRouche, who had left the oppressive herlands of 
rural Quebec during his own youth to become a 
moderately significant inventor and technician 
principally occupied in the development of our shoe 
manufauring industry, and a well-traveled technical 
representative of the United Shoe Machinery Cor- 
ration in Latin America. This grandfather 
represented the technological traditions within the 
writer's household, exemified by the often-cited fa 
that this grandfather had built one of the first radio 
receiving sets in home use in the city of Lynn, 
Massachusetts. The maternal grandfather, the 
Reverend George Weir, had immigrated to Fall River, 
Massachusetts from Scotland, at the age of two, a 
migration which aided his own father, a professional 
Scots dragoon by family tradition, to volunteer with 
the First Rhode Island Cavalry. The brother of this 
dragoon, Captain William Weir, also a part of the 
family tradition, captained one of the first New 
England-built steamship voyages to make the South 
America run. 

The Reverend Weir had been won to the ministry 
during his youth, had moved to Columbus, Ohio, 
initially to assume a skid row ministry, and then to 
become  until his death after World War II  an 
aive and retired minister of the United Brethren 
denomination in many localities in Ohio. The family's 
deepest penetration o American history came 
through this writer's maternal grandmother, Martha 
Wood Weir, of a Delaware County Ohio Quaker family 
whose conscious inner-family traditions went im- 
mediately back to her father (an aive figure in the 
Ohio ^'underground railway" movement) and her 
grandfather, the Reverend Daniel Wood, a John 
Woolman Quaker from the Carolinas and an 
acquaance and strong admirer of Henry Clay. 

If millions of Americans of the writer's own and the 
preceding generation look o their own experience, a 
similar sort of knowledge to similar effe is located. 

The writer's childhood (spent mainly in his 
Rochester, New Hampshire birthace) and youth 
(spent mainly in Lynn, Massachusetts) centered 
about these two grandparents and the related trips to 
Ohio and Massachusetts where were the high s of 
family life and consciousness during his first ten 







 

years, and only less dominant a feature during the 
s. For this period, the writer's surviving 
