
unite the Whigs by conneing the purse embedded 
in Whig impulses to that national licy which repre- 
sents a conscious and efficient realization of such a 
common imicit purse. 

That historic obligation has become a reality  
rather than only a tentiality  through the expe- 
rience of the months from August of last year to the 
present time. Those various Republican, Democrat, 
trade-union, industrialist and other American Whigs, 
who as late as last December still regarded the U.S. 
Labor Party's evaluation of the Carter danger as 
exaggerated, have increasingly professed themselves 
astonished by the precision with which the Labor 
Party forecast the monstrousness now emanating 
from the Rockefeller's captive Carter Administration 
and the federal courts. This, combined with the impul- 
sion of a desperately bankrupt David Rockefeller 
to violate the thresholds of countervailing reaion to 
his evil demands, has situated the Labor Party in cir- 
cumstances of whose precedents in our nation's histo- 
ry we are so visibly sensible. 

The long-simmering renewed battle between Amer- 
ican Whig and American Tory now verges un the 
threshold of an irrepressible confli. The quality of 
crisis which breaks through the lag in historical 
developments, the crisis which makes the knowledge 
of irrepressible confli sensuous to broader forces, is 
now un us. Unless we defeat the Carter energy, 
hyperinflationary austerity, and related foreign l- 
icies, our nation will die  either by thermonuclear 
holocaust or biological catastrophe. The trip-wire of 
fateful, irreversible decision has been struck. Now we 
must move  or die. 

The nation must move with the U.S. Labor Party  
or die mewling in its own cowardice. 

The writer does not know in advance what exa 
consequences that will have for the future status of the 
Labor Party itself. He does not know, for exame, 
whether the Whig coalition will ele him to the Presi- 
dency, or on what precise basis that ssibility might 
occur if it were to occur. What is certain is that the 
Whig coalition must quickly become the ruling liti- 
cal force  and that that includes a congressional 
aion modeled in a legal sense un the inelegant 
precedent of the Tories' own **Watergate" caper. The 
weres of the Congress are the vital constitutional 
bastion remaining to us to save the nation, a Congress 
which in turn must be moved in adequate prortions 
by a mobilized Whig eleorate. In this course of 
events, respeing the Labor Party we only know with 
certay that we are a key initiating elleual 
litical force in catalyzing the necessary licies and 
instruments o being. 

The key to that present, vital historic obligation of 
the U.S. Labor Party is the developed body of ap- 



PEF=T(o)® i()X. E)EM© E^S 



propriate knowledge represented in the preceding 
seions of this present licy study. That conceptual 
overview  or, at least the essence of it  represents 
the necessary fresh and freshly enlarged expression 
of our humanist, American Whig heritage, which is in 
turn the indispensable foundation in knowledge for the 
criticism and shaping of our licies and instruments. 
It is for this present crisis- that that body of 
knowledge was developed, and it is in the process of 
developing that knowledge  principally through the 
mediating role of the writer and his associates  that 
that knowledge has been shaped o the form ap- 
propriate to the specific needs of this crisis as this 
crisis has in fa developed. 

That is nothing but a fresh illustration of the princi- 
es of scientific progress in general, and an illustra- 
tion of the proper course of real litics. It is the un- 
derstanding and exercise of true, lawful freedom by 
the creative individual, through the broadening of con- 
certed efforts of creative personalities, that the dis- 
covery, transmission, and assimilation for informed 
willful praice of necessary enlargement of the body 
of knowledge is accomished. 

The foreign and domestic licies of the United 
States have only one admissible axiomatic basis: the 
fundamental erest of humanity is expressed by 
technological progress as the common licy of a 
world comsed of sovereign, viable republics. 

The praical expression of that single axiomatic 
premise is those measures which are appropriate to 
a twofold resolution to, first, sitively, foster the 
fulfillment of that princie, and, second, to contain 
and check the contrary impulses of persons and 
nations insofar as such wrong impulses threaten the 

fulfillment of that licy in our nation or globally. 

Those coherent precepts of princie and praice 
must be established as licy and understood as the 
governing erpretation and original ent of our 
constitutional law. 

That licy and law is elaborated in two respes. 
First, our people, our institutions, and other nations 
must be informed of the proper imications of our us- 
age of the terms ^^technological progress'* and **sov- 
ereign, viable republics.** Second, we must situate 
that outlook, that method, that licy, that funda- 
mental princie of law, in respe of the present and 
forecastable national and global circumstances to 
which that licy, that law is to be presently apied. 

The central feature commonly underlying the 
notions of * 'technological progress** and '^sovereign, 
viable republics,*' is the notion of litical freedom 
peculiar to the neo-atonic humanist tradition in- 
clusively embedded in the establishment of our own 
republic. Although this rigorous notion of freedom 
governs our condu respeing those liberties proper- 



 

ly associated with toleration, our notions of freedom 
and toleration are respeively distin, in no sense 
erchangeable notions in the apication of licy 
and law. 

Freedom is rigorously defined as that process of 
self-development and expression of the kinds of crea- 
tive tentialities within each human individual which 
are pularly typified by great scientific discoveries. 
It is the discovery, transmission, and assimilation of 
willful impulses of useful praice of new knowledge 
on the initiative of creative individuals, which is the 
sitive expression and content of freedom, and it is 
that were of creative advancement which the law 
must foster and for whose expression it must provide 
