making belongs in the Department of Agriculture, 
with the obvious aspes of domestic fiduciary func- 
tions delegated to the Department of the Interior. 

It is imssible  and insane, at this time  to at- 
tempt to *'defend nature against man." The Nader- 
environmentalist outlook is refleive of the mentality 
of a lowere beast, not a human being. The necessary 
consequence of the mere continued existence of the 
human species is the deetion of any fixed order of 
nature. To defend'' nature is to prose genocide 
against man. Looking at nature as a whole with the 
charaeristic outlook already embedded in our 
Department of Agriculture, looking at the entirety of 
nature as *'our great farm," we must develop its fer- 
tile fields, its woodlots, its streams, its living and re- 
creation areas, its livestocks, as an elligent modern 
farmer does in transforming a former dustland o, 
once again, a rich grain-producing area. 

By acing the knowledge of modern asma physics 
and its by-produs at the dissal of our Department 
of Agriculture, and emwereing that Department to 
look at the nation and world as the greater farm" 
from which human needs must be annually extraed 
in increasing amounts, we ave at the kernel of a 
sitive ecological licy in conformity with natural 
and constitutional law. 

The instrument of government for imementing the 
sitive licies generated around the focal, coor- 
dinating  of our Department of Agriculture is 
principally national economic-development licy. 
The principal subsumed instruments for that licy 
are the credit licies of the National Bank and our 

federal fiscal institutions. 

Those instruments shape the overall economic 
environment. 



 

We must add instruments for checking specific 
heteronomical problems not efficiently controlled by 
the principal instruments. This is the area of dire 
enforcement. The principal form of enforcement 
should be congruent with the princie of minimum- 
wage law and working-conditions law. We establish 
standards, defining in terms specified by legislative 
law  and not some casual administrative or judicial 
procedure extending the law  precisely what those 
standards are: what exicitly represents an oler- 
able condition, and what methods shall be used to 
determine qualitative non-conformity with the prai- 
cal ent of the principal instruments of national eco- 
nomic licy for this area? 

We need steel. We cannot stop steel produion, 

bringing it below required levels of output and capa- 
city because of a short-term, localized ''environmental 
problem." The head-on opsition of two elements of 
national erest, which may appear to exist in such a 
case, does not exist in fa under proper conditions of a 
national, economic-licy-determined environment. 
These most troublesome s of the erface be- 
tween produion and the ecology merely shape the 
peripheral features of our technological development 
licies. 

The obje of the overall approach is to minimize all 
dire rusion o the ernal ordering of the er- 
nal, privileged domain of liberties of the citizen and 
the firm. This is not a noble sentiment, a truism, but a 
praical licy imperative. 

There are two indispensable primary instruments 
for the government of a democratic capitalist 
republic: the litical instrument of properly inferred 
willful impulses for praice of the firm and individual 
citizen, and the establishment of a praical environ- 
ment of national licy praice which enables the 
desired result to occur ''molecularly" by means of 
individual initiative. The associated obje of these 
measures is to reduce to the ssible minimum the 
number of heteronomic and other exceptions which re- 
quire dire enforcement or other dire govern- 
mental erventions. 

The real problem of *'dirigism" is that leading 
agencies and others variously do not understand the 
lawful features of the processes involved, or refuse to 
acknowledge the imications of such knowledge* 
Hence, when litical stupidity attempts to mobilize a 
society to conformity with some specified result, it too 
quickly, foolishly substitutes methods converging ulti- 
mately or sooner un ''totalitarian" methods of 
dirigism. The knowledgeable approach, based in con- 
sciousness of natural law, is premised un a compre- 
hension of the lawful determination of the environ- 
ment in which individualized aion seles its choices. 
This same distinion defines the two distin no- 







 

tions of litical were. One notion of were, the notion 
of force, is associated with military and lice mea- 
sures. The other notion of were, the were of natural 
law, is the writer's charaeristic method and licy. 
The former's use is not excluded, but is properly 
delimited to those exceptional cases in which heter- 
onomy sets itself fixedly o opsition to natural law 
and the force of reason. It is the second kind of were, 
the conscious apication of natural law to simul- 
taneously informing individual willful praice, and 
creating a praical licy environment appropriate 
to that informing, which is the tentially mighty 
were of the United States government, which this 
writer proses to awaken to exert itself. 

The overwhelming majority of the people of this 
nation and of other nations will regard the diates of 
natural law as their primary individual self-erest, 
on condition that their willful impulses are so in- 
formed, and that the ordering of the environment of 
individual praice by great weres is coherent with 
such informed impulses. That is the proper essence  
the rinsic might  of a **new Federalist" govern- 
ment of the United States at home and abroad. 

The social basis for that licy is the **Whig im- 
pulses" more notably charaeristic of our trade 
unionists, modern farmers, scientists, engineers, and 
industrialists. This, as an informed pulation and a 
litical force unified to that purse, is the leading 
force of the majority of our people, the majority which 
must rule our licymaking and government. 

The Tories, here and abroad, won't like that 
arrangement, but it is nonetheless in their real in- 
terest and that of their sterity, and the only course 
