suicidal military sture, and other special considera- 
tions  not all to Khrushchev's discredit  were pro- 
rtioned in contributing to Khrushchev's dismissal. 
Nonetheless, the consequence of the Kennedy admin- 
istration has been the Soviet and Warsaw Pa 
commitment to a thermonuclear war-winning capa- 



 

bility  a development imrtant to cite as il- 
lustration of the lawful tendencies which ovede 
the Atlanticists* estimations of the strategic 
process. 

Since Kennedy, and since Senator Barry Gold- 
water's  eleion campaign, excepting the forces 
behind the **Hallowe'en Massacre," no credibly large 
litical force in the U.S. has mustered the gumption 
until now to seriously opse direly the Rockefellers 
and their allies. Since President Gerald Ford backed 
down in face of a monstrous eleion fraud on the 
morning of November , , amid blackmailing 
rumors from Rockefeller circles concerning Ford's 
alleged '*KCIA ta," and since others predominant- 
ly, wishfully refused to believe up through Dec. , 
 U.S. Labor Party warnings of what a Carter 
administration and its licies would be, we have the 
worst Democratic Party administration in a chain of 
horror-stories going back through Kennedy, Roose- 
velt, Wilson, Buchanan, Van Buren, and Andrew Jack- 
son  with Republicans Theodore Roosevelt and Taft 
properly thrown o the colleion. Unless forces are 
mustered adequate to change U.S. nominal licy 
now, the result may well be the physical extinion of 
our nation this year or next. 

Monetarism leads to war, Atlanticism is its litical 
dorine, the dorine of war, and Atlanticist 
**liberals" are its principal social base. 



P^OF-T(o)(Q)llOT. OEM© E^^ 



j-j'. ..y. 




The drought' stricken Sahel in Africa, caused by the Rockefellers. The bare licy underlying the Rockefellers ' 
Atlanticist Dorine is to loot the world*s agricultural-industrial base. 



P^OF-T(o)(Q)llOT. OEM© E^^ 



THE GEOPOLITICS 
OF ATLANTICISM 







 

Thus far we have considered two sets of foreign- 
licy outlooks and praices, one Anglo-Amer- 
ican monetarist and the other admissibly termed 
either *Xonstitutionalist" or **Whig,'* Now, to un- 
derstand the fuller praical imications of the 
problem, we must consider the special feature of the 
**American Century" dorine which warrants its self- 
charaerization as an **Atlanticist Dorine." 

Taken at face value, as Walter Lippmann and others 
set forth their exanations of it, the ^'Atlantic Doc- 
trine" is the most radical version of the geolitical 
teachings associated inclusively with the name of Nazi 
Rudolf Hess*s teacher, Haushofer. () On the surface, 
Lippmann's (Roosevelt's) conception of U.S. foreign 
licy is entirely a reduionist metaphysical struc- 
ture derived from the most radical and most ob- 
sessively-seized axioms of the Haushofer school. This 
metaphysical concoion serves ostensibly as a pur- 
rtedly ausible rationalization for the special self- 
erests of the lowere Manhattan-based monetarists. 

The fa that the metaphysical dorine serves as a 
rationalization for monetarist erests, and that Fab- 
ian Lippmann is essentially a monetarist's hired in- 
telleual thug in the tradition of James Mill and 

Jeremy Bentham, might suggest that this form of doc- 
trine itself is merely a deliberate hoax. If one signifies 
by that that all the rationalization involved is there- 
fore entirely hycrisy on the part of the perpetrators, 
that conclusion would be mistaken. 

Granted, wherever a Roosevelt (Lippmann) and 
other notable pronents of the document wish to 
press a licy which is in their faion's own naked 
self-erest and also visibly contrary to the vital in- 
terests of the United States, they consciously prefer to 
state the argument for the prosal or aion in its 
geolitical or other metaphysical disguises. Such con- 
scious fraud, such hycrisy is what we properly 
signify as exemifying ''the Wilsonian tradition." 
Such hycrisy taken o account, for the rest of the 
matter they are, unfortunately, sincere. At its core, 
the Atlanticists' geolitical dorine is not merely 
false, but it is that special kind of false notion proper- 
ly, rigorously defined as an ideology. 

The metaphysical reduionism represented by the 
geolitical Atlanticist Dorine is the guise for the 
ruling ideology of the combined force of the ruling 
monetarists and their broader liberal-to-radical social 
base. 

m 

Stri epistemological distinions are imperative if 
the problems involved are to be effeively understood 
for praical remedies. The Atlanticist Dorine is not 
in-and-of-itself the ruling core ideology of that fac- 
tion, but an appropriate refleion of the core ideology 



. The British authorship of the dorine is, in fa, equally im- 
rtant, but less recognized pularly than Haujshofer's. 



respeing the configuration of problems the faion's 
leadership confronts in the domain of foreign licy. 
Other expressions of the same core ideology are 
Keynesian economics, pragmatism, behaviorism, and 
the mentality of a slum-landlord's overdressed attor- 
ney eading the axiomatic sanity of rent before a 
session of New York City Landlord-Tenant Court. 
Epistemologically, the core ideology is the contem- 
