tatorship veering toward the perfeion of Rockefel- 
ler's model, "Papa Doc** Duvalier. A gaggle of mostly 
confused colonels and junior officers leading a semi- 
disciined, uniformed and armed rabble gathered 
from the brutalized peasantry and urban slums. And, 
what did we find was the heroic a for freedom they 
had accomished with such instruments?  the sup- 
pression of the same sort of litical-social ferment 
which our own American Revolution typified for emu- 
lation ! 

That was before the Kennedy administration  
before David Rockefeller, Rockefeller*s Cyrus Vance, 
and the lunatic Milton Friedman "improved" un 
Banana Republic traditions with a large dose of Nazi- 
occupation economic licies of the sort exhibited in 
the auto-cannibalistic collapse of st- Chile. 

 

Contrary to Rockefeller*s collaborator, J. Paul 
Austin, a Coca-Cola bottle does not represent ade- 
quately the enlightening touch of modern civilization. 

Although the "Whig impulse*' persists as an impulse 
among the industrialists, urban labor and some el- 
leuals of the developing seor, this sitive ten- 
tiality is frequently precariously balanced against 
dominant or wereful-minority currents whose ideolo- 
gical outlook erupts from some of the most stagnant 
bowels of humanity. That stink is in part historically 
rooted in the wretchedness Europeans first en- 
countered in such regions, a wretchedness which "cul- 
tural relativist" colonialist licies and looting have 
often exacerbated o a form of degeneracy of the cul- 
tural vestiges first encountered. 







 

In too many cases, the peasantry is not a produive 
peasantry in the main. He miserably scratches at the 
earth. He does not produce a surus, and even what 
miserable little he produces is looted in large part 
from him by local chieftains, landlords, and other 
petty, thieving tyrants and swindlers. The peasantry 
shades o burgeoning masses of urban and semi-ur- 
ban vagabonds  a vagabondage produced by the 
same sort of monetarist-generated processes which 
caused the mid-fourteenth century Black Death. As in 
the case of the present collapse of the Sahel, in the ef- 
fort to squeeze more out of or peasants and nomads, 
local governments foster grazing and cropping li- 
cies  under ruinous tax pressure  destroying 
their own nation in the effort to pay debt service to 
lowere Manhattan. Without fertilizers and related mod- 
ern techniques, the ecological collapse of the Sahel 
caused by the Rockefellers and their allies was inevit- 
able. (Just as the Congo at the beginning of the s 
and Zaire today have no mystery for those who know 
the history of Rockefeller investment movements o 
Rhodesia and Congo during the s and the larger in- 
flux after the elimination of Lumumba.). 

Large masses of the pulations of such countries 
live at the edge of dionysiac frenzy  if they have, in- 
deed, the energy to do much at all. The tendency to 
identify with lowere forms of life  lowere beasts and 
ants  rinsic to the precarious humanity of 

heteronomized barbaric cultures  merely has been 
smashed, its allonian order scattered o a 

nominalist schwarmerei. The embryonic Rothschild 
mentality of the *'buy cheap, sell dearer'* petty trader, 
the infantile netism of the petty official and clerk, 
erse the dionysian despair of the brutalized im- 
verished  the endemic '*Tory'* tential **in the 
people*' un which some ambitious swindler pre- 
mises his litical career. 

What do they know of development? When did they 
experience it as empirical reality? These or people 
only know '*what is there" to be taken, and to be sold 
for as much as can be gained. 

That summary depis the ernal problems of the 
developing seor in its worst extremes, admittedly. 
That extreme defines the conceptual  of reference 
for understanding the ermediate, less glaring 
approximations of the same problem, and how those 
problems lawfully influence the outlooks and licies 
of faions of the developing seor nations. 

The most efficient model for understanding the 
sitive thrusts within the developing seor in 
general is the case of **Arab nationalism." 

No doubt the epigonoi of the late Walter Lippmann 
have more than once cited this ''phenomenon" as 
crucial clinical evidence in suprt of the Atlanticists* 
regional-bloc dorines. That is irrelevant, except as it 



once again exses more efficiently how stupid the 
corresnding features of our past foreign licy have 
been. 

The secret of "Arab nationalism" is not geographic, 
but rather the Arab religion. What about the Arab 
tongue? How, dear questioner, do you imagine that the 
Arab diales from the Atlantic to the Euphrates are 
mutually comprehensible  approximately as much 
as local Italian diales are mutually comprehensible 
in today's Italy  except through the commonality of 
the Koran? Once the Arab tongue was rooted in the 
pulation, with the aid of the Koran, it was the 
mediation of the Koran which preserved that in- 
fluence. 

Does this fa favor the views of any variety of 
'* cultural relativists"? They would look at the outside 
of the Koran, and say,"Aha, a religion. Don't you see 
what that exains?" The Koran is not just a 
mediation of a "religion;" it is the central axis of a 
body of knowledge which has very specific ernal, 
epistemological charaeristics. It is not a member of 
a "class of religion;" it is not a member of the "set of 
religions" which includes Zen Buddhism  and who- 
knows-what-else the Fabians and neo-Fabians might 
have dredged up or synthesized in the way of fake 
cults lately. 

From the period of approximately the seventh 
through twelfth centuries, A.D., the Arab Caliphates 
were the mainstream of modern civilization. It was 
un that foundation, mediated to Europe chiefly by 
the Mediterannean Caliphates  from the Fatimids of 
Egypt to Cordova  that the elleual foundations 
of modern European culture were contributed. Its 
greatest elles, best known to us as Al-Farrabi, Ibn 
Sina, Averroes, and Omar Khayyam, were in- 
telleually qualitatively above the Hellenic and 
Roman culture in respe of science and epistemol 
