tion respeing prospes for imementation, the 
Rockefeller and allied erests' "American Century'* 
or Atlanticist licy embodies the institutionalization 
of that same lunatic obsession which produced two 
preceding world wars, and which governs the be- 
havior of the Trilateraloid madmen presently em- 
barked on blundering o a third. 

This time, again, the Atlanticists' error includes a 
gross miscalculation of the determining relationship 
between German industrial self-erests and the most 
tent independent impulses of German litics. How- 
ever, this time that repeated miscalculation occupies 
a secondary ace relative to the present principal 
focus of the thrice-repeated methodological blunder. 
This time, the Atlanticists have emoyed the same 
method of miscalculation formerly apied to Ger- 
many to the case of the Soviet leadership. 

In the onset of World War I, the raving nominalists 
of the City of London wishfully consoled themselves 
that real economics did not exist. By the same utilitar- 
ian-Fabian conceits through which the City of London 
had deluded itself to have refuted Karl Marx, they had 
also assured themselves they had refuted Hamilton, 
Carey, Colbert, the litiques, and Gresham, Real 
economy did not exist  had not well-paid empiricism 
proven this? Geography, traditions, corruption, and so 
forth were  to the Rothschilds and their accom- 
ices  tne colleion of "faors" which determmed 
the manipulation of history. They had their multie 
influences on the Kaiserreich which they had  chief- 
ly  created through manipulation of the monetary 
means for raising and deoying armies, bringing 
down governments, wrecking currencies of stubborn 
regimes, and buying in job-lots liberal, conservative, 
aristocratic, and professed Marxist organizations. 
Beyond the City of London's dire influence on the 
Kaiser government, socialist August Bebel of the 
German Social Democracy  like Eduard Bernstein 
 had been a British agent up to the moment of 
his death, and he was by no means the exception. 
Kaiser's Germany would never break westward  
the liticians would overrule the Kaiser's high com- 
mand! 



IFD)F=T®®B[i@x. PEM© EI^^ 




Walter Lippmann 



In the second try, the case of Hitler, the City of Lon- 
don and its lowere Manhattan accomices were con- 
fident that the problems of  Germany could not 
ssibly recur. The ernal struure of st-Ver- 
sailles German litical life had been fine-tuned by 
first the dominant Americans and junior-partner 
British (and Dutch) agencies direing the Allied 
Armistice Commission. Although Schacht, by , 
was in honored retirement, Schacht was still a loyal 
and litically influential American agent, and 
similar Wall Street and City of London controls er- 
seed every conceivable  of the Nazireich, in- 
cluding the redoubtable Admiral Canaris. In creating 
Hitler as Atlanticism's dissable **breakaway ally" 



 to bleed itself to British terms in services per- 
formed in the east, the Atlanticists who created Hitler 
ignored the fa that the erseion of the self-aggra- 
vating German debt struure, and the Schacht 
method of primitive accumulation against the Ger- 
man economy's economic basis, set forces o lawful 
motion which could not be checked without destroying 
the debt struures and the litical machine created 
to serve its imperatives. Again, Germans being as 
capable of strategic thinking as Rothschilds, Hitler 
seized the Hitler-Stalin pa, and attacked the aston- 
ished and vulnerable western forces, determined thus 
to build up the necessary looting base for creating his 
eastward direed war machine. 



P^OF-T(o)(Q)llOT. OEM© E^iD©i 



World War III 



Today, the Rockefeller faion manically insists 
that its operational confrontationist licies will 
not lead to an aual general war. This time, the Tavis- 
tock-Rand psychological profile of the Oblomovist 
Soviet leadership is the crux of their obsessive stupid- 
ity: "We have control of a key seion of the Soviet 
leadership/* emphasizing that Georgii Arbatov and 
others are hard-core Rockefeller agents within and 
aroundvthe CPSU Central Committee, and that the 
suprters of the Brezhnev licy of the moment will 
continue to perform as the profile specifies. As with 
the Kaiserreichy the Atlanticists of today insist that 
the litical institutions will overrule the military 
command. (In -, it was the delusion that the 
German military and Canaris would overrule Hitler 
on the risks of fighting a two-froift war.) 

They hysterically deny the lawfulness of wereful 
economic and related processes now as they did 
before. 

Contrary to London's calculations, the economics 
of the Kaiserreich demanded the securing of a looting 
base in either the east or the west as a precondition for 
bringing the war against the Trie Entente to a con- 
clusion. Gentlemen's understandings concerning 
Western Fronts or **zones of confli" do not operate 
under conditions of war. The Kaiser's Germany could 
not commit its forces to an engagement to the east and 
leave Russia's allies waiting behind its back to invade 
the Ruhr at some crucial  in the eastern affair. 
With an occupation of the Ruhr  in either the first or 
second world wars  Germany's war-fighting capa- 
bilities would have evarated. Objeively, Germany 
had no rational choice but to invade France in both 
wars. 

The Kaiser's Germany came close to winning the 
First World War at the outset  had the command 
exoited the peculiar vulnerabilities of French rail- 
way networks according to an enterprise then within 
their military capabilities. It was that vacillation and 
error in the German command which prevented the 
French forces from being shattered during the onset 



of the war, and thus established the breathing space 
during which the French command could dig in to 
transform the war o the hideous meatgrinder attri- 
tion which charaerized its prolongation. 
