become the "molecular process" of aving at the 
properly adjusted trends in wages, working conditions 
and social services. 



 

Otherwise, when the element of primitive accu- 
mulation is roduced to industrialist-labor relations, 
through a massive debt burden direly and indirely 
imsed un industries, agriculture and government 
agencies, the confli between industrialists and labor 
must tend to become a profound litical crisis. 

That  is key to the Roosevelt administration. 

The Roosevelt administration became a ssibility 
through a process of monetary decay in the ernal 
U.S. economy over the period -. The effes of 
that monetary decay were transmitted through debt 
overhangs, as a primitive-accumulation licy im- 
sed un industrialists, to exacerbating of manage- 
ment-labor relations, unemoyment, and associated 
matters. In consequence, the Republican Party, which 
had maained the White House during the - 
period through suprt of black voters and large 
rtions of the labor movement, lost its traditional 
labor-black social base to the Democratic Party 
during -. 

Roosevelt, by using corratist methods  e.g., the 
NRA  and by emulating the Hitler regime's Ar- 
beitsdienst in forms such as the WPA, CCC, and so 
forth, took credit for the autocannibalistic process of 
modest recovery of -, and called the whole 
unwholesome mass the **New Deal." 

It is a wretched delusion to imagine that Roosevelt's 
licies in any significant way contributed to an eco- 
nomic recovery during the middle of the s. Once 
the process of liquidating some of the weakest 
financial paper and other bankrupt property titles had 
been effeed by approximately , and especially 
beginning , the shattered economy made an 
automatic upturn in levels of numerical emoyment. 
The marginal source of the wealth for this semi- 
recovery was the looting of stored-up real value 
caed forward from the pre- period. Physical 
ant and inventories were run down, and, as in Nazi 
Germany, levels of wages and working conditions 
were pushed substantially below those of the earlier 
period. Both the produive capacities of industries 
and the tential produivity of the labor force were 
savagely deeted during the - period. This 
was demonstrated by the mass of comas in 
rerts on the war mobilization begun in late  and 
during . The produion tential of ant and 
labor was far below the levels of . This decline 
represented a looting of industry and labor force, of 
operating - ant and labor force overall at 
levels of maenance below that needed to maain 
them at pre-existing levels of produive tential. It 
was that margin of looting of the pre- build-up of 
produive forces which provided the thin margins of 
primitive-accumulation profits on which the de- 







 

pressed U.S. economy stumbled miserably through 
the economic autocannibalization of the - 
period. 

The Roosevelt administration's corratist licies 
of primitive accumulation ensified the bitterness 
between labor and industry, an industry pularly 
identified with Morgan and the Republican Party, 
Roosevelt, chiefly with the aid of Fabian operative 
Sidney Hillman, kept the emerging organized labor 
movement within the Democratic Party. Organized 
labor  egged on beginning in  by the Communist 
Party  suprted Roosevelt's diluted fascist primi- 
tive-accumulation licies of government and finance, 
and viewed the results of their suprt of such licies 
as all the more reason to hate the Republicans. By and 
large, the Republicans fell o the same scenario- 
trap, as did the industrialists. 

The litical princies involved are by no means a 
pecularity of the - period. The American 
Revolution was based un an alliance forged by 
Franklin, Adams, Tom Paine and others, between pro- 
development capitalist forces and urban labor, 
dragging farmers along behind. The Lincoln govern- 
ment was based on an alliance among industrialists, 
urban labor, and the new farm strata emerging 
around the growing ernational role of U.S. grain 
produion. The - conflis  and the con- 
ditions preceding those eruptions  were the result of 
a massive debt-accumulation, which broke apart the 
Lincoln social base of the Federalist-Whig-Republican 
current. 

The same princie underlay the coalition of 
litical and social forces which charaerized the 
period of the reign of Tudor Elizabeth I up through 
. 

Such litical coalitions of capitalists and labor can 
exist and funion effeively only under the condition 
that the industrialist alliance is based on a conscious- 
ness of the princies involved, and when constituted 
as an anti-monetarist force. The Tudor development 
of capitalism was based un an alliance of English 
forces for a conscious licy of forced technological 
progress, against the well-defined monetarist enemy 
(Fugger-Hapsburg) and monetarist licies. The 
American Revolution was an alliance forged by 
Benjamin Franklin and his collaborators, an alliance 
of pro-development capitalist and urban labor forces 
against the Hanoverian monetarist enemy, and 
against the hated monetarist licies otherwise set 
forth in Adam Smith's despicable Wealth of Nations, 
The Lincoln administration was built un a rear- 
ticulation of Federalist anti-monetarist licies, a 
Lincoln licy immediately incorrating the con- 
verging features of Henry Clay and Carey. Whenever 



such a consciously anti-monetarist licy is lost or 
otherwise abandoned, the coalition must tend to 
disperse, and monetarism and monetarist licy 
easily insinuates itself and then prevails. 

This princie is obviously not something we have 
just now uncovered. If more persons would seriously 
read Karl Marx's Communist Manifesto, and waste 
less energy professing to be frightened by its pular 
misrepresentation, they would discover that Marx 
prosed there the establishment of a German 
national capitalist republic. Indeed, the German 
capitalists' earlier choice of Karl Marx, over the 
alternate candidate, Friedrich List, to edit their Neue 
