security. 

He must have ''recreation"  relief from creative 
mental life, relief from being a useful, produive 
person in the "outside world." This need for recrea- 
tion is not the same as a true adult's recreations, in 
which the monotony of relatively routine produive 
work is left briefly for the freedom to exercise one's 
mental-creative processes in a more concentrated 
way  as we shall emphasize. It is not merely recrea- 
tion in the more inclusive sense that governs the phen- 
omena of childish recreation such as those games. 
Toryism is the desire to leave the world of reason for 
the comforts of an infantile way of living. 

In this, we are confronting real litics at its 
"molecular" roots. 

The infant and child are properly diminishing 
degrees of dependency on the infantile condition, a 
thrust of progress toward becoming morally a part of 
the "outside world." The infant exists as the family 
provides, and controls his or her family environment 
by propitiating  principally  the parents, who are 
the providers. Food, and so forth, are not needs 
realized in consequence of the infant's and young 
child's rationally willful aions on the real world. 
These childish needs are met typically through the 
parents. Furthermore, the child projes its own in- 
fantile, propitiatory comprehension of ernal family 
relations un the parents' relationship to the larger, 
"outside" world. 

As the child matures, the developing individual 
assimilates increasingly a rational sense of cause- 
and-effe as being the universal, lawful ordering of 
events in the "outside world/' This necessarily 
focuses on non-social aspes of his experience: 
making things work. It is by turning his focus away 
from social errelationships to objes and processes 
which are not governed by opinions, which cannot be 
propitiated, that the child is able to apy his weres of 
pre-conscious, concept-generating insight to the 



 

notion of lawful processes operating independently of 
the heteronomic wills of eraing individuals. 

The dichotomies involved in the child's mental life 
on this account are exhibited by inappropriately 
propitiatory behavior toward objes. The child 
breaks the toy that "stubbornly refuses" to "obey" his 
desires. The frustrated child within the adult machin- 
ist breaks a tool against the machine, out of 
frustration. The enraged child within an adult 
smashes the public telephone "because" the telephone 
conneion "refused" to funion as desired, or 
because none of the coins were returned from the 
incometed long-distance call. We say, noting such 
aberrations, that the person has behaved irrationally. 
Such irrational behavior in adults emphasizes the 
 that one enters adulthood either because one has 
grown o it, or because one has been thrown o it, 
or because one has been thrown o it at the  that 
the process of growing o adulthood has not yet been 
cometed. It is the epistemological dichotomy be- 
tween the propitiatory, false notion of "universal 
causation" by the infant and by the infantile aspe of 
the personality, and the opsite real notion of a 
universal lawful ordering of causal relationships, 
which rigorously accounts for the charaeristic 
irrationality-rationality dualism of the overall be- 
havior of the growing child, adolescent and adult. 
This is the root-molecular issue of real litics. 

The corresnding feature of this dichotomy is the 
way in which these two impulsions  infantile- 
propitiatory and adult-rational  are linked to 
corresndingly opsite tendencies in the in- 
dividual's location of a sense of identity. The infantile 
aspe of the personality locates identity in terms of 
the propitiatory dependency sense of being "my 
mother's child/* "That is the real me," is exemary 
of this world outlook and correlated notion of sense of 
identity. The individual who is thrown o adulthood 
usually accepts the painful obligation to funion in the 
"outside world," according to rules whose aual or 
imied rationality confli with the propitiatory 
outlook of the infantile personality, his or her "real 
me," which he or she locates as "behind" and "un- 
derneath." The "outer-world" or quasi-rational or 
rational aspe of personal behavior is essentially a 
persona, a living mask, the praical erface be- 
tween the "inner me" and the adolescent or adult 

funioning in the "outside world." 

The relatively true adult is not-accidentally typified 
by the person who has an untaedly adult-rational 
relationship to parents and siblings, uncluttered by 
"background noise" representing the propitiatory 
tendencies and conflis of childhood. Although sur- 
face appearances to this effe are not infallible 



P^OF-T(o)(Q)llOT. OEM© E^iD©i 



 

guides, what they imy is sufficient for our purses 
here. The inner change which makes such an adult 
transformation ssible is the individuars locating in 
the experience and a wareness of the were of crea tive 
insight of his (pre-conscious) mental processes, his real 

sense of social identity. 

This required qualitative change in the personality 
is dependent un not only an experience of such 
creative weres, but a twofold confidence in those 
weres. He must be confident that those creative 
mental weres are an ordered, reliable instrument for 
mastering comprehension for praice of a univer- 
sally-lawful ordering of the world, and must also be 
confident that this quality in himself is what makes 
him properly useful and imrtant to his society. 

It is inevitable that this adult tentiality is most 
readily associated with creative accomishment in 
the physical sciences. The normal case of the 
developing chiXA apies. The physical sciences are a 
more accessible focus for psychologically tolerating 
the notion of a universally lawful ordering in nature. 
The focus does not yet require abandonment of the 
infantile sense of identity, but rather permits the 
exercise of a rational-creative capacity, without im- 
mediately bringing the aual or tential scientist's 
infantile identity heritages o dire confli with 
the inquiry. Similarly, creative promise among 
mathematicians tends to show early, chess masters 
usually begin as prodigies, as do gifted musicians, and 
so forth. A person otherwise a monstrously infantile 
personality can be a famous chess master or a pure 
mathematician and so forth. 
