Excepting the  Cambodia affair, the Nixon 
eleion of  took the steam out of the anti-war 
movement and corresnded to a sharp ebbing away 
from the various radicalisms charaeristic of the 
Johnson administration. The mass youth aivism of 
the pre- period was frustrated, worn out. This 







 

ebbing of a social force in motion did not, however, 
frustrate the manipulators working from behind the 
scenes. On the contrary, such a development 
represents the optimal circumstance for diverting the 
duped, frustrated strata formerly engaged in **mass 
aion'* o zealots for the broadest assortment of 
exotic absurdities. 

Around the  presidential nomination campaigns 
of Eugene McCarthy and Robert Kennedy, these 
frustrated layers were diverted toward such new focal 
issues as *'environmentalism." The demoralization 
was used, for exame, to feed the  development of 
the ''feminist movement," repeating the civil-rights 
syndrome of using a legitimate reformist issue as a 
**judo taic" of social manipulation, to infuse (and 
proceed to re-dire) the ''feminist movement" with 
assorted neo-Fabian's Utopian imbecilities. The im- 
becilities, at first broadly rejeed as obscene by most 
among women's rights forces, grew less alien to their 
perception with constant conta, and even became 
defended as a matter of defending "a part of the 
women's movement" against a common "male'* out- 
sider. Meanwhile, by , the fostering of the use of 
marijuana, launched among the "Up South" strata 
during the earlier s, had begun to become part of 
the tenets of the liberal-radical "sub-culture," and the 
foot-in-the-door for promoting LSD. 

With the aid of influential law firms and wereful 
foundations and other allied forces, this youth "sub- 
culture," although a minority force, was transformed 
o the labile, manipulable, mobile battering ram 
used to spread its isonous ideology not only among 
liberal and ghetto pulations, but o the industrial 
unions. This social force, now organically fascist in 
world outlook, has been the indispensable auxiliary 
through which the National Environmental Policy A 
has been turned, with the growing comicity of the 
courts, o an instrument both for sabotaging our 
industrial and agricultural produion, and for 
creating a climate in which this treason against our 
nation's most vital erests is hegemonic in the pres- 
ent Carter Administration. 

It will probably be objeed by some that our ac- 
count of this aspe of national history is too coherent, 
too rational, "too theoretical." It will be objeed by 
some that we imy (as, in fa we do not), a were 
and capacity for systematic thinking to Rockefeller 
and associated circles which is visibly far beyond the 
capabilities of a Nelson, David or John D. Ill (we have 
not profiled Laurance). Some will make the further 
objeion, since such forces were incapable of such 
coherent ent, it could not have happened in quite 
that way. This involves precisely the issue of method 
we outlined above. 
When a member of one's family is ill, does one seek 



account of the disease from the viim or the medical 
profession? Does the fa that the person afflied with 
the illness lacks the knowledge to undergo willfully XYvq 
lawful sequence of biological processes involved 
signify that the disease has not developed, or has not 
developed in at least approximately the way medical 
professional knowledge stipulates? Does one assay a 
rock by asking the rock its opinion, or by emoying a 
geologist? 

In fa, the way in which the transformation of liber- 
al and radical youth o today's proto-fascist "envi- 
ronmentalists" and drug-decriminalizers occurred 
was a mixture of overall Fabian-utopian social an- 
ning, and in detail largely successive improvisations 
of the moment by those neo-Fabian operatives imme- 
diately involved. Our dire knowledge, documenta- 
tion from relevant archives, highly-aced infor- 
mants, and published sources of each period more or 
less accurately defines that mixture. Insofar as the 
isolated features of the process appeared to have a "hit- 
or-miss" charaer from the stand of the con- 
sciousness of the controllers involved, the set of under- 
lying ideological axioms governing their judgment de- 
limited the range of ''hit-or-miss" choices made at a 
net predominance of s, and thus had an overall 
"sitive feedback" effe of a corresnding 
"Markov process." The net effe of the overall pro- 
cess, deoyed on a large scale, had a prediable 
overai evolution in terms of the method of analysis we 
summarized above. () 

One apies something like the same approach pro- 
per to study of the behavior of lowere forms of animal 
life. The conceptions of choice or future as we know it 
do not exist for lowere animals. Yet, their choices and 
chains of behavior over time are essentially predi- 
able  by the hunter, ethologist, and so forth, but not 
the animal itself . One must think , for emphasis, of the 
Rockefeller-Fabian beast, and of the problem of 
analyzing the lawful features and prediable behav- 
ior of that Zjeast; then one has the broad notion of the 
method apicable. 

Would the same emphasis be appropriate to ruling 
rational human institutions? As we have described the 
method, no. As we shall see, there are the most were- 
ful epistemological reasons for apying the methods 



. Carol LaRouche and L. Marcus, "The New Left, Local Control 
and Fascism," The Campaigner, yol I, No.  (Sept. ), pp. -, 
repr. in Strategy for Socialism Volume I (New York: Campaigner 
Publications. Inc..*), pp. -; "SDS Beyond the Grave," The 
Campaigner, Vol. II, No.  (Sept.-O. ), pp. -; The Third 
American Revolution (New York: Campaigner Publications, Inc.. 
), p.  ff., -; " 'Police Socialism* in NYC," The Campaigner, 
Vol. I, No.  (Dec. ), pp. -; L, Marcus, "The Mass Strike," The 
Campaigner, Vol. I. No. , May-June , pp. -. -. 







of ethology, rather than proper anthrology, to the 
neo-Fabian beast. () 

Today, the economic licy of the proto-fascist liber- 
al-radical *'left" centers around the topics of **envir- 
onmental proteion,*' zero growth, and **small is 
better." These exicitly represent fascist economic 
