

As even the White House basement's Tories running 
the **human rights" campaign themselves know fully, 
it is the United States government's turning up the 
screws of the **Cold War" which is the most imrtant 
variable slowing down the expansion of liberties with- 
in the CMEA countries. () It would be through the 
creating for the Soviet Union  to the extent that our 
erests and licies permit this  of a non-aversive 
outward climate, especially in respe to Western 
Europe and the United States, that the areas of tolera- 
tion we call liberties would be increased in the rele- 
vant nations. To the extent that the United States 
government condus or tolerates aversive external 
and penetration-disruption operations within the 
CMEA nations launched from within the NATO coun- 
tries, it is hycrisy for the government and leading 
press of the United States to lie to the citizens of the 
United States concerning the causal conneions in- 
volved. 

On the outside, for the credulous, duped U.S, con- 
servatives, such as former Representative and Presi- 
dent Gerald Ford, and also for the majority of the 
duped U.S. citizens and residents of recent Eastern 
European extraion involved, the **captive nations" 
front-organization is essentially what such a front- 
organization is prescribed to be  a litical cover 
and a trick to be ayed un the credulous dupes who 
don't know by whom or why they are being used. On 
the inside. Underneath and behind the layers of dupes, 
the captive nations" network is an ernational 
fascist organization, coordinated through Interl, 
and comsed of first and second-generation opera- 
tives of the Nazi SS and Canaris Abwehr Second 
Division (the so-called *'Brandenburger Division"). 
These Include the Canada-based Ukrainian Nazi 
network, comsed of Nazi Waffen SS and Branden- 
burger Division war-criminals and their immediate 
descendants. These include the Buenos Aires-based 
ernational Nazis' Ustashi network, including 
leaders, some resident in the United States, who are 
wanted in Yugoslavia for war crimes which rank in 
deeds perpetrated by individuals as the most hideous 
of the World War II period. 

This inside aspe of the **captive nations" opera- 
tion is direly affiliated to Interl under the **cover" 
of Interl's fiive authority for processing er- 
national searches for wanted Nazi war criminals. 

That is standard operating procedure. To run 
massive ernational drug-smuggling networks, the 
networks are run through the agencies which have 
nominal prime authority for investigating drug net- 



. Cf. "How the White House Manufaures 'Soviet Dissenters' " 
and accompanying case studies in Executive Intelligence Review, 
Vol IV, No.  (Feb. , ), pp. -. 







works. The **under investigation" fiion is then used 
to ward regular, unwitting lice agencies off er- 
ference with the drug-network operations. To run an 
ernational network led by wanted Nazi war 
criminals, the network is run through the organization 
which has the delegated authority to investigate such 
persons and groups. To run massive arms-smuggling 
operations across borders in small private anes, 
unmarked C-'s and so forth, from Hartford, Connec- 
ticut through various parts of the United States, 
through Mexico, o Guatemala, and s south, the 
cooperation by the National Security Agency and 

Interl is vital. 

This inside operation of the ''captive nations'* 
racket ermeshes with other aspes of the Nazi and 
the Nazis' Vichy fascist networks, including the South 
American-Spain network coordinated by Hjalmar 
Schacht's son-in-law, the recently deceased Colonel 
Otto Skorzeny, and the Vichy French fascist network 
known as the OAS, us major elements of Israeli 
elligence. This network overall erfaces official 
government erior and other ministries in various 
nations, chiefly through those sub-departments of 
government which coordinate with Paris Interl 
headquarters. It is relevant to the predominantly 
fascist pedigrees of the Interl base network that the 
Rockefeller-created Interl organization was headed 
by Austrian fascists at the outset, then by Nazi SD 
chiefs Heydrich and Kaltenbrunner, and at the end of 
the war was ''reconstituted" under the direion of the 
Rockefellers' attorney, Allen Dulles, acing the In- 
terl organization under the direion of some of the 
same Nazi officials who had inclusively participated 
in such wartime Interl operations as the Nazi round- 
ups of Hungarian Jews and gypsies for extermination. 

This Interl network is the "hard" or "wetwork" 
side of the ernational network which runs not only 
illegal drug and arms smuggling operations, mer- 
cenary armies' aivities, but also the bloody side of 
every terrorist operation and many assassinations 
throughout the world. In terrorist operations, Interl, 
with its immediately associated elements within 
government agencies, deoys the terrorist aion 
itself and also manipulates the lice agencies 
deoyed against the terrorists. 

This operation is presently run with computer- 
coordinated assistance. The criminal and non- 
criminal investigatory operations of many national 
governments are modernized through the develop- 
ment of central, semi-"real time" computer files. By 
virtue of the Interl-linked agencies' dire access to 
such computer files, Interl has a degree of barely 
visible control over local law enforcement conditions 
in two ways. It represents elligence of a sort in- 
valuable to the deoyment of terrorist operations. 



 

and affords Interl and its collaborators means to 
screw up the anti-terrorist aivities of both local 
lice agencies and even the principal ernal 
security and elligence forces of national govern- 
ments. This computer network is ernational, in- 
terfacing not only under the control of Paris-based 
Interl, but also with such relevant organizations as 
the Rockefellers' WorldWatch Institute, which not only 
computer-monitors pulation control and hunger- 
and-famine information globally, but also engages in 
coordination of ernational terrorist information. 

This network operates, obviously, in such a way that 
vast operations can be more or less efficiently 
deoyed with a relatively minimum degree of "need 
to know" by the resnsible executives and other 
emoyees of the sub-elements making up the network 
