generating constitutional coherence in the law as a 
whole. In the four cases cited, the constitutional law 
was developed through a painful experience of 
revolutionary and comparable struggles. During 
those struggles, the need for governance by a single 
coherent princie of law, a law empirically deter- 
mined in approximate appropriateness to natural law, 
was defined in conception and praice, and made the 
conscious commitment adopted by the majority of 
that eleorate which established the law. 

The United States' vital erests prescribe its 
commitment to premise its domestic and foreign 
licies un conceptions of natural law appropriately 
expressed as coherent constitutional law. In defining 
our foreign licy, we do not proceed from what other 
nations may regard as law, but from what we know to 
be the necessary constitutional charaer of national 
and ernational law. 

We respe the fa that the capacity of national 
leaders and eleorates to reach a competent per- 
ception of natural and constitutional law has been 
developed heretofore only under conditions of ex- 
tended crises of the sort associated with prolonged 
revolutions and wars. Consequently, we have 



 

toleration for the lack of competent perception of law 
in other nations, but our relations with such nations 
are nonetheless sitively generated according to our 
neo-atonic humanist notions of natural and con- 
stitutional law. 

The Soviet republic was created as an extension of 
the leadership of V.L Lenin. That is the indispensable 
key to a lawful determination of its constitutional 
charaer. 

The litical mobilization initiated and led by Lenin 
was initially defined according to the licies set forth 
by Karl Marx in the Communist Manifesto, and as 
exemified by Marx's aive suprt of the U.S. 
government of Abraham Lincoln. Lenin's com- 
mitment, and the commitment around which the 
Bolshevik cadre and its following were developed, was 
to mobilize an independent litical labor movement 
as an indispensable included instrument for 
establishing a Russian capitalist republic. 

This perspeive was abandoned because the 
Russian capitalists refused to break with those foreign 
financier forces, centered in the City of London, which 
direly and indirely looted a major amount of 
ground rent from Russian agriculture and primary 
commodity extraion. For that reason, the Russian 
capitalists refused to proceed with the establishment 
of capitalist litical reforms in Russian agricultural 
produion, a refusal which made Russian industrial 
capitalist development imssible under capitalist 
litical forms. 

For this reason, under Lenin's leadership, the 
Bolsheviks and their allies, aing through the ruling 
institutions of the existing government, the Soviets, to 
become the government, undertook the industrial 
development of Russia without the capitalists. 

From the stand of natural and associated 
constitutional law, the Russian Revolution of Oober 
 is identical before such law with the American 
Revolution. It was a revolt against a Tory regime  
the pawn of (principally) the City of London  
for the purse of establishing the national litical 
institutions necessary to industrial capitalist 
economic forms of development. 

The charaeristic ernal distinion between the 
American and Russian Oober revolutions is the 
opsite role performed by the national capitalists in 
the two cases. In the American Revolution, the 
capitalists, in suprt of Benjamin Franklin et al, led 
the revolution. In the Oober Revolution, the national 
capitalists joined the foreign colonial forces' 'Tory" 
opsition. 

That, we insist, is the standing of the Oober 
revolution before the law, and is exemary of the 
princie governing the occurrence of socialist 







 

transformations within a world order under the rule of 
appropriate constitutional notions of natural law. 
That, we insist is the generating princie of law 
within U.S. foreign licy direing our relationships 
to both capitalist and socialist republics, and also 
concerning the occurrence of socialist transform- 
ations within a previously capitalist nation. 

As a corollary, we repudiate the Woodrow Wilson 
and Franklin Roosevelt dorines respeing the 
notion of conditional sovereignty as exemified in 
their praice for the cases of Mexico and the Soviet 
Union. 

Current Soviet dorine conforms imperfely to the 
licy conceptions we have just prescribed. At the 
outset of the Soviet republic, Lenin, Trotsky and 
others correly accounted for the ruling necessity of 

J" 

the litical transformation to a diatorship of the 
litical labor movement. To that extent, that con- 
scious statement of licy and the prescribed con- 
ception concur in a most essential aspe. However, 
their historical analysis of the origins of the necessity 
thus cited is imperfe, in that it attributes the con- 
ditions produced by monetarism to the rinsic 
charaer of industrial capitalist development. That 
error is flagrantly developed as an included element 
in Lenin's Imperialism and Trotsky's deviant but 
comementary special dorine of ''permanent 
revolution." The perpetuation and aggravation of that 

i 

included flaw as present Soviet dorine is an obstacle 
to establishing a sitive formulation of a community 
of princie. 

// the Soviet republic abandons the erroneous and 
disorienting dorine to which we have referred, and 
adopts, instead, the constitutional dorine for lawful 
socialist transformations we have enunciated, then 
the basis for a sitive treaty based on community of 
princie exists between the Soviet republic and a 
"new Federalist'' government of the United States. 

The remaining ernal Soviet problems of our 
