Our geography was assimilated o the process that 
was America as emphatically as our pulation 
assimilated so many kinds of immigrants. It is not an 
* 'Anglo-Saxon tradition"  in our Revolution we 
founded a nation by rejeing the axiomatic features 
of the then-dominant Anglo-Saxon outlook. 

To be an American is to be a part of that historical 
process, first brought to our shores by neo-atonic 
humanist currents from England, the Netherlands 
and France, which Benjamin Franklin and his 
collaborators made self-conscious to our litical 
forebears, during especially the periods from ap- 
proximately  through the adoption of our republic. 

The work of Franklin and others, seizing un the 
appropriate impulses embedded in principally the 
urban pulation of the North American English 
colonies, but also impulses more weakly developed 
among most of our farmers, work condued over half 
a century of litical and related education and 
organizing efforts, generated among our litical 
forebears a new and more advanced litical world 
outlook. 

Organically, the development of this self-conscious 
outlook was premised in the tentiality represented 
by the humanist impulses transmitted to our shores 
from Tudor and Commonwealth sources. However, 
the Federalist  and Whig  litical outlook was not 
merely the conscious sime affirmation of such 
impulses, in no sense a *'social contra" agreeable to 
the immediate, heteronomic expression of such im- 
pulses. Those impulses were the tentiality through 
which Franklin's original conception of a litical 
outlook was embedded in those same thus- 
transformed impulses, transforming those impulses 
o a new quality of universally-oriented national 
willful impulses for praice. 

The charaeristic feature of the work of Franklin, 
the Federalists, the Whigs, and Lincoln's Republicans 



 

was the combating of the wrong, heteronomic ideas 
which the people would have ^'naturally" developed 
under the condition their judgments were shaped 
heteronomically, on the '^fiitious" basis of local 
circumstances. The charaeristic feature of the 
educational process leading o our Revolution and 
the establishment of our republic was the success of 
Franklin and others in showing how a heteronomic 
erpretation of impulses was in reality in praical 
opsition to the fulfillment of individualized goals in 
terms of consequences for the colonies and nation as a 
whole. The need for unity of aion and purse of the 
colonies, the need for unity of aion and purse by 
the nation, in opsition to the localized, heteronomic 
erpretation of the imperatives of those same im- 
pulses, was the charaeristic method by which 
Franklin and his collaborators convinced, first, the 
industrialists, then the urban labor movement, and, 
lastly, the majority of the farmers, to reje their 
individualistic blunders, in favor of understanding 
that the aual fulfillment of their proper individual 
erests depended un subordinating those ''fic- 
titiously" misdireed impulses to those impulses' 
proper expression in terms of the universal erest. 

It was that process which won the majority of the 
eleorate to adopting the notion of the universal as 
primary. It was that alteration of the informed willful 
impulses for praice of the majority of the American 
eleorate during the decades-prolonged process 
leading to the establishing of this nation, to that effe 
 to the adoption of the universalist outlook on the 
impulse for technological progress and self- 
development of the individual within technological 
progress, which became thus the embedded national 
charaer, transmitted through such impulses o the 
molding of our early institutions. 

To understand that, and to coordinate that 
knowledge sensuously in respe of one's self- 
consciousness of the origins of one's personal history, 
is to be an American in the proper, meaningful sense 
of the term. It was the persistence of that universalist 
perception of national and subsumed individual in- 
terest embedded in our nation's founding institutions, 
whose persisting influence  even in face of Tory 
subversion  accounts both for all our successes as a 
nation and the Whig outlook still organically em- 
bedded in the impulses of the majority of our people. 

America succeeded as it did during the last quarter 
of the eighteenth century, because the forces centered 
around the high Renaissance-like genius of Benjamin 
Franklin represented by far the most advanced 
litical thinkers in any part of the world  as the 
contrasting failures of the French Revolution aptly 
illustrate. Because that, the most advanced litical 
conception existing in the world, was made conscious, 
and in turn, embedded consciously in the willful im- 







 

pulses of the founding eleorate, those conceptions 
and impulses generated institutions and instruments 
which governed the American Revolution and the 
Constitution's founding of our republic. 

It is in that light that we may understand more 
exaly the significance of pragmatist John Dewey's 
assertive repudiation of universal values at the end of 
World War I, and of the same consistent expression of 
American Toryism in Beard, Arnold, Williams, 
Roosevelt, Kennedy, and the Carter Administration. 
These persons are not Americans, but the grotesque 
refleions of an alien social disease of heteronomy 
which has isoned the body litic. 

It is within that same context that the philo- 
sophically fascist film Roots is to be appreciated. 
The black American is not an epiphenomenon of 
Africa or of his black skin (except as our culture has 
bestialized the black American by distinguishing him 
litically as black). He is not an heir to the 
degenerating forms of the seventeenth to eighteenth 
centuries* African cultures, already in collapse, an 
African collapse and degeneration toward bestiality 
aggravated by the disruptive effes of the Arab slave 
traders even before the imrtation of slaves o this 
continent. The black American is an American by 
right and his historically determined American 
charaer. The fascist charaer of the film Roots is 
not accidentally associated with the fa that the 
leading neo-Fabians (e.g., Marcus Raskin) are 
professedly * 'philosophical fascists,'* and their 
associate Professor Noam Chomsky is thoroughly a 
philosophical fascist of precisely the genre Marcus 
Raskin has professed. 
