same categorical effe by neo-atonic humanism, is 
the charaeristic, axiomatic premise of nominalism, 
and the axiomatic premise of monetarist praice and 
dorine. Hence, epistemologically, what both 
Christian currents of humanism define as evil, 
nominalism, and monetarism are respeively only 
different facets of the same degeneracy. 

There are three now classical attacks on the 
problem of heteronomy in modern thought. The first 
convincing attempt at a coherent analysis of the 
problem was accomished in the Netherlands: 
Benedi Spinoza, notably in his Ethics, and the great 
humanist paer, Rembrandt, by showing the face of 
evil in his ^'Syndics of the Cloth Guild," The second is 
the systematic analysis of heteronomy from a 
stretched Aristotelian stand by Immanuel Kant, 
most notably in the concluding seion of his Critique 
of Praical Reason, The third, resolving the ap- 
proaches contributed by both Spinoza and Kant, is the 
rigorous notion of alienation as anually developed 
successively by G.W.F. Hegel and Karl Marx, 



It is to be emphasized that Hegel's and Marx's 
rigorous conception of alienation has no cognitive 
conneions to the uses of that term by Frankfurt 
School and other Fabian and neo-Fabian corrupters of 
its usage. 

Since Kant situates the problem within the stretched 
framework of Aristotelian geometries, it is his term 
and his analysis which afford the preferred  of 
departure for an historical analysis of the problem. 
Hence, Kant's notion of heteronomy is the  of 
reference we have roduced here. 

The Cartesian humanist, Spinoza, located the 
problem of heteronomy in respe to what he termed 
^'fiitious knowledge." The significance Spinoza gave 
to the formal aspe of the problem is that localized 
knowledge is inherently wrong; and also that the at- 
tempt to bring thought o agreement with ordering 
princies governing such localized misapprehension 
of reality forms the lawful basis for generating evil, 
behavior contrary to the prescriptions immanent in a 
universal, lawful ordering. Because Spinoza's method 
was hylozoic, his notion of ''fiitious knowledge" also 
meant an insight o a lawful generation of a con- 
tinuum of "fiitious" or evil praice in the suc- 
cession of human affairs. 

The crucial formal defe in Spinoza's effort to 
advance neo-atonic humanism was that he at- 
tempted to resolve the problem in terms of reference 
of an Aristotelian-Euclidean epistemology. His causal 
princie was not Aristotelian-Euclidean, but he at- 
tempted to use his princie to make a revolution with- 
in the stretched formal premises of the Aristotelian 
system. Hence, the formal result was a linearized 
attempt to represent a model for the kind of negen- 
tropic continuum which he demanded. 

That was not an idiosyncrasy of Spinoza's. The 
Erasmian Thomas More exhibits the identical 
problem in the conceptual ordering of his Utopia, Any 
effort which adopts the notion of an Aristotelian-like a 
priori ordering of the preordained formal lawful 
framework of ordering, as Ficino typifies such neo- 
atonic humanists' errors in his Five Questions, must 
lead to a Utopian ethical method of the type best exem- 
ified by Ficino, More, and Spinoza. The proper 
judgment of this problem does not lead to discarding 
of Ficino, More, Spinoza, et al,, but to adducing the 
generative princie ordering their creative thought, 
by examining the imications of their efforts under 
the condition that the crucial, Aristotelian restriion 
on the formal representation of their hytheses is 
removed. 

That is by no allowable view merely a problem of 
humanist philosophers. It is also the approach 
uniquely demanded for understanding the pre- 
Tudor Renaissance and the charaer of the founding 
American institutions associated with the Declaration 







of Independence and Constitution. In each case, with 
respe to a self-consciousness of the necessity and 
form of the generative licy outlook and method they 
represented, the authors of the Tudor and American 
revolutions were charaeristically neo-atonic 
humanists, and self-consciously so regarding those 
features of the humanist outlook we have defined as 
crucial. However, in the course of the effort to trans- 
late these self-conscious impulses of outlook and 
method o the formal specifications of institutions, 
they were confronted with the obstacle of a culturally 
determined, caed-forward Aristotelian dorine. 

This epistemological contradiion within the fram- 
ing of, for exame, our Constitution, does not warrant 
the outrageously fraudulent conclusion that the Con- 
stitution is therefore so ambiguous respeing outlook 
and method that the question of the cited ent can be 
relegated to mere mootness. On the contrary, the 
founding fathers exicitly precluded such outrages 
with such key phrases as '*In order that ... to in 
every aspe of their definition of the controlling 
purse which must govern the apication of each 
formally specified feature. The essential feature of the 
frauds perpetrated by such Fabian and neo-Fabian 
revisionists as Thurman Arnold and William A. 
Williams is to demand a comprehensive discounting of 
just such crucial Constitutional specifications of out- 
look, method and empirical criteria of appropriate- 
ness. 

It is relevant to proof of our principal  to er- 
late here an observation of the refleion of this 
same problem in the philosophy of constitutional and 
subsumed law. Constitutional law, whether literally 
so or otherwise, is merely the institutionalized 
expression of the praical impulse of a governing 
epistemological outlook, and is itself an egral 
feature of the charaeristic geometry of societies. 
The notion of Law as a subje unto itself is isonous 
nonsense  as the methodology of nominalist evolu- 
tion of law under Weimar led direly and consistently 
o the irrationalist nightmare of Nazi judicial and 
related praices. 

Accordingly, it is an included charaeristic fraud of 
the Aristotelian scholastic dorinaires that they at- 
tempt in the main to define an ernally consistent 
continuity of evolution of law from Roman through 
feudal through medieval o modern law. Similarly, 
the preparatory background for empirical arguments 
in behalf of revisionist subversion of our Constitution 
is the attempt to similarly fuse English Common Law 
o the corpus of U.S. law. The outrageous fraud 
embedded in any such fallacy of comsition in legal 
dorine and praice, is that the successive bodies of 
law which they so recklessly rtray as the process of 
