by a misinformed eleorate, is a swindle* 

The eleorate must go through a forced process of 
informed refleion  of the sort the same eleorate's 
members wished they had emoyed before **buying 
that used car*'  or voting for Carter. 

A major document prosing a profound correion 
in domestic and foreign licies  such as the present 
one  is and must be ended to afford the rigorous 
statement of licy necessary to a process of broad 
and ense discussions within the eleorate. 

According to that princie and foresight, the initial 
and concluding seions of the document prove at first 
glance to the reader the nature of the olerable error 
in our existing domestic and foreign licies, proving 
also at first reading that in many respes the present 
licies of the Carter Administration are outright 
treason. Those same rtions of the document 
describe and illustrate the contrary licies we should 
adopt, in consistency with both our vital erests and 
the institutions and instruments specified by our Con- 
stitution. That aspe of the document suffices to ace 
our prosals properly in first ace on the nation's 
agenda for licy discussions and short-term 
decisions. 

However, any change in licy, even the prosed 



return to constitutional princies set forth here, has 
long-term imications. The statements we make in 
the initial and concluding seions are adequate to 
define our proper national licies for the immediate 
year or so ahead. The question remains: on what 
grounds can we be certain that these licies will work 
to our proper advantage, and that of our immediate 
sterity over the next decade and the decades to 
follow? 

For that reason, the middle seion, with its in- 
cluded more difficult passages, is indispensable. We 
cannot premise the future existence and condition of 
our nation  and the effe of our national licies 
un the world  on the authority of licies grounded 
only in the sentiments agreeable to a surface mood of 
the moment. As we qualify that imrtant distinion 
within the text, it is imssible to predi the future 
consequences of presently adopted licies, but we 
can and must forecast the range of alternative imi- 
cations of that licy. That forecast must not be a 
mere guess, an * uition." It must be rigorously 
grounded, so that we may be certain of what range of 
consequences of present licies we have bequeathed 
to ourselves and our immediate sterity. 

Respeing that latter aspe of the matter, let the 
relevant ferment of ense discussion begin. The time 
is short, and the matter is urgent. 

May ,  



[til] 




The drought' stricken Sahel in Africa, caused by the Rockefellers. The bare licy underlying the Rockefellers 
Atlanticist Dorine is to loot the world's agricultural-industrial base. 



P^OF-T(o)(Q)llOT. OEM© E^iD©i 



t 




The signing of the Versailles Treaty, June , , President Wilson and Colonel House are seated at the head 
table at the center of the photo. 



IFD)F=T®®B[i@x. PEM© EI^^ 





Plato, left, and Aristotle, shown in a detail of The School of Athens by Raphael, 



P^OF-T(o)(Q)llOT. OEM© E^iD©i 



THE CRISIS 

IN U.S. 
FOREIGN POLICY 







 

The early American et and novelist Edgar 
Allan Poe related a tale of a man hypnotized at 
the moment of his death, whose mind remained aive 
while the dead body to which it was pinioned un- 
derwent the progress of decay. The smell of that grisly 
Poe tale erupts as an association, as one compares the 
 U.S. Foreign Policy and U.S. War Aims of 
Roosevelt's Fabian propagandist Walter Lippmann to 
the decay-stricken effluvia of today's Trilateral Com- 
mission and its fellow-accomices. 

Beginning shortly after his  screening and in- 
dorination under the Webbs in England, Lippmann 
emerged to become for over almost half a century a 
leading Fabian litical propagandist. He was an 
imate of both British litical elligence and 
Woodrow Wilson's confidential circles during the 
period of the Versailles treaty. An ^'outsider" during 
the s Republican administration periods, he 
regained his semi-official status in relationship to the 
Roosevelt administration and later drifted o the 
rank of ''elder statesman** of the Anglo-American 
litical elligence circles. 

At the time it was written and published, Lipp- 
mann*s cited book had an imrtant assigned role in 
the process of formulating stwar U.S. licy. 
Although the Rockefellers* Brookings Institution had 
already articulated the main premises of the prosed 
licy in the ''American Century** dorine issued 
some years earlier, that general dorine had not been 
elaborated in terms appropriate to the principal 
strategic relations emerging from the course of 
