recolleions of relevant considerations are presently 
vivid (although in retrospeively diminishing 
number) back to the age of five. 

The Reverend Weir in particular was a most in- 
telleually aive representative of what it meant to 
be a minister in many parts of Ohio during his aive 
ministry over approximately the - period. To 
be such a minister during that period was to be a kind 
of local litical figure in the present sense of the 
term, imately concerned with the crises and other 
deeper features of the ernal lives of parishioners, 
drawn o every crisis affeing communities at the 
social erface of the farmers and the industries. The 
dominant feature of the Reverend Weir refleed to a 
child and youth was his blending of history, firsthand 
historical source knowledge, and broad contemrary 
experience o the conscious shaping of praical 
moral outlooks and decisions. ^ 

This impr of the two grandfathers determined 
charaeristics of the writer's more immediate family 
life, such that the moral continuity and associated 
historical method encountered separately in the 
parental and grandparents' homes made the latter  
especially to a child  a bright enrichment of the 
former. 

To have merely experienced how one's parents have 
raised one is to assimilate blind prejudice. To see 
through one's grandparents how the values of one's 
home have been shaped, determined, is to become 
conscious of those values as something created, rather 
than simy existent. It is to become conscious of a 
process creating the values according to which one's 
life is immediately governed, to become conscious of 
the process through which those values were adopted 
as a de fao body of family ^'constitutional law." 

To also have the advantage of grandparents who in 
turn emphasize their consciousness of the way in 
which their own values were determined, is to begin to 
become self-conscious of one's existence, rather than 
continuing to view it in the infantile, Aristotelian way 
as nothing but the order of things as they mysteriously 
are. The infantile Aristotelian view accepts the "way 
things are," and, at most, attempts to find some 
rational exanation of why that **system" is either 
entirely right (allonianism-Aristotelianism) or 
irrationally rejes it as **all wrong" (dionysian). The 
self-conscious outlook, most efficiently acquired by 
the child through grandparents who manifest a self- 
disciined sense of the developmental features of 
their own history, becomes an awareness of how the 
ordering of the individual's immediate life was 
historically generated. 

In American history, it is the nineteenth century 
which is distinguished as that part of our national life 



which is thus both sensuously accessible to our mature 
generations, and that accessible part of our sensuous 
knowledge which encompasses our nation in an aspe 
of that process of development during which its 
organic values were further embedded in the core of 
our pulation. 

The writer's specific form of advantage on this 
account respeing the overall social-litical history 
of our people is that the blending of the experience of 
the American immigrant families and of the Quaker 
settler families of the late seventeenth century, was 
the background of reference in which this self- 
conscious outlook on the history behind the eyes of 
others was early developed as the governing method 
of social experience. 

Respeing childhood first insights o the farmer 
question, between New Hampshire and Ohio, most of 
the Quaker, United Brethren and many of the Baptist 
families known to the writer during childhood were 
farmers, as were most of the writer's own maternal 
forebears. At the same time, the contrasting social 
experience was the writer's immediate identification 
in experience and outlook with the more immigrant 
side, the industrial, the technological. From the still 
conscious experience of childhood onwards, this in- 
terface between the farmer and the immigrant- 
emphasizing urban aspes of our culture was a 
shary defined erseion of two distin varieties of 
American world outlook, both respeing the overall 
outlooks as such and the notable differentiations 
within each. This was the conceptual basis for the 
writer's mature experiences with farm and rural 
strata during the s. 

Hence, to this writer, as to any other person 
similarly advantaged, the historical differentiation 
among rural pulations of America between the 
individualism of the technological oriented, proudly 
competent farmer and the wretched heteronomy 
charaeristic of the '*or farmer" is a clear and 
incontestable litical or otherwise protolitical fa. 
We understand the lumpen social basis of Jacksonian 
Toryism. 

Situating that approach to understanding the 
American farmer historically  using the materials 
and methods of history to understand how people 
come variously to view the world as they do in fa  
also immediately defines a broader, more imrtant 
 of immediate pertinency. 

To be an American in any morally acceptable un- 
derstanding of that profession, is to be self-conscious, 
along the lines we have set forth, of the process by 
which the present United States was generated. The 
method for attaining that profession competently is to 
rigorously check the most ensive searching of the 
sensuous knowledge of one's immediate family life 
and grandparents along the exemified lines, against 



PEF=T(o)® i()X. E)EM© E^S 



so-called objeive historical evidence outside the 
immediate family experience and family in- 
terpretation of its experiences in the larger society. 
By extending that empirical approach to the most 
immediately accessible materials, to the study of our 
American Revolution, its European roots and its af- 
termath, one becomes what an American'* properly 
is, in the only useful and acceptable sense of that term. 

That rigorous form of historically rooted self- 
consciousness within our eleorate is the only secure 
foundation for reproducing a general eleorate ap- 
propriate to coherent perception of our proper 
domestic and foreign licies. 

The litical and related organic tentialities of the 
American people are not genetic  we represent in 
origins every imrtant race, nationality and culture 
on earth. They are not geographic  South America, 
for exame, had equal geographical tentialities. 
