dustry and agriculture, in the tradition of Benjamin 
Franklin and the Federalists, that were's licy is 
coordinate with the underlying fundamental erests 
of the people of every other nation, and is thus the 
basis; and the most effeive licy for global peace. 

The included problematic feature which cannot be 
solved by that licy alone is the fa that govern- 
ments and the aual erests of the governed nations 
do not necessarily coincide. The difficulty, in the 
lesser part, is that the wrong perception of national 
erests by some governments is predominantly a 
matter of ignorance and delusions. In such cases the 







optimal course for avoiding war is to adopt the maxi- 
mum restra tolerable in the course of the effort to 
bring the opinion of eng governments and pular 
opinion o conformity with reason. In the most 
imrtant part, the faion which governs a nation is 
not susceptible of the ordinary means of influence of 
reason, because the government faion represents a 
special self-erest fundamentally antagonistic to the 
fundamental economic erests of its own nation as a 
whole. Such governments represent an obstacle which 
must be removed in the general world erest. In such 
causes the proper foreign licy of the United States 
toward such a government is emphatically ^'Clause- 
witzian, 

When such obstacles are in the form of the govern- 
ing faion of a relatively weak were, an aggressive 
world climate of industrial and agricultural tech- 
nological progress sets o motion the processes 
under which the obstacle may be removed efficiently 
by force if necessary. The use of military force may be 
avoided in such cases if the opnent can be induced 
to bend to the economic and related forces, be induced 
to adapt to a pro-development orientation, and so 
evolve a modified nature and perception of self- 
erests consistent with both global erests and real 

national erests. 

Such obstacles, such tential adversaries are those 
faional erests which represent the special in- 
terests of either pre-capitalist institutions, or an anti- 
industrial monetarist impulse. In the case that such a 
reaionary or monetarist force represents a major 
were  such as the eighteenth and nineteenth cen- 
tury English monarchy, or Czarist Russia  only in- 
ternal litical transformation or war, or revolutions 
fostered by the circumstances of war, will ordinarily 
suffice. 

The twentieth century governments of the United 
States have not, as a whole, corresnded to either 
category. The impulse for national and global 
technological progress, the heritage of our American 
Revolution and Constitution, has been centered as an 
impulse in the industrial-capitalist erests and in 
traditionalist trade-union forces, with suprt from 
those technologically progressive agricultural strata 
oriented to the role of U.S. agricultural exrts in the 
world market. These echoes of our Federalist foun- 
dations are pitted against a Tory monetarist force 
gathered presently around the Rockefeller faion, 
and suprted by that faion's pular base among 
the liberal and so-called left-radical strata associated 
with both the Republican and, most emphatically, the 
liberal wing of the Democratic Party. 

The so-called conservatives in both major parties  
excepting Rockefeller's own Buckley and Larry 
McDonald varieties  predominantly represent the 



 

pro-development, or American tradition and tendency 
for perception of self-erests. These conservative 
industrialist, trade-union, and agricultural strata may 
be seized by a badly misdireed perception of 
national erests on many issues, but under appro- 
priate circumstances they are susceptible of corre- 
ing such errors through the force of reason. The Tory 
faion  the Rockefeller-linked liberals of both 
parties and their lunatic-radical fringes inside and out- 
side the parties  represent a monetarist erest 
which is not susceptible of the influence of reason. 

The further comication is that the nominal 
holdings of the pro-development capitalist forces are 
dependently erlinked in many short-term aspes 
with the national and ernational monetary insti- 
tutions controlled by the Rockefellers and their allies. 
For this reason, the pro-development capitalist 
currents are delimited in the scope of their opsition 
to the Rockefeller-led forces. Their pro-development 
impulse is usually expressed as resistance to the most 
outrageous pro-monetarist innovations, especially in 
domestic licies. This resistance has the charaer of 
attempted Whig reforms within the ruling monetarist 
order, rather than an effort to overturn the monetarist 
order in favor of American Federalist princies. To 
the extent that these capitalist strata are imprisoned 
in fa and in perception by these circumstances, they 
are reluantly induced to tolerate and suprt the 
monetarist institutions' erests as a matter of 
defending their own perceived nominal wealth. 

Such comications taken o account, the conser- 
vative current of the Republican Party tends to repre- 
sent the bastion and rallying- for a pro-develop- 
ment erest in both domestic and foreign licy  
heretofore, emphatically in respe of domestic 
licy. To the extent that such conservative Republi- 
can licy-thrusts are allied with major seions of the 
trade-union and related social forces, that aual or de 
fao alliance provides the basis for a coalition with 
conservative Democratic Party forces on such issues. 
That tendency within U.S. litical life has been the 
principal tendency for effeive restra operating 
against the Tory forces. 

Nonetheless, because the capitalist constituent of 
such pro-development alliances has located its in- 
terests otherwise within the terms of the monetarist 
national and ernational institutions and licies, 
the conservative wings of the Republican and Demo- 
cratic parties have heretofore regarded themselves as 
compelled, however reluantly at times, to serve 
monetarist erests domestically and abroad. 

That is the content of what has been euphemistically 
defined as a ''bi-partisan foreign licy." The idea 
that our nation ought to have a clear domestic 
majority for the crucial features of its foreign licy 






