terest associated with David Rockefeller. 

It is indiable treason in the same sense as the 
indiment of Aaron Burr by the Thomas Jefferson 

administration. 
The secondary funion of this study, outside the 

U.S., is to create the informed view of the United 

States  - variously among leading OECD, developing 

seor and CMEA circles  which tends to sweep 

away the most idiotic, but nonetheless strongly held 



deep and hostile prejudices against the United States 
and its people. We must contribute to creating the 
global litical climate in which leading forces aing 
through the U.S. Congress can effe the appropriate 
transformations in U.S. domestic and foreign licy 
without having the congressional effe sabotaged 
with aid of some idiotic, prejudice-based nonsense 
from the Soviet leadership, certain developing seor 
nations and so forth. 

More fundamentally, it is past time that the U.S. 
working person had a dire look at the ugly realities 
behind the demagogic illusions and delusions which 
have heretofore, for so long, passed as United States 
foreign licy erests, and also understand how his 
follies, abetted by the so-called '^socialists," have 
contributed to creating and sustaining the domestic 
configuration of litical forces in which an ultimately 
suicidal foreign licy dorine has been installed and 
sustained. 

Although the initial and concluding rtions of this 
licy analysis are straightforward attacks on the 
obvious problems confronting our nation today, the 
substantial middle seion unavoidably gathers 
together the elements of a rigorous proof and exsi- 
tion of the correness and present apications of the 
constitutional princies of our republic to present 
world circumstances. In that middle seion, the 
average reader will find recung erlations of 
rigorous argument between the more immediately 
accessible successive presentations of the faual 
account of each step of the argument. We do not pro- 
se that these erlated, more rigorous rtions 
can be skipped over. If they were not essential, they 
would have been edited out of this text for statement in 
a different publication devoted to such theoretical 
considerations. However, we appreciate that many 
readers will get only the purse and gist of the er- 
lated more rigorous arguments at first reading. 
After assimilating this licy analysis as a whole, the 
more difficult  and necessary  passages of the 
middle seion can be studied again. 

Concerning that special, included charaer of the 
writing as a whole, the following licy  is 
properly emphasized. The formulation of the *'gut" of 
United States foreign licy is not to be based on the 
slick sort of ausible campaign document which 
Lippmann produced on behalf of President Franklin 
D. Roosevelt during the - onset of the  
presidential campaign. The methods of the successful 
used car salesman, or of the slick journalist and 
campaign speechwriter, have no morally tolerable 
ace in laying before an eleorate the vital issues of 
national domestic and foreign licy. Any basic 
feature of licy which is adopted because it was suc- 



m 



P^OF-T(o)(Q)llOT. OEM© E^^ 



rJ r  



. - r -i . II K . , , 



^ 



I i 



+ ^ ^ I 



 I  

' I i . - II > % ,> ' - ! 



V.'J 



. 



l. l-,-' . 



:"i^:r-: 



 w 



 I'l"^'- I >  Vi ' . . „- 

 - ' . . 





Wall in the course of his  "Ich bin ein Berliner * adventure. 



P^OF-T(o)(Q)llOT. OEM© E^iD©i 



cessfuUy sold by such methods, by an appeal to the 
superficial, mistaken knowledge of issues and licies 
