


 

already served (-) as a part of Colonel 
Nikolai's Anglo-American agent network inside the 
German military elligence. () 

It was the Russell Sage Foundation which served as 
an instrument for Rockefeller's establishing of Inter- 
l during the s, an organization which was later 
headed by Nazi elligence chiefs Heydrich and 
Kaltenbrunner during the s, down to , which 
was headed by avowed Nazis while still based in 
Vienna, and which was "reorganized" (i.e. laun- 
dered) under the direion of former top Nazi officials 
by Rockefeller's Allen Dulles and others at the end of 
the war. 

It is the same network, deey overlapping present- 
day Interl, which conduited the "Law Enforcement 
Assistance Administration" o the U.S. Justice 
Department, principally via the Ford Foundation 
conduit, which today condus the majority of illegal 
arms and drug smuggling ernationally, which today 
performs an egral funion in the deoying of all 
notable forms of ernational terrorist as, which is 
egral to most of the assassinations and related 
horrors which a credulous Congress and public too 
quickly axiomatically presume to be the work of the 
U.S. Central Intelligence Agency as such. 

Although, broadly, such covert aivities of the 
Rockefellers and their allies are not an exicit 
feature of stipulated U.S. foreign licy conventions, 
these covert and related operations have become 
today an element of U.S. government de fao praice 
almost approaching the significance of our national 
military sture and deoyments and our financial 
and economic stures. Even though such Rocke- 
feller-linked covert-operations networks and forces 
may not be Congress's perception of official U.S. 
foreign licy, they are very much de fao U.S. 
foreign licy instruments  to the effe that official 
statements not taking these o account amount to 
"Wilsonian" hycrisy. Furthermore, any analysis of 
foreign licy which does not take these o account 
in assessing the - period is for that reason 
essentially an incompetent appraisal, 

Wilson's licies, especially Versailles itself, 
established the fateful preconditions for World War , 



. This Nikolai-Canaris element in - Anglo-American el- 
ligence networks inside Germany was based in part on British and 
Rockefeller agreements with "Farben" representatives concerning 
Chilean nitrates and related matters. Colonel Nikolai was a key part 
of the "Farben" firm's private elligence network and operations, 
as well as part of the Kaiser's official elligence organization. It was 
through the Rockefeiler-British-Nikolai network collaborations in 
Chile that Canaris was smuggled out of ernment in Chile during 
World War I, and conduited, through the erventions of the 
British Foreign Office, back o Germany, via Anglo-Dutch ac- 
comices of the Anglo-American erests involved. 



Mp;//www.d)®(Buirgi(gfe.(S®[ffli/ 







 

The U.S. was headed for war with Japan, and most 
probably Germany as well, from the day Franklin D. 
Roosevelt was eleed. By , this was apparent to 
and openly stated by various well-informed circles. 
The foundations had been laid by the Wilson ad- 
ministration. It was the initially pro-fascist foreign 
licy of the Roosevelt administration, and the 
manner in which that administration dealt with the 
monetary crisis, which by no later than  
predetermined the inevitability of the war. 

Whatever their faional differences on matters of 
detail, the City of London and lowere Manhattan were 

agreed on installing the fascist rule of Benito Musso- 
lini in Italy and Hitler*s rule in Germany. Further- 
more, the leading liberals in the United States  such as 
John Dewey and his associates  were largely un- 
ashamedly pro-fascist during the s and o the 
earliest part of the Roosevelt administration period. 

It was immediately British elligence which had 
moved Mussolini o were in Italy  with the aid of 
such British agents as the fathers of present-day 
Italian Communist Party leaders Enrico Berlinguer 
and Giorgio Amendola. During the s, Mussolini 
was Winston Churchill's personal acquaance and 
protege. Roosevelt's administration maained a 
special relationship to the Mussolini regime up to the 
Fall of France. 

Hjalmar Schacht, a prominent lowere Manhattan 
agent of influence in Germany since the World War I 
armistice, aced Hitler in were through clearing the 
proje with key forces in the City of London and New 
York City, including the consent of the publishers of 
the New York Times, whose diluted Jewish con- 
sciences required Schacht's assurances on this pro- 
je. It was lowere Manhattan erests, not German 
industrialists, who direed and spearheaded the fund- 
ing of Hitler's accession to the Chancellorship  and 
induced the German industrialists to go along with the 
proje under the diates of a jo lowere Manhattan 
and City of London de fao **Atlanticist" direive to 
this effe. Roosevelt's principal backers, as well as 
some of his chief Republican opnents, were among 
those included in that Atlanticist proje of installing 
and suprting Hitler as Schacbtian monetary l- 
icy's indispensable tool 

The military side of the Hitler proje involved 
faional comications among the Atlanticists. All 
faions agreed broadly on the objeive of using a Hit- 
ler Germany to overturn the Soviet republic. They 
were not agreed on the exicit approach to such a re- 
sult, or how the loot from such an enterprise should be 
distributed. Despite faional misgivings and differ- 
ences, the thrust of the military perspeive fatefully 
converged un some form of adaptation of the 
"Parvus Plan." 



On the monetary and economic side, there was no 
significant overall disagreement concerning the 
Atlanticists' pro-Hitler licy. Assurances had been 
given to the Rothschilds, Sulzbergers, and others that 
the Nazi Jewish licy was not to go beyond an i- 
tant. Otherwise the Hitler proje meant the following. 
It meant, first of all, saving the shards of the bankrupt 
