of adult identity, and the epistemological apparatus 
with which to competently attack the problem of 
social processes, to bring his comprehension of social 
processes within the conceptual scope of natural law. 

Positivism and associated forms of radical 
behaviorism have purrted to do just that, but they 
do so under the barbaric banner and rallying-cry of 
"science is statistics." The problem of the sitivist 
"Wallenstein" and his vagabond swarm of behaviorist 
"statisticians'* is that he and his execrable horde of 
computerized hoodlums represent a viciously anti- 
scientific, in fa infantile epistemological  of 
view. 

The relevant issues of distinion have already been 
settled conclusively enough in building up the con- 
cepts to this  through preceding successions of 
sub-topics. We have already defined the principal 
ernal features of the process by which an aual 
scientist competently attacks the empirical domain of 
social phenomena. We mean that approach and 
nothing else. Moreover, not only is the approach we 
have defined the only admissible approach to social 
processes, but as we have shown, this is the approach 
represented in the entire sweep of development of the 
scientific and neo-atonic humanist outlook from 
Thales, through Ibn Sina, through Roger Bacon, 
Ficino, Keer, and so forth to the present time. 

What we have added, in the more immediate 
probing of the inner development of the adult per- 
sonality, is to bring to the surface the aual kinds of 
processes within the great elles which have 
produced their discoveries and related achievements. 
Moreover, just as the outlook of Benjamin Franklin 
not-at-all accidentally coincides in crucial features of 
licy outlook with our own, so in the entire sweep of 
the development of great human thought, the ernal 
features of the conscious articulation of the arguments 
of such elles overwhelmingly corroborate the 
piure we have just rounded out  respeing the 
formal and psychological essentials of creative, 
scientific insight and outlook. 

The successive progress of European humanist 
thought, through the scholastic (Aristotelian) and neo- 
atonic, represent successive phases, successive 
echs in the upward progress toward adulthood by 
humanity as a whole. Both represent  putting aside 
for the moment the reaionary aspe of the great 
Thomas Aquinas  the struggle to lift the individual 
and society out of the bestiality of the infantile, 







heteronomic self, and not merely to make the persona 
more efficiently rational, but to make such a perfeed 
persona the entirety of the human sense of identity. 

This is otherwise vividly underlined by the ongoing 
struggle of Christendom as a whole. Putting aside the 
misdireions, the rubbish, and so forth, the Christian 
effort respeing the war of good against evil has 
always and properly premised its combat on the 
certay that the evil within the world was also the 
extension of the evil within the individual. The good 
was properly defined, at least in respe of the overall 
working approach, as the agreement (atonement) of 
the individual's informed willful impulses for praice 
with the necessities of universal law in respe to the 
real world. The enemy, evil, was always the suscep- 
tibility of the rationally informed human will, in- 
formed of universal erests and necessities, to 
heteronomic impulses (desires). These are rightly 
associated with the fiitious imperatives of a 
miserpreted, because localized, immediate, sen- 
suous self-erest. It was the animal-likeness of the 
baser aspe of man, his propensity to behave as an 
animal does, to see nothing but some local sensuous 
self-erest of the moment, or to ace that 
heteronomic imperative above the consciousness of 
universal imperatives. Hence, Christendom located 
the **flesh" as the mediation of evil, because its 
locality was the ostensible lure of heteronomy by 
which the evil one (heteronomy) within the individual 
took control. 

Such religious notions of Christendom, however 
inadequate the systematic insight involved, persisted 
because the argument was efficiently grounded in 
empirical evidence. Christendom's evolution, from 

what Aquinas (most notably) adduced as schol- 
asticism (Aristotelianism), to neo-atonic human- 
ism, does not alter that focus, but represents rather 
a qualitative advance both in understanding of 
natural law, and in respe of moving away from the 
reduionist, Aristotelian '^geometry"  from what 
we today properly describe as the field-particle 
paradoxical notion  to a non-Aristotelian, neo- 
atonic ''geometry" based on recognition that the 

human identity was not a self-evident particle, but an 
individuated process. Imicitly, with respe to social 
praice, Ficino's Five Questions already rigorously 
solved the field-particle paradox, by defining the ef- 
ficient causal relationship between the individual (as 
a process) and the **field," the development (per- 
feion) of the society as a whole. 

From what we have already developed, converging 
on this , in this writing so far, the case is made 
clear and conclusively so. There is no admissible 
degree of mystery why those conceptions appropriate 
to physics today were first developed in thrust and pre- 



 

liminary conception in epistemology and neo-atonic 
litical movements, or why the process by which this 
occurred and the initiation of physical science was 
accomished by the same neo-atonic currents. The 
fusion of the epistemology, which is the **transfinite" 
reality of the subsumed details of what is naively 
regarded as science per se, to the empirical reality of 
the social process, is the (hylozoic) scientific world 
outlook as a whole. The development of this outlook is 
originated only, ever freshly, by those individuals who 
have developed in themselves that epistemological 
outlook on their own fruitful creative processes which 
we described above. It is not sufficient that such indi- 
viduals know this epistemology empirically, as we 
prescribed such conditions for knowledge. That know- 
ledge must also be emoyed as the basis on which 
they **wrench" the notion of their deepest personal 
identity away from the infantile particle-thing the 
immature person regards as '*the real me," to locate 
their sense of fundamental personal identity in the 
creative process, and its ongoing weres, which is the 
core of their creatively direed aivity in society. 

What we had already detailed respeing the 
epistemological-ontological distinions between the 
