small country's national capital. Not too long after 
that discreet chat, the patriotic colonel would march 
on the capital, shoot or hang a few of the overturned 
government's exemary thieves, exile the rest, and 
settle down to establish a new government, beginning 
the **yin-yang" cycle of Caribbean destism all over 

again. 

At least, that is the aspe of the *'yin-yang" or 
**yo-yo"pattern of U.S. Caribbean licy which is 



PEF=T(o)® i()X. E)EM© E^S 



most pertinent to the problem of the Batista regime of 
the late s. A half-million unemoyed around 
Havana alone, a tourist trap, pimps on every street 
and in every taxicab, every imaginable vice, and a 
national economy going bankrupt while the Batista 
bureaucracy stole left and right. At a certain  in 
the endemic tumult these conditions engendered 
within Cuba, the Castro-led force, having **proven 
itself*' chiefly on its own merits, was assimilated o 
the amalgam of organizations which represented U.S. 
licy for eliminating the Batista problem. 

The difficulty was that once in were, Castro et al. 
proceeded toward delivering on the promises they had 
made in the course of campaigning for office. Then 
Castro did what any other sensible capitalist govern- 
ment would have done in such a fix  took over the 
sugar mills and demanded a scheduling of debt and 
debt-payments consistent with permitting Cuba's eco- 
nomic recovery from Batista's reign. Certain lowere 
Manhattan erests howled, acing their nominal, 
short-term private erest above the national in- 
terest, and various forms of warfare were unleashed 
against Cuba. Under conditions of de fao economic 
blockade, Castro turned (the details of the process are 
secondary for present purses) to the only source of 
aid adequate to defend his national economy against 
U.S. economic warfare. 

Putting the matter thus, in terms which could not be 
competently disputed by any honest anti-Communist 
conservative in the U.S., what would you expe from 
such a U.S. foreign licy? The ABC of the princies 
we have outlined above operated, precisely as they 
operated in the case of the Bolshevik Revolution of 
. When the industrial-capitalist forces fail to un- 
dertake the tasks of extended reproduion, or, worse, 
ally themselves with the monetarists against 
economic growth and technological development, the 
socialist movement has the duty, if it is able, to make 
a socialist transformation. We are not suggesting that 
socialist transformations are merely remedies for 
forms of illness which occur from grievous mistakes. 
On the contrary, provided they are viable, they are to 
be esteemed. The  is that any capitalist who 
comains about socialist transformations in Russia 
or Cuba is unentionally or not a hycrite. In both 
cases, the socialist transformation occurred because 
industrial-capitalist forces, rather than attending to 
their own real erests, were aying lackey to the 
monetarists. 

That is the gist of the wrong and evil things the U.S. 
did in the conclusion of the Spanish-American War, 
and the gist of every wrong thing, anually contrary to 
our vital national erests, we have permitted our 
government to undertake or tolerate since. 

To kick away any lunatic-socialists or sick liberals 



 

who might be tempted to attach themselves to our 
litical coattails on this , we shall be very blunt 
concerning the U.S. assimilation of Puerto Rico. 

The mere fa that the U.S. ^'gobbled up" Puerto 
Rico was no offense against proper ernational law, 
nor was it a crime or offense in any other rational 
respe. Only a sentimental babbler in the Wilsonian 
tradition of hycrisy would argue to the contrary. 
Puerto Rico was a wretched little Spanish colony, with 
no visible economic viability as an independent 
nation. Under the circumstances, the best praicable 
alternative for the Puerto Ricans themselves was to 
become part of the United States. Whether we con- 
dued the assimilation badly or well is a different 
matter. This is not to suggest that today we should 
enlarge the tetorial United States by such prac- 
tices; for those past circumstances and at that time, 
the mere fa of appropriation was consistent with 
U.S. and Puerto Rican erests, and represented no 
offense in fa against the Puerto Ricans. 

The First World War is not to be direly compared 
with the Second World War, except, as Lippmann 
emphasizes, that the same monetarists' licies 
governed U.S. condu in both affairs. A few obser- 
vations, more in the form of moot s than pros- 
ed, retrospeive alternatives, serve the funion of 
showing that there is reason to challenge the 
argument that we should have gone to war against the 
Kaiser's Germany  where no such doubt can be 
sed for the Nazi case. What we should have done, as 
we shall indicate the dimensions of the difficulty here, 
is open to discovery, but, otherwise, we absolutely 
should not have done what Wilson did, either in the 
way he got us o the war or the way he purrted to 
extricate us from it. 

It was consistent with U.S. erests as an industrial- 
capitalist republic that Czarist Russia and the Austro- 
Hungarian obscenity should be terminated. However, 
it was also in our vital erest that British monetarist 
control of the world market be ended, and, hence, that 
under no circumstances should Britain be permitted 
to gobble up elements of Russia or the Balkans. It was 
contrary to our erest that the defeat of Britain, 
which was eminently desirable, should be contingent 
un the Kaiser's looting of France. However, it was 
not in our national erest that the corrupt and 
stagnating form of licy represented by the Third 
Republic be perpetuated by our sacrifices. It was in 
our urgent erest that the British Empire be 
dismantled, both as a litical system of colonies and 
semi-colonies and as a monetary entity. We could not 
welcome a Kaiser Germany takeover of those British 
roles. Furthermore, although the prenderance of 
our national erests recommended the destruion of 
Czarism and British imperial and monetary rule, the 







 

anti-republican Kaiser's government was to a lesser 
