elleual and technological progress. It is a rapidly 
developing culture, or a great creative elle, which 
finds in the sensuous reality of its own immediate 
creative experience the most overwhelming de- 
monstration of the primary role of creative innova- 
tion in advancing human existence. 

As a culture  for one reason or another  merely 
consolidates or **coasts un'' the stock of funda- 
mental innovations contributed from outside., or its 
own past, the existing hegemonic body of ideas and 
related established forms of praice predominate as 
the essentially fixed ordering of social experience. 
Here, the task of reason is sensuously focused on 
bringing order o established standards of praice, 
rather than solving problems through profound in- 
novations in concepts of general, informed, willful 
impulses for praice. Hence, in this condition, the 
dominant ideas and institutions exist as '*givens,*' as 
axiomatically self-evident entities and norms of 



 

relationship. In such circumstances, the Aristotelian 

or allonian outlook predominates as most agreeable 

to prevailing experience, and to the prevailing value 

put un both experience and the individual sense of 
identity. 

In periods of breakdown, of general degradation, in 
which the human erests and standards of a 
preceding period are violated in circumstance and in 
prevailing informed impulses for praice, under 
circumstances of moral anarchy, the nominalist, or 
dionysian, outlook and mood tend to predominate, () 

For reasons related to these considerations, the 
Aristotelian or allonian view leads fatally to the 
theologian's **ontological paradox." To the extent that 
the existing rational ordering of affairs is viewed as 
properly pre-ordained as converging un some pre- 
existing perfe, fixed form, God exists relative to that 
order only as the Creator and as the agent of miracles. 
The Creator's were as orator cannot be regarded as 
efficiently present in the created world. Hence, the 
form of the "ontological paradox" which stipulates 
that if God the Creator is omniscient and perfe, he 
gave up his omnitence respeing the further 
determination of the universe once he perfely 
created it. 

The medieval literary neo-atonic view, out of 
prudent regard for the inquisitional limits of existing 
authority, accepted the outer shell of the scholastic 
dorine of the ontological paradox, but did not submit 
to its dium respeing the ernal features of the 
process between the Creation and the attainment of 
Perfeion. Where the Aristotelian emwered man 
only with reason (rationality), but not the were to 
create qualitatively higher orders of human reason, 
the neo-atonic recognized the human capacity for 
creative synthesis of qualitatively new weres of 
reason  scientific knowledge, for exame  as the 
primary, aive human quality. 

This was not merely a theological difference, nor 
was it the principal line of division between the 
Catholic and protestant faions in the sixteenth 
century schism. There were Aristotelians (Thomists, 
Calvinists) and humanists within both the Catholic 
and protestant denominations. The difference be- 
tween the two currents, Aristotelianism and 
humanism, centered around the praical issues of 
litical economy. The humanist current, the English 
Tudor Erasmians, the founders of capitalism, and 
their co-thinkers abroad were committed to tech- 
nological progress, not merely as the necessary basis 
for economic progress, but as the natural moral condi- 



. As Holmes refused to understand, the nominalist or dionysian 
outlook and mood and the aual, rigorously definable mens tea are 
one and the same thing. 



Mp;//www.d)®(Buirgi(gfe.(S®[ffli/ 







 

tion of man. Ficino*s conception of man's creative 
aivity as the location of the way in which man was 
cast in the image of the Creator efficiently identifies 
the Promethean impulse of the high s of the 
Tudor period. 

The same problem is refleed in the qualitatively 
differing conceptions of freedom among the three 
outlooks. 

To the neo-atonic humanist, man's behavior was 
absolutely lawfully bound to natural law: no deviation 
was morally permissible to the will. Freedom was the 
right and moral duty of the individual to exercise 
creative aivity in behalf of the advancement of the 
fruitfulness of his own praice to the purse of ad- 
vancing the universal erest of his society, and the 
obligation of the state to prote and nurture that 
freedom through technological and other education, 
cultural enrichment, and through licensing the un- 
checked advancement of those forms of creative in- 
novation beneficial to the society as a whole. 

To the Aristotelian, freedom was essentially the 
latitude to choose between good and evil, and 
discovery was limited to a more conscious, more 
profound familiarity with a preordained, fixed 
rationality. 

Whereas humanism located freedom in man's 
were of lawful creative innovation for the general 
good, the Aristotelian located freedom as the 
canonically tolerable margin of choice within an 
existing order. Both the revolutionary neo-atonism 
and the pro-feudal Aristotelianism were humanist 
relative to their common enemy, nominalism. Both 
the neo-atonic and the scholastic accepted in prin- 
cie the absolute moral and praical rule of natural 
law, except that they defined it differently. 

The nominalist denied the objeive existence of 
natural law, and reduced praical law to a matter of 
customs, denying both absolute rationality and the 
existence of a universalizing lawful creative princie. 

What we humanists properly mean by freedom 
today is rigorously described as the lawful causality 
which ultimately determines the successive 
