methods of "low energy" cotton produion produced 
the boll weevil ague and the destruion of the 
preconditions for successful agriculture in those 
regions of the U.S. southern states. Hence, the mon- 
strous genocide among the Irish pulation of the 
s and correlated, if relatively more buffered 
conditions in Germany. 

The tato crisis symptomizes the entire sperum 
of the effes of the British monetarists' consciously 
Malthusian economic and social licy of the 
nineteenth century. 

This set of primitive-accumulation correlatives was 
not in any respe an expression of industrial- 
capitalist development. 

Capitalist development originated in Tudor Eng- 
land, was on the verge of being consciously roduced 
to sixteenth century France, was attempted under 
Colbert in seventeenth century France, and was 



developed by the followeres and collaborators of 
Benjamin Frankin in the course of the American 
Revolution. This development of capitalism was a 
consciously humanist conception, (Humanism has 
nothing to do with, but is absolutely the enemy of the 
bestialist licies professed in the misappropriated 
name of "humanism" by the pragmatist wretches of 
the Humanist Society and the Ethical Union.) From 
the outset, capitalist development was consciously 
anti-primitive-accumulation. This licy was not an 
accidentally sitive feature of the Tudor initiation of 
capitalist development, but refleed their ap- 
propriate, if preliminary, insight o the fundamental 
laws and self-erests of national economies. The 
persistence of primitive accumulation praices in 
modern history has consistently originated with anti- 
industrial-capitalist erests. 

Gresham and others recognized immediately and 
absolutely that the advancement of the material 
conditions of life and the aggressive technological 
education of the labor force as a whole was an indis- 
pensable precondition both for capitalist develop- 
ment and for the sustained augmentation of real 
national wealth. The same thrust predominated 
among the Franklin-instigated Federalist movement 
in the USA. The notion of augmenting capitalist in- 
comes at the expense of the necessary material and 
cultural conditions of life of the labor force is as alien 
to industrial-capitalist self-erest as a whole as 
smashing the machinery of produion in order there- 
by to augment the annual profits of corrations from 
the sale of the resulting scrap. 

It was as the monetarist faions gained were, first 
in Holland, then, especially after , in England, and 
then first in  and, again, most notably after  in 
the United States, that the licy of squeezing of the 
industrial capitalists by monetarist debt licies 
produced not only exacerbated looting of primary 
resources, but, worse, the squeezing of additional 
margins of capitalist income from the necessary 
material and cultural conditions of life of the labor 
force. 

To put the issue of primitive accumulation against 
primary resources out of the way, the following should 
be noted before resuming concentration on the 
problem of the industrial-labor litical alliance. 

As we have repeatedly developed this crucial  
in numerous published locations, including the 
author's textbook on litical economy, () primary 
resources are not a permanently preordained set of 



. Lyn Marcus (a.k.a. Lyndon H. LaRouche), Dialeical Economics 
(Lexington, Mass.: D.C. Heath and Co., ), pp. -, -,  
if., passim. 



Mp;//www.d)®(Buirgi(gfe.(S®[ffli/ 



PEF=T(o)® i()X. E)EM© E^S 



forms of "natural wealth.'* Primary resources as such 
are always defined by the technology of produion of 
a culture for a relatively limited span of its develop- 
ment. In each case, any specific primary resource so 
defined is necessarily relatively finite in respe of the 
effeive social cost of its procurement. This relative 
finiteness may or may not be expressed as the 
phenomenon of relative deetion of such a resource 
as development proceeds. In any case, the problem is 
solved by technological progress to modes of 
produion which are thermodynamically negentropic 
relative to preceding modes. It is by increasing the 
negentropy of the mode of produion, that the in- 
creased energy thus apied to produion and con- 
sumption per capita constantly enlarges the total 
primary resources available, while qualitatively and 
Quantitatively redefining the sperum of primary 

resources as a whole. 
For exame, again, Tudor England. The most 

serious obstacle to crawling out of the conditions of the 
England of the fifteenth century was that England had 
to supersede a de fao licy of **solar energy*' and 
**biomass'* as its energy licy. To solve this, the 
Tudors roduced the large scale use of a new energy 
source, fossil fuel  coal, thus avoiding the catas- 
trophes which must have resulted from continuation 
of a medieval culture's reliance un **solar" and 
"biomass" (wood and charcoal) energy licies. 

Similarly, in contrast to the efforts of the Rocke- 
fellers and their neo-Fabian henchmen, the Tudors 
initiated the efforts to develop the steam engine  
freeing basic economy from dependence un such 
outdated contrivances as windmills. 

To return to the main focus of our concern here, 
although the precise measurement of the **equili- 
brium-value" separating primitive accumula- 
tion from redistribution of proper profit as wages, is 
presently beyond the means of existing institu- 
tions in praice, the maenance of household 
income, social services, leisure (e.g., education) at 
levels consonant with the developing of a labor force 
suited to tomorrow's more-advanced technology ef- 
fes a corresnding tendency for **social equilibri- 
ation" in the relations between industrial capital and 
labor. That was the gist of the approach to this 
problem by Gresham et al., and the thrust of licy of 
Franklin's collaborators. Such an incomes licy does 
not preclude strikes and so forth. It does provide the 
circumstances of perceived respeive self-erests 
and corresnding praices in which the settlement 
of strikes and other industrialist-labor negotiations 
