of the founding of our republic, appropriately apying 
that to the world at hand, and with the establishment 
of a community of princie with the Soviet Union, the 
adulthood of humanity will have begun. 

That is what the **new Federalist" President and the 
Congress together must set out immediately to accom- 
ish. 



P^OF-T(o)(Q)llOT. OEM© E^iD©i 



.Y 



Foreign Economic Policy 



The central and chief duty of the new President 
of the United States is to effe a general solution 
to the current world depression and the effes of that 
depression un the ernal life of the nation. He 
faces the most profound crisis the nation has ever 
confronted  respeing the hazards involved  and 
must quickly extricate the nation from that deadly 
predicament. 

The basis for the principal aions the President and 
Congress must take  and promptly  is the au- 

i 

thority exicitly embedded in the ent of our Consti- 
tution and the founding institutions and instruments of 
our republic. On the basis of that authority, it is the 
duty of the President and the Congress to promptly re- 
establish the nation as an industrial capitalist republic 
committed to the Idea of Progress as centered about 
the licy of technological progress. It is also the duty 
of the President and the Congress to restore to effi- 
cient funioning the essential princie of our repub- 
lic, the seleion of representatives and the adoption of 
laws and licies according to the princie of a pro- 
perly informed general eleorate. 

The two central tasks before the President and the 
Congress are the establishment of a National Bank, 
and the aions taken by the United States to termi- 
nate the bankrupt vestiges of the Bretton Woods sys- 
tem and a in concert with other nations to establish a 
new world monetary system, a gold-reserve-based 
International Development Bank, to serve as the com- 
mon rediscount facility of member national banks like 
our own, representing various nations and regions of 
the world. 

Within this framework, the President and the Con- 
gress must take emergency measures to prevent the 
present bankruptcy of major private financial institu- 
tions from precipitating a chain reaion impairing 
the funions of essential instituitons of desit and 
credit. These measures and related necessary 
measures have been developed adequately in the 



Emergency Emoyment A and related draft leg- 
islation published by the U.S. Labor Party. 

Within the framework of these indispensable in- 
stitutional and emergency measures, the President 
and Congress must dire the process of rapid econo- 
mic recovery within the nation. The principal instru- 
ment for effeing that recovery will be the National 
Bank. The method emoyed will be principally to 
issue credit through existing banks aing as corre- 
sndents of the National Bank for financing those 
payroll, materials, and capital expenditures of basic 
industry, transrtation, construion, extraion and 
agriculture required to bring the utilization of existing 
capacities up to full or approximately full produive 
tential. 

The same method will be emoyed for the issuance 
of credit for purses of capital expansion. The 
methods of ordinary sound industrial banking prac- 
tices will be apied to the National Bank for this 
purse. Wherever, by virtue of national licy for 
domestic priorities or foreign programs, the capital- 
ization of expansion and improvements is known to be 
in corresndence with forecastable requirements, 
and on the basis of other standard estimates of merit, 
the National Bank shall be a participating prime 
lender. 

The governing consideration in National Bank 
licies will be the maenance of a *'hard dollar. " 
For every dollar of credit issued to the private seor, 
there must be a reasonably forecastable regenerative 
expansion of tangible wealth in a form of capital and 
consumer commodities themselves representing the 
raw materials of further expansion of the output of 
tangible wealth. Hence, the dire participation of the 
National Bank in the private seor will be restried 
to industry, transrtation, extraion, agriculture (in 
the broad definition), and construion. The special 
added case will be those categories of scientific and 
engineering research and development which are 

 







designated for this purse according to the President 
and the specified related weres of the President to 
that effe. 

The necessary new credit additionally required for 
non-produive commerce and private services must 
originate as a by-produ of the expansion of the 
money supy and desits through the income and 
credits received direly by industry, transrtation, 
extraion, agriculture and construion. 

The correlated objeive of this licy is to effe a 
persisting shift of emphasis in emoyment, away, in 
net effe, from unemoyment, governmental em- 
oyment, services and clerical occupations o the 
industrial labor force and increases in the labor-force 
ratio of scientists and engineers. Within this overall 

direedness of government fiscal and monetary li- 
cies, certain categories of services should be numer- 
ically expanded, notably medical and related profes- 
sions, and certain shifts within the teaching profession 
should be fostered to increase the emphasis un sci- 
ence and engineering within the developing labor 
force. 

The principal means to accomish this are a hard- 
dollar monetary licy of the National Bank, and the 
