growing dionysiac frenzies. 

Objeively, from the Whig stand, there were 
good reasons to go to the  of war with Great 
Britain during the early s, Bust up the colonial 
system, rid the world economy of the ison of ster- 
ling indebtedness, create elbowroom and a significant 
further purging of the sick monetary system, scrap 
the German war reparations, and get a dollar system 
moving in a way to salvage as much as was viable to 
provide the basis for significant further industrial 
expansion. 

Friion between the U.S. and Britain on the Soviet 
issue, which the  Lippmann exaggerates and dis- 
torts in behalf of the tentative form of agreement with 
Stalin being considered prior to the successful Los 
Alamos testing of "The Bomb," erseed such 
impulses within U.S. licy. From the U.S. stand, 
it was one thing to bust up the Bolshevik Revolution 

and that sort of thing; it was quite a different matter 
to turn the real estate over to Britain just at the time 
that the U.S. was attempting to reduce Britain's status 
definitively to that of a junior partner ~ if there was to 
be a partnership at all. As soon as it became clear that 
the Soviet republic was a going concern, the same 
impulses which evoked the Rapallo perspeive 
among German industrialists were experienced in a 
milder way in the USA. 

Broadly, the United States of the s wished to 
return to the pre- period's industrial-boom times. 
The industrialists and the pulation generally 
hungered for technological progress. Versailles was a 
failure, and everyone either knew it or sensed it. 
Europe was dying economically. Wilson had been a 
fool who had shamed the United States before the 
world with his sententious hycritical babblings. 

The disgust with the babbling Wilson and Colonel 
House's schemings was comementary to the shame- 
less fascist enthusiasms of John Dewey and the 
broadly corratist utopianism trickling out from the 
Fabian liberals of the New Republic and Progressive 
Party. The Whigs and many others didn't like it, and 







said so by voting Republican  out of hatred for '*Wil- 
sonism'* and Fabianism, without having much clear 
idea of what to do but to try to stop things from drifting 
o the weird condition the Fabians and others were 
prosing. We knew what we weren't going to be , 
pulled o  at least on a few salient s, but we 
had no sitive idea of what to do effeively about the 
downward slide away from the Constitution and the 
Idea of Progress. () 

The significance of the s U.S. foreign licy and 
domestic licy is that it constituted a grudging 
retreat in face of an encroaching foreign and domestic 
licy which was in fa both fascist in impulse and 
treasonous in content. The uncertaies and lack of 
consistency in foreign licy aims during that period 



. The indicated crisis among the anti-Wilson Whigs and their allies 
is exemified by the shocking toleration of the "pre-revisionist" over- 
throw of the U.S. Constitution by Justice Oliver Wendell Holmes. 
Whereas the founding fathers conceived of "sovereignty" as a 
sitive instrument of a humanist licy of capitalist development. 
Holmes' so-called "force" dorine degrades the instrument o a 
self-evident princie of sovereignty-in-itself. (The Holmes-Laski cor- 
resndence is illuminating on this in more ways than the letters 
taken by themselves exicitly state.) Thus, Homes laid the transi- 
tional basis for the rampant revisionist corruption undertaken 
beginning with the Roosevelt administration. Holmes, in the 
nominalist spirit of Dewey's vile Reconstruion in Philosophy, denies 
the existence of universals, and in a way which repudiates and thus 
sets forth to subvert the aive princies embedded in the U.S. Consti- 
tution. Hence, similarly, the notion of mens rea was essentially in- 
comprehensible to Holmes. Refeng to Christopher White's account 
of Colbertisme and its humanist roots, in The Political Economy of the 
American Revolution, the case is made in fa and in respe of the 
ent and content of the Constitution for a flat rejeion of not only the 
revisionist amoralism now sweeping the U.S. Department of Justice 
and federal courts, but also for Holmes* dorines and their 
derivations. The founding fathers were anti-monetarist humanists, 
committed to perfeion through the means of the general education 
and praice of an energetic advancement of produive technologies, 
and defining the need for a praical universality, the centralized 
state, as the common instrument indispensable to the enabling of such 
progress. 

The individual is obliged to contribute in praice and through the 
self-development of his capacities for praice, to the advancement of 
the society in behalf of its citizens and the sterity. The society, in 
turn, is obliged by its self-erest to foster and prote such forms of 
self-development and praice. The right of the state to exist and be 
preserved is not axiomatic, but flows from the need for the state to 
fulfill a defined funion, and the obligation of the individual to prote 
that funion efficiently to the extent of defining the self-erests of 
such a state as his own self-erests. 

The founding fathers believed in the existence of a natural law, and 
a human community, which natural law was man's right and obliga- 
tion to perfe his human existence. The state, the particular society 
within humanity, has the rights of sovereignty insofar as it is the in- 
strument of that natural law. The state, to sacrifice the distinions 
for the sake of the summary argument, is the instrument of the 
society. The distinion between the democratic state  which the 
founding fathers rightly rejeed on the combined basis of historical 
knowledge and corroborating experience  and the republic, is that 
the democratic state confuses the immediate majority of a pulation 
with the ongoing existence of that pulation. Hence, Federalist Tom 
Paine, among others, rightly and vigorously rejeed a democracy as 
being as tentially evil as a monarchy, as tending to the same errors. 
The republic is constituted to force refleion on the whole erest of 



 

is not that the U.S. lacked a licy, but that it had two 
wrong foreign licies in constant contention. The 
first, the vestiges of a self-erested Federalist- Whig- 
Republican licy, had been made ineffeive except 
as a rallying-ground for resistance against a Fabian- 
corratist monetarist licy that was thoroughly evil. 

The breakdown of the monetary order during - 
, and the immediate economic sequelae of that 
monetary failure broke the will of America to continue 
to resist the fascist impulse. Franklin Delano Roose- 
velt, beginning in , attempted to exoit the shock- 
effes of the social crisis to attempt to roduce con- 
sciously fascist licies, and obtained instead a com- 
promise, a thinly disguised corratism litely 
termed the **New Deal." 



the current society and its sterity, to ensure that whole erest 
against the whims of an episodic majority. The seleion of President, 
