at one   among some Europeans  the Papacy. 

The toleration of such disinformational exana- 
tions" was principally governed by their consoling 

features, that they appeared to exain away the dis- 
turbing fear that our competencies might be rooted in 
special ernal qualities of our organization itself. 

The notion that a small force of '^outsiders," an 
organization with no official, significantly insti- 
tutionalized mandate to meddle in **grand litics," 
could rude hubristically o the world's ruling 
circles and demonstrate that in the main those circles 
lacked some imrtant competence, was the crux of 
this matter. 

However, even the disinformational "exanations" 
could not and did not eliminate the persisting view 
that our organization was advantaged to know a few 
things of some imrtance. Consequently, increas- 
ingly since January , there has been an overall 
increase in erest among various leading circles of 
the USA and abroad in acquaing themselves with 
our information on various matters of that sort. Such 
erest has ebbed and flowed repeatedly during the 
shorter term, but the fluuations were only an in- 
cluded feature of a widening and otherwise signifi- 
cantly increasing overall tendency. The focus of such 
erest evolved over time, away from random pat- 
^ terns respeing specific topics and kinds of topics, to 
emphasize specific foci of information, including the 
varieties of background fas, analyses, and fore- 
casts. The methodological error predominant, most 
emphatically, in the attempt to appraise our fore- 
casts, is the most efficient charaerization of the 
wrong way our organization's qualities and its 
methods of work were generally appraised among 
leading and other circles. 

A forecast involves, in customary and mistaken 
opinion, a prediion. When what is offered is seen as a 
mere prediion, the recipient of such elligence 
tends to assume that the source has either obtained 
vital information concerning the operational ent of 
the relevant agencies involved in shaping the event, or 
that the projeed conditions are deduively deter- 
mined. Such appreciations, apied to the writer's 
organization's elligence output, ultimately involve 
precisely the same kind of error otherwise prompting 
credulous acceptance of the sort of disinformation 
cited above. 

In the matter of accepting consoling disinformation, 
the credulous observer has denied, in effe, that the 
subje organization's notable competencies arise 
autonomously from some special ernal quality. In 
the miserpretation of the quality of the elligence 



 

output we represent, the miserpreter demands, in 
effe, that an unusual quality of competence be 
causally attributed to an ordinary sort of methodo- 
logical praice. 

It is the methodological blunders commonly made in 
effort to erpret and assess our forecasts which is 
most to be singled out here, for sake of the urgent 
governing, praical  under consideration in this 
licy paper as a whole. The exsure of what is badly 
mistaken in the cited two forms of misappreciation of 
our forecasts s direly to that praical . 

First, the included case in which our forecast is 
attributed to knowledge of an operational commit- 
ment of ent by the relevant influential agency in- 
volved in the subje matter of the forecast. 

From the outside, it is a standard ABC of military 
elligence competence that documentary or other 
**hard" knowledge of an adversary's or ally's ent is 
of no conclusive value respeing a forecast of the be- 
havior such institutions will pursue in praice. 
Evidence of such ent is merely a clinical fa of 
greater or lesser imrtance in forecasting, in- 
dependently of the subje's own foreknowledge of his 
behavior, how his capacities and shifting perceptions 
of self-erests will cause him to behave under cir- 
cumstances we or others variously will in part shape. 

In respe of an adversary's or ally's adopted licy 
concerning ent (provided the elligence is not 
disinformation) , the strongest value to be attributed to 
it as a clinical fa is that (even in the case of disinfor- 
mation) it refles his deliberate processes and, more 
immediately, represents a consciously-identified and 
institutionalized licy option. Since the ent is a 

conscious effort to articulate praical realization of 
an adduced self-erest, it tends to have greater in- 
fluence on the subje's behavior than equally ad- 
ducible expression of the same self-erest which he 
has not made conscious to that same effe. However, 
the ent  operational commitment or otherwise  
remains no less merely a clinical fa, an ent whose 
realization and influence will be shaped by consider- 
ations of shifting alternative capabilities and shifting 
immediate expressions of self-erest. 

In our organization's work, that appreciation of the 
quality of evidence respeing ent is caed to what 
might be seen by the outside military-elligence and 
related specialists as a radical extreme. The writer's 
organization projes no inherent trust o evidence 
of conscious ent, operational or otherwise. We 
would not tolerate basing our licies  including our 
strategical and taical forecasts  on an amateurish 
miserpretation of perceived conscious ent. 

In the second aspe of the commonace misappre- 
ciations of our forecasts, our attention is confronted 
direly with the root-problem of the Aristotelian 







 

method. In identifying it as Aristotelian for this pur- 
se, we are subsuming the nominalist method as a 
special case, the degenerate form, of the Aristotelian. 

Our immediately preceding epistemological dis- 
cussion is most direly relevant. The notion that 
litical and certain related forms of forecasts can be 
competently developed by methods of prediion is the 
core of the misappreciation to be analyzed. 

First, in respe of underlying reality, the world is 
presently governed in fa by two systems, capitalist 
and socialist. The lawful processes determining 
economic relations of those systems, the lawful pro- 
cesses governing material erests, are immediately 
of the negentropic form we contrasted to the Aristotel- 
