tions among parents, siblings and others within the 
family, neighborhood and school life of the infant and 
young child, shading o the cathexes of infantilism 
acquired in that period of adolescence which pre- 
cedes being thrown o the outside world. Hence, the 
charaeristic feature of the Tory impulse is "con- 
cert," "uralism," and "egalitarianism," all ac- 
comodations to the central axiom of the whole affair, 
''that's mine!" 

By ing, as we are doing here, to the "mole- 
cular" root of the proto-Tory impulse, we exse the 
psychodynamics of a wide range of litical and proto- 
litical phenomena. In this specific consideration, we 



have emphasized the accessible dire evidence from 
the United States during recent decades, using that 
evidence not to effe a *iocalized** induive general- 
ization, but to aid us, that evidence considered 
together with other appropriate evidence, in develop- 
ing a crucial . The included result of such an 
approach is to afford us an enriched method of ap- 
proach to all comparable features of the history of our 
European-and-Mediterranean-littoral , years of 
culture. 

Although the rigors emoyed in our approach are 
representative of the crucial method appropriate to 
such resulting sitive knowledge concerning broader 
areas of history, the immediate empirical api- 
cability of the result is best defined for the narrowere 
area of investigation emphasized within the evidence 
emoyed. Consequently, we can make rigorous state- 
ments concerning broad features of other aspes of 
the history of our European cultural development, but 
we are still limited in respe of the most detailed, 
specific apications, to the narrowere range of em- 
pirical evidence we have emphasized. Hence, we are 
emphasizing the proto-Tory impulse as it has occurred 
in or affeed the United States' history, most em- 
phatically the recent decades to date. 

For the moment, as we describe the charaeristics 
of the proto-Tory impulse, our statements are direed 
in purse to the most recent generations in par- 
ticular, even though they have more or less analogous 
imications for other historical aspes of the same 
European culture viewed more broadly. 

Our generations of proto-Tories desire, at bottom, a 
society charaerized by models of those fantasy 
family and family-orbiting relations the proto-Tory 
liberal or radical wishes his infantile, childhood and 
adolescent family, neighborhood, and school life 
might have been. Hence, Toryism (liberalism, 
radicalism) is essentially rnographic, incestuous, 
and pederastic. This *'goar* is the only purse em- 
bedded in the impulse. The aive element of the 
impulse itself borrows from neurotic dreaming, and 
from rnographic fantasy life generally, those kinds 
of changes of ** scenario" details through which the 
neurotic (or psychotic) mind searches recurrently for 

a scenario** in which the dream  he hopes  finally 
becomes ''satisfying.** 

This underlying impulse of the proto-Tory and Tory 
takes a specific litical form by the same sort of 
"mechanisms'* the individual neurotic emoys in 
building fantasy scenarios. The neurotic mind in- 
terprets the scenarios of movies, TV dramas, *'soap 
operas," and journalists' work as fantasy scenarios 
created by script writers and by news editors and 
news writers. 

The contemrary prevailing standards of **news- 



 

worthiness*' in most United States' leading news 
publications* praice is the conscious exoitation of 
the princie of the audience's fantasy-building ac- 
tivities, to mold ''public opinion" in Tory direions. In 
general, contrary to common perceptions, this mani- 
pulation of our pular entertainment and "news** 
institutions does not operate effeively by a single 
distorted "story" or article, or even a few lying news 
rerts. It operates through broad, cumulative effe, 
through the biases represented by overall seleion of 
topics and treatments according to overall editorial 
formulas. It is guided to the effe of creating an 
ideological environment of fantasy, to the effe that 
"public opinion" in the main is "steered" o certain 
direions in colleive overall trends in private 
fantasy-building. 

The suggestible mind uses the scenarios supied to 
it as models for rebuilding its own private fantasies. 
This has two, erconneed features of imrtance 
here. Respeing the ernal mechanics of private 
fantasy-building, the entertainment and "news" 
stimuli represent "suggestions"  like the 
suggestions of a new boy in the neighborhood for a 
"stimulating" improvement in a become-boring mode 
of aying "cowboys and Indians." The fa that the 
individual knows that a massive audience is being 
similarly stimulated with such neurotic suggestions 
makes the fantasy credible to him as the kind of in- 
fantile game which society as a whole might consent 
to ay. 

Even if our mass entertainment and most influential 
TV news, news magazine, metrolitan press, and 
wire-service agencies did not have a conscious licy 
concerning such methods of molding "public opinion," 
the same mechanisms would nonetheless tend to 
operate. Beginning with Fabian Sidney Webb's en- 
thusiasm for the tentialities of utilitarian dorine 
as a wereful means for mass brainwashing of public 
opinion, through the er-war Lippmann  New 
Republic-centered  dominant modes of '^public 
opinion"-shaping, through the "Radio Research" pro- 
je, the combined outgrowths of World War II stra- 
tegic psychological warfare methods, and the Tavis- 
tock-Roper-Gallup-Has methods of manipulating 
"public opinion," the now-Rockefeller-centered neo- 
Fabian faion has pragmatically shaped the neurotic, 
heteronomic tentialities of entertainment and news 
produion o a coordinated deliberate instrument of 
mass brainwashing, whose coordination itself is ef- 
feed by the "scenario princie." 

The credulous person imagines that a journalist, 
editor or TV produions official who is uncovered as a 
"CIA agent" must therefore be engaged in spying, 
assassination operations, and such particular offenses 
against pular sensibilities. Such aivities may 







 

