


U.S. Congress, as well as seions of the federal 
courts up to the Supreme Court itself  could ime- 
ment or even condone such treason against the United 
States and such monstrous repudiation of the clearest 
and most fundamental specifications of natural law? 

The answere to such questions will be made clearer 
as we turn now, direly to the specifications of the 

Atlanticist Dorine as a geolitical metaphysics. 

In the preceding major topical seions, we con- 
sidered predominantly the real content of Atlanticist 
dorine, as a monetarist self-erest which 
developed o an alliance of the monetarist forces 
based principally in the City of London and lowere 
Manhattan, and which established its litical 
dominance over the government of the United States. 
The Atlanticist system and its licies have been 
examined thus as a consistent but ernally contra- 
diory Anglo-American monetarists* alliance, in 
behalf of the attempt at world domination by their 
monetarist were, but accompanied by faional 
struggles between (growing) Manhattan and 
(weakening) City of London forces for hegemony 
within that monetarist world order. 

Now, that monetarists' alliance, in its form as a 
litical alliance between the monetarists of the 
United States and the United Kingdom as a nation, is 
at the  of breaking apart. The looting of the 
economy of the United Kingdom and of the City of 
London's Commonwealth-sterling base by lowere 

Manhattan-based forces has reached the  at 
which the looted British forces are coming to view 
themselves as suffering relative to lowere Manhattan 
today, the sition inverting that of the rebelling 
North American English colonies and United States 
during -. In contemrary litical-science 
usages, one says that today's United Kingdom is 
among those nations of Western Europe (us Japan) 
which are moving toward '"Gaullist" opsition to the 
Rockefellers' Carter Administration. 

It is illustrative of that circumstance that during the 
first half of last year, one leading executive of a major 
London bank observed to this writer that lowere 
Manhattan was blindly repeating the past mistakes of 
the London bankers. It is also illustrative of the same 
, that at about the same time we received that 
cited comment, a leading British parliamentarian 
observed that the  of crisis had not yet quite been 
reached  at that moment  at which new forces 
fermenting within the British labor movement would 
manifest themselves in defense against the mone- 
tarist-imsed hyperinflationary austerity. We see 
how matters have progressed since then. 

Since that time, the Giulio Andreotti government 
and its ernational role of the June  through 



 

January  period have triggered the chain of events 
which is tending to turn most of Western Europe to 
**Gaullist" opsition to Rockefellers' monetary and 
austerity licies, and correlated opsition to Carter 
Administration strategic and covert-operations ad- 
ventures. 

At this junure, were this writer the President of 
the United States, he would be developing a trans- 
atlantic alliance  not because of, but despite Lipp- 
mann's dorine  and would be in imate collabora- 
tive discussions with Messrs. Callaghan, Schmidt, 
Andreotti and others to this effe. Our past enemy has 
not been the United Kingdom as such, the competitor 
to our present vital economic self-erests is not 
England as such  nor continental Western Europe 
nor Japan. The thrust of emerging *'Gaullist** ten- 
dencies in Western Europe and Japan converge on 
coincidence with our own nation's most vital, im- 
mediate erests. (Unfortunately, at the moment of 
writing, the *'Gaullist" thrust is only a tendency, and 
not yet a consolidated set of institutions appropriate to 
its imied goals.) 

Even the old Fabians of Western Europe, without 
yet freeing themselves of ingrained nominalist habits, 
are tending to become almost semi-Gaullists, in op- 
sition on many praical issues and corresnding 
overall self-perception to the lunatic neo-Fabians 

based in the United States. Among British Fabians, 
since especially , their growing perception of the 
Rockefellers' neo-Fabianism is that the traditions of 
Rothschild, Palmerston, the Russells and the Webbs 
have been extralated far beyond toleration, 

England, to single out the feature of the present 
situation most relevant to the immediate discussion, 
has come around, albeit two hundred years late, 
toward recognizing the merits of Benjamin Franklin's 
persisting advice to the British parliamentarians 
during the decades preceding . In southern Africa, 
for exame, the Callaghan government, in healthy 
tendency towards repudiation in fa both of the vile 
precepts of Adam Smith and of the Carter Administra- 
tion's licies, shows an impulse toward Franklin's 
prosed, urgent English reforms of the mid- 
eighteenth century, 

England, in concert with other leading forces in 
Western Europe, and in parallel to wereful thrusts 
emanating from industrialist erests in Japan, is 
edging  if ever-cautiously, uncertainly  toward the 
financial and economic licies of Alexander 
Hamilton, In sum, the United States, as a nation, now 
has the oprtunity to secure finally the foreign licy 
objeives of the American Revolution and its Con- 
stitution. 

Lippmann's (Roosevelt's) Atlanticist Dorine 
predominantly denies that such a lawful development 







 

would be ssible. From the stand of the real 
processes and erests operating, the history of the 
rise of monetarism in the United States and the Anglo- 
American monetarists* alliance of the two govern- 
ments they controlled is exicitly comprehensible in 
the main from the stand of perceiving as central 
the real aspe of the special self-erests of the 
monetarist faions based in lowere Manhattan and the 
City of London. However, as the current tendency of 
the United Kingdom to break away from such a licy 
illustrates, the continuation of the Atlanticist Dorine 
