
In the Second World War, Germany's imperatives 
for invasion of France were even more wereful. 
From a sime military stand, the Wehrmacht 
could not permit itself to be deoyed in depth on an 
eastern front, waiting for the  of mutual Nazi- 
Soviet attrition at which the Western allies cometed 
their preparations to occupy the Ruhr. From any 
objeive purely military strategic stand, the 
Wehrmacht had to conquer continental Western 
Europe before undertaking a thrust to the east of Po- 
land, That  certainly by -  was any 
military cadet's ABCs. The fa that the British and 
French financiers and liticians could suppress 
elementary strategic competence in their military 
commands was extended o the double folly of pre- 
suming that the Nazi litical struure could  or 
would attempt to  check its military command on 
that . The fa was, as London knew, the Hitler 
regime of - lived on the sufferance of the Ger- 
man military. Military questions as such aside, the 
bankruptcy of the German monetary system and the 
deeted condition of German basic industry 
demanded a substantial source of loot as a precon- 
dition for building up the German economy to the  
that an eastern thrust was ssible. 

The difference between  and - was that 
but for a command failure at the outset of World War 
I, the Kaiser's Germany would have won the peace by 
a successful early conquest of France. The conquest of 
France in June  could not produce the same dur- 
able result. The Kaiser's Germany was, relatively 
speaking, a viable capitalist economy, whose early 
military viories would have opened up Eastern 
Europe and Russia to massive German capitalist 
extended reproduion. The Nazi economy created by 
the Rockefellers, et al, was of a fundamentally dif- 
ferent charaer. It was an auto-cannibalizing 







economy, which subsisted by destroying the economic 
basis it assimilated, thus destroying the produive 
forces un whose expansion and development a dur- 
able conquest depended. 

If the Nazis had defeated the Soviets, the condition 
of Europe  and the world  would have been mon- 
strously worse than at the middle of , but then the 
Nazi economy, by its nature, must collapse of its own 
effes as it extended itself beyond a certain weighted 
ratio of Germany proper to looted conquered regions. 
However, that fa could not alter Hitler's licy any 
more than the force of reason  showing Rockefeller, 
et al. the inherent folly of their war aims  could deter 
the Trilateraloids. Entities such as the Hitler regime 
and the present-day Atlanticists must be destroyed 
before they go o full-scale motion, otherwise they 
will pursue their wretched follies to the end  
because, beyond their commitments, they have no al- 
ternatives. They have burned the bridges leading back 
to other alternatives. 

There is, admittedly, some weighty conceptual 
problem incurred by emoying the term ''objeive 
processes*' in conneion with-the hypergeometries of 
shifting patterns in lawful transformations being 
provoked within the Soviet licies and operations. As 
every Moscow- watcher knows, the canonical epithet 
for the so-called Brezhnev faion is "objeive.'* 
Brezhnev's self-aped sycophants, such as the 
Arbatovs insist on this, and Brezhnev, et al. seem to 
relish such litical insults. The Averell Hamans 
and others also insist on the same , as, in a 
slightly different form, do the Henry Kissingers, the 
James Schlesingers, and so forth. It is argued that 
precisely because the Brezhnev faion is "objeive," 

it will resnd to appropriate Mutt-and-Jeff confronta- 
tionist games by pragmatically retreating, grumbling 
bitterly as it nonetheless throws off concession after 
begrudged concession like so much confetti. 

Neither Haman nor Kissinger  nor Arbatov  
use the term "objeive" in the historically-rigorous 
epistemological sense. The cognates for the "objec- 
tivity" they attribute to the Brezhnev faion are 
"pragmatic," "empiricist," "Menshevik (Herzen- 
Plekhanov) fatalism." However, just as the Soviet 
command is "Clausewitzian," the Soviet opnents of 
Arbatov and the Bukharinist tradition are predom- 
inantly "objeive" in the rigorous epistemological 
usage of that term. It is that element of the Soviet com- 
mand struure which the Rockefellers will lawfully 
render predominantly operative by the sort of con- 
frontation-process now under way. So, the Rocke- 
fellers will repeat the same methodological stupidity 
charaerizing the two preceding world wars in 
triggering a third. 

Considering the mass of the twentieth century 



 

evidence on the , one might ordinarily presume 
that even a pragmatist would be wiser than in fa the 
Carter Administration's puppet-masters show them- 
selves. Indeed, such persons emphatically admit the 
most relevant fas  as they have done so, once 
again, in recent testimony before Congress. Yet, in 
that testimony, and repeatedly on the same topic over 
the three years that we have been direly confronting 
them and others on the issue, they fall back to the 
obsessive conviion that the pragmatism of the Brezh- 
nev faion obviates such fas and thus renders the 
prosed track toward World War III acceptable. 
Considering the uniformity of such manic hysteria 
within the Trilateraloid leadership, one must wonder 
what strange wishful delusions are operating there. 

There are two sources of the Atlanticist delusion. 
At first identification, the two causes may appear to 
be distin "faors," Modest critical assessment 
suffices to show without doubt that the two phenomena 
are but different facets of the same consideration. 

Predominantly, as David Rockefeller's desperate 
address to the New York City Economics Club symp- 
tomizes, they are obsessed by the need to believe that 
the schemes will succeed. For them, since they have 
committed themselves to such operational licies, 
cut themselves faionally off from alternative 
courses of aion, and so forth, the notion that the 
licy might fail is properly associated with the 
spere of an early collapse of Chase Manhattan Bank, 
and a total loss of their faion's financial and litical 
were. 

As with the  disclosures of Soviet physicist L. 
Rudakov, they prefer to believe that such realities do 
not exist, and if they are forced to acknowledge their 
existence, must convince themselves that such con- 
siderations will not be efficiently operative. They des- 
