sterling-dollar monetary system, providing litical 
credibility for the existing ernational debt struc- 
tures. It meant that the **Rapallo" tendency among 
German industrialists and trade unionists for break- 
ing out of the dollar-sterling orbit, for massive eco- 
nomic cooperation with the Soviet east, was blocked  
with the aid of the * 'termination" of Gregor Strasser, 
Schleicher, and so forth. It meant that the capability 
of using Germany as a ''breakaway ally" ''marcher 
lord" force against the Soviet Union was being estab- 
lished. 

To grasp the sense of the relevant opinion of the 
times, it must be understood that Atlanticist attitudes 
and praices in imsing the Hitler regime in Ger- 
many, in behalf of Schacht's fascist monetary l- 
icies, were broadly identical with the thinking and 
public toleration of the David Rockefeller-led opera- 
tion establishing the Pinochet regime in Chile in 
behalf of Milton Friedman's fascist monetary 
licies. 

Although Roosevelt attitudes toward the two 
Atlanticist-created fascist regimes of Mussolini and 
Hitler were significantly differentiated from the out- 
side, and this predominantly for strategic reasons, 
Roosevelt's administration was pro-fascist from the 
outset. 

Not only was Roosevelt's administration pro-fascist 
in foreign licy, but also in domestic licy. General 
Hugh Johnson and the National Recovery A left no 
doubt of that. With the defeat of the NRA and Congres- 
sional and Supreme Court resistance and foot-drag- 
ging on other legislation, executive aions, and labor 
struggles to the same effe, Roosevelt's administra- 
tion was compelled litically to retreat to a compro- 
mise, semi-fascist licy, called the *'New Deal." 
Such dire imitations of the Hitler regime's labor- 
ensive Arbeitsdienst measures and BdM insti- 
tutions as the Works Proje Administration (WPA), 
Public Works Administration (PWA), and Civilian 
Conservation Corps were not only imitations of the 
Nazi regime, but consciously so. The Agricultural 
Adjustment A (AAA) was another fascist *'zero 
growth"-oriented atrocity of the same genre. 

From the contrary stand, of vital U.S. national 
erests, the Nazi regime was from inception an unre- 
deemable adversary in the Clausewitzian sense as we 
have outlined that sense above. Just as the collapse of 
German industrial development imsed by Ver- 



PEF=T(o)® i()X. E)EM© E^S 



sailles not only created the preconditions for a new 
general war but destroyed the tential for world- 
market recovery, the Hitler regime was a more pro- 
found economic threat to our most vital national in- 
terests on that same account. By its nature, its organic 
constitution as a * 'command economy" dedicated to 
maaining inflationary, already bankrupt debt 
struures by increasingly savage primitive accumu- 
lation against its own economic base, the persistence 
of the regime meant a nation which had no alternative 
but to prevent the otherwise inevitable, total ernal 
collapse of its ernal economy by soon launching 
wars of looting against its neighbors. This irrepres- 
sible military impulse, and the infeious conse- 
quences of such primitive-accumulation licies on 

the world economy, represented an olerable con- 
dition. 

It must be emphasized that the Wall Street backing 
of Roosevelt's first eleion and the installation of Hit- 
ler were comementary efforts. 

Hitler could have been pulled down  probably 
without war  by the United States at any time prior 
to the  Munich agreements. The U.S. could have 
sent the French army  two or three divisions would 
have sufficed  o the Rhineland in , and Hitler 
would have collapsed. The economic and monetary 
were of the United States respeing Britain and 
France would have sufficed to prevent the  Mun- 
ich agreement, and could also have induced the 
French to accept the Tukachevsky Plan if we had 
wished. Although the U.S. capacity for litical and 
related aion was admittedly delimited by the in- 
ternal litical situation inside the U.S., it is obscenely 
false to profess that a Roosevelt administration either 
helessly watched the growth of the Nazi problem in 
Europe, or that the Roosevelt administration did not 
consciously refrain from emoying those preventive 
measures within the existing discretionary capabili- 
ties of the government. Shattered as the U.S. was by 
the Depression, we had the were to determine, mar- 
ginally but crucially, the licies of England and 
France in such respes, if the Roosevelt administra- 
tion had chosen to exercise such were to that effe. 

Nor can Roosevelt defenders argue that he was 
either uninformed of the imications of the Nazi re- 
gime, or profess that public opinion prevented him 
from taking preventive aions otherwise within his 
means. As Lippmann most imately knew, the 
Roosevelt administration largely molded public opin- 
ion in the U.S. during the - period  after all, 
Lippmann was part of the proje of refining the use of 
the press as a ^'brainwashing*' tool against the U.S. 
pulation, and Roosevelt himself was the "confi- 
dence man's confidence man." 

Central to the overall licy-configuration of the 



 

Roosevelt administration was the *'bank holiday." 
The definitions of nominal wealth embedded in the 
chosen form of financial reorganization delimited and 
otherwise determined domestic and foreign licy op- 
tions overall thereafter. 

It was objeively unnecessary for the United States 
to go through the prolonged depression of -. 
With the collapse of sterling and the appropriate bank- 
ruptcy precedures against worthless debt struures 
in the U.S. itself, the proper task was to resort to a 
**HamiItonian" National Bank licy, putting the cre- 
dit of the government o such a bank, and acing 
Colonel House's ruined Federal Reserve System o a 
"holding corration" status for sorting-out at leisure- 
Provided that government-issued credit was re- 
stried to restoring viable industrial and agricultural 
capacities  and not to refinancing of old paper or 
non-tangible-wealth-regenerative forms, the lawful 
reproduive operation of the profitable produive 
process, raised above the real-economic break-even 
, would have sufficed to convert the credit issued 
o an appropriate margin of profit in the form of 
tangible commodities. Under any circumstances of 
crisis, such use of mobilized government weres to 
create produion credit can promptly reverse any de- 
