
pared with the aid of McGeorge Bundy's Ford Founda- 
tion: to force a massive rise in ernal U.S. petro- 
leum and natural gas prices, much larger than the 
- leap, and hope to do the same with Third 
World and other primary commodities, to repeat the 
refinancing swindle of - on a broader scale. 



growth movement the final solution to the over- 
pulation question. 

It is a licy to reduce the pulation of the United 
States to the order of  million persons, aqd to 
reduce the global pulation to the order of not ex- 
ceeding two billion persons  within more or less the 
relatively near term. There are only two ways to effe 
such a licy. One is by wars and mass murder 
direly. The other is by unleashing biological catas- 



This same package has an auxiliary, devilish imi- trophe in the form of famine and associated waves of 



cation. Since the per capita energy-throughput of in- 
dustry correlates with the level of produive technol- 



epidemics. 

Rockefeller erests are not prosing to wipe out a 



ogy overall, by driving up energy prices to parity with coue of billion human beings because the Pocantico 



the price of uneconomical solar were, and by simul- 
taneously blocking fission energy and other augmen- 
tation of energy availability, the Carter Administrat- 
ion creates a climate (if that is allowed) in which main- 



Estate in New York is itself becoming oppressively 
overcrowded. They are prosing genocide because 
their economic licies  their global hyper- 
inflationary austerity licies  have the inevitable 



tenance of modern technology becomes increasingly consequenceof producing the conditions of famine and 



imssible. If Carter can push his energy program 
through the Congress, the combined forces of indus- 
try, trade unions, and farmers will have thereby lost 
meaningful legal were to resist a licy of deindustri- 
alization and driving back of agriculture toward more 
primitive forms of produion. 

Rockefeller has demanded the same licy for 
Western Europe, for Japan, and throughout the 
developing seor. If that combined energy licy and 
IMF-refinancing were to go through, the combined 
OECD and developing nations (or, most of them), 
including the United States itself, would soon be under 
firm fascist-economic rule by the Rockefellers and 
allied erests. 

The other principal features of the Trilateral pack- 
age are, as we have stipulated above, litical and 
social derivatives of the Rockefellers' fascist eco- 
nomic licy. 

The most prominent, and broadest feature of the 
Trilateral program is the prosal that the present 
economic situation precludes the toleration of con- 
tinued forms of republican and parliamentary rule. 
The Trilateraloids* demand '^command economies" 
 e.g., regimes paralleling David Rockefeller's 
Chilean Pinochet regime, with its fascist licies as 
specified by Milton Friedman. 

The reason for Rockefellers' prosal of a reign of 



diatorships throughout the OECD and developing 
seors  including the USA  is that no form of 
representative government can imement the 
protraed process of the licy of hyperinflationary 



epidemics in which that result must occur. Zero 
growth  the fraudulent '^overpulation" dorine  
is a litical movement designed to make the geno- 
cidal consequences of hyperinflationary austerity 
acceptable to a sufficient force within the pulation 
that the imminence of such consequences will not 
evoke an effeive revolt against the hyperinflation- 
ary-a usterity licies. 

The ''small is better" and the allied '*local com- 
munity control" movements are of the same form. 
These fascist social movements are not developed by 
Rockefeller and allied forces because the Rockefellers 
themselves have, necessarily, some compelling desire 
to enjoy fascism, but because a pulation which tol- 
erates such fascist social licies is a pulation 
which cannot effeively resist, and will probably 
tolerate the effes of deindustrialization and other 
forced breakdown of the nation's produive forces. 

Otherwise, prompted by memories of Franklin 
Roosevelt's blocked efforts to pack the Supreme 
Court, the Fabians have systematically corrupted the 
Federal and other courts, and large segments of the 
legal profession. The advantage of this is obvious. The 
U.S. Constitution has the most wereful exicit and 
associated authority emwereing any honest federal 
court system to a as a defense of last resort against 
the fascist criminality which Rockefeller's Carter 
Administration is attempting to imse. In the event 
that the Congress, as well as the executive, capitu- 
lated to Rockefeller's treason, the Supreme Court has 
the authority to block fascism. However, if the Su- 



austerity to the  of deliberate genocide against preme Court is itself sufficiently corrupted, that 

major rtions of its pulation and destruion of its bastion is removed, and as in Weimar, becomes an 

industrial and agricultural produive capabilities in instrument for treason, 

the service of an alien (Rockefeller) erest. How, then, is it ssible that a government of the 

This coincides with John D. Rockefeller Ill's zero United States  the Executive Branch and part of the 




