ideology. Once the dire relationship of such fascist 
liberal-radical hoodlumism to David Rockefeller's 
erests is recognized, one is not astonished that the 
Rockefellers and their allies have funded, coddled and 

otherwise fostered the inspiring and molding of the 
neo-Fabians' fascist liberal-radical upsurge which 
presently confronts us. 

The Rockefellers' energy licy has a double aspe. 
The traditional stand of the petroleum marketing 
monolies' financial backers and controllers has 
been to hold back produion in order to increase the 
rate of profit on the marketing of each barrel, both by 
monolistically jacking up the price at which the 
marketing monoly delivers petroleum, and, when- 
ever ssible, by keeping their purchase-price down 
by creating a condition of aual or tential competi- 
tive oversupy at the  of constried produion. 
(*'gas wars) aside.) In this and equivalent ways, the 
financier forces associated with a hegemonic sition 
in world marketing of petroleum squeeze marginal 
profits from both the consumer and the producer. 
Insofar as the Rockefellers represent both petroleum- 
marketing erests (although they incidentally con- 
trol major producers, they do not represent a produ- 
cer-erest overall), and also monetarist financier in- 
terests, their decades-old approach to energy licy 
has this traditional double aspe. 

This double aspe concentrates at a middle  
best illustrated by the - petroleum hoax. The 
net flow of funds as dollar-denominated desits o 
the accounts of Rockefeller and allied institutions rep- 
resented income not immediately consumed by the 
exrting economies, and hence was in the form of de- 
sits to strengthen the otherwise indefensibly over- 
extended sition of the Rockefeller and allied finan- 



. That, as we have rerted it, is the way it happened. That is not a 
surmise, an inference. This writer was there, a dire observer of 
many of the principal events and personalities involved at each turn. 
It was merely necessary to enrich one's knowledge of the significance 
of McGeorge Bundy's and other visible controllers' roles and con- 
neions by research after the fa, to uncover the conneions which 
accounted for the way they behaved in praice at each . The 
archives of Eric Gerlach, exsing certain relevant leaders of the 
American "left" as long-standing Fabian agents dating back to World 
War II, are illustrative of the kind of background research involved. 
This writer has lived through the s as a child, aware of that era's 
values, the s as a youth, and from the end of World War II went 
through such relevant experiences as the American Veterans Com- 
mittee, the campus Americans for Democratic Aion, parts of the 
labor movement experience, the s through s socialist 



 

cial erests. What was most significant financially 
was the abrupt enlargement of this flow of dollar-de- 
nominated desits through such institutions. This en- 
largement was crucial, since the preceding flows were 
part of the insufficiency which represented the insta- 
bility of the base of the financial institutions involved. 
The other economic side of the price increase was that 
the added income came from savagely deeting the cir- 
culating capital of industry and agriculture in the non- 
oil-exrting, or net-consuming nations. Since the glob- 
al economic base involved was already in a depres- 
sion taken as a whole^ a purely temrary rollover of 

the Rockefellers' and others' overextended sitions 
slashed further  often deey  in its destruion 
of circulating capital. This reduced the overall ability 
of the debtors to pay, making the subsequently ex- 
panded mass of refinanced paper vastly more over- 
extended. ''Positive feedback/' 

From any rational stand, it represents a hope- 
less, hopelessly insane spiral, but each time the 
Rockefellers and their allies go to that well they bring 
back a moment or so of further stnement of their 

ultimately inevitable financial collapse. Again, 
''sitive feedback, " 

The present Rockefeller-Ford Foundation- 
Schlesinger energy prosal projes the licy-imi- 
cations of such Rockefeller looting of the United States 
in an obvious way. In order to roll over the Rockefel- 
lers' and others' worthless paper yet once 
again  for a short time  they require a massive 
refinancing of the International Monetary Fund  so 
that the IMF may in turn loot the contributing govern- 
ments' treasuries with hyperinflationary conse- 
quences, to finance various nations' unpayable debt 
service to Chase Manhattan Bank. 

It requires more. It requires also a massive aug- 
mentation of the desits put through bankrupt finan- 
cial institutions. Hence, we have witnessed the Rocke- 
fellers' effort to get through the International Re- 
sources Bank swindle (a dire imitation of Hjalmar 
Schacht's Mefo Bill swindle), and such token "foot-in- 



movement, and was himself an increasingly aive participant, and 
oppenent of neo-Fabianism in key related developments of the s, 
experiencing and fighting against what then most often first appeared 
to be inexicably irrational sudden turns to new firm conviions 
among those varying grades of influential figures with whom he was 
acquaed. Since , he has been the founder and leader of a 
growing organization at the center of struggles against the neo- 
Fabians of our liberal and radical strata, leading an organization of 
limited physical but extraordinary and expanding research and 
related capabilities, which itself has experienced the most relevant 
experiences of the s. Although the account we have presented is 
condensed for obvious reasons here, every aspe of it is 
authoritatively based on a massive, accumulated detailed record of 
combined dire observation and authoritative documentation. That 
is the way it happened. 



Mp;//www.d)®(BU=tiirgi(gfe.(S®[ffli/ 



P^OF-T(o)(Q)llOT. OEM© E^^ 



 

the-door" efforts to the same effe as the so-called 
"Common Fund." Hence, the Rockefellers* energy 



licy 



the Carter-Schlesinger energy licy pre- 


