more difficult problem confronts us in those cases in 
which the same reaion formation in behalf of heter- 
onomy is made lawful through vicious discrepancies 
between the law and morality. Once a heteronomic 
impulse contrary to the nation's and humanity's most 
vital erests is aced within the body of efficiently 
lawful praice or, worse, allowed to diate the for- 
mulation and imementation of governmental and re- 
lated licies, then the full litical hell of heteronomy 
confronts us. It is the legalizing of such immoral 
(heteronomic) reaion-formation impulses which is 
the key to the topical problem of this seion as a 
whole. 

In the case of the degeneration leading o the 
Black Death of the mid-fourteenth century, the 
stretching of the tolerated, relatively small margin of 
Jewish usury to its reacement, rampant Lombard 
usury, is the most obvious aspe of the breakdown of 
the morality of the feudal order. 







 

First, to understand this , one must ac- 
knowledge the truth about the European Jew. The 
European Jew was not a produ of some, in fa, half- 
mythical religious society associated with what is 
called Palestine. Such notions are historically pure 
bunk. The European Jew was created by Christen- 
dom. Since by law a Christian could not engage in 
usury, but since feudalism required the occasional 
emoyment of the usurer, the feudal Jew was created 
by Christendom from out of the ranks of that strata of 
Levantine small merchants and peddlers which 
featured the followeres of Philo et al. as the social 
element of that commerce most notable to an observ- 
ing Christendom. It was in this way that Christendom, 
having a small but definite need for services outlawed 
within the ernal, feudal order of Christendom, 
seized un the strata most appropriate to that func- 
tion and defined the Jew by law (e.g., Charlemagne's 
laws concerning his Jews) as having a special right to 
exist juridically outside Christendom. It is not only 
famous rabbis who fabricate real howlers of a pilpul; 
Christendom's creation of the feudal Jew was itself 
one of the fabulous pilpuls of European history. 

The existence of the praice of usury by feudal 
Europe's Jewry did not represent a tolerant violation 
of the lawful prohibition against usury, but exaly the 
opsite. It was a ruse to make that princie of law 
ironclad within Christendom itself. 

It is only necessary to refer, additionally, to such 
other relevant features of feudal law as the regulation 
of the preconditions and conditions for wars within 
Christendom. 

From our outline of the feudal economy as a system, 
it is immediately clear enough why those two aspes 
of law  concerning usury and wars within Christen- 
dom  were indispensable to the vital erests of the 
feudal order as a whole. Loosen those laws widely 
enough and the resulting outbreak of heteronomy 
would itself be sufficient to bring the feudal order o 
the sort of collapse we have summarized. It is also 
clear that the duty of the papacy and the associated 
princes of the Church was not merely to enforce these 
laws with respe to form, but also with respe to the 
purse of the la w. 

In that respe, the problem of law is immediately 
analogous to that for the case of the Tories' monetarist 
subversion of the U.S. government. 

This is not to imy that the preservation of the la ws 
of Christendom could have saved the feudal order. 
That would have been neither ssible nor desirable. 
The  is that it was the wrong specific aspes of 
the law of Christendom which gave way to develop- 
ments. Rather than abandoning feudalism to save the 
law, the core of the law was sacrificed in the attempt 
to save a decaying feudalism. The consequence of 
this abandonment of the princie of universal natural 



law in ordering the social and economic transform- 
ation was the rule of heteronomy, in the form of the 
cited alliances and de fao litical diatorship of 
bankers and feudal forces. It was the reaion form- 
ation to the violation of law, the Inquisition, which 
destroyed the Church of feudal Christendom from 
within, and accelerated those tendencies for schism 
which refleed at the outset the defense of the prin- 
cie of universal law within the law of Christendom, 
against the deepening nominalist corruption of the 
papacy and princes of the Church. The morally empty 
dorine of the princie of papal sovereignty (papal 

infallibility) was crucial to this process. 

That granted, we are not concerned to exore 
further in this location the question of precisely how 
Christendom might have avoided the genocidal path it 
took from the thirteenth century onward, but to define 
the relevant princied features which shaped the 
subsequent course of history. The litical dia- 
torship of the feudal reaion and the papal bankers of 
that period established the twofold pattern, which 
simmered throughout the later fourteenth and fif- 
teenth centuries and erupted in the same essential 
form in the Fugger-Hapsburg institutions of the six- 
teenth and early seventeenth centuries. As White 
outlines in his cited dissertation on Colbert, the 
ideological and litical institutions embodied in the 
Fugger-Hapsburg alliance were continued in a new 
adaptation by the Amsterdam bankers of the seven- 
teenth century, and took over control of the British 
monarchy and government during and following 
. () 

It was that current against which our litical 
forebears fought the American Revolution, and in 
opsition to that that our Constitution and republic 
were in stitu te d. 

It was the litical diatorship of that same institu- 
tion of nominalism over Great Britain and later our 
government which made most of the world a hell 
during the late eighteenth, nineteenth, and twentieth 
centuries, as the ideological predecessors of the 
British monetarist-nominalist faion had made 
Europe a hell since the twelfth century. It was that 
same Tory ison of monetarist nominalism which 
has subverted our institutions and theatens to unge 
us o a new '*low-energy,*' **deindustrialized" hyper- 
inflationary austerity grand parody of the biological 
catastrophe of the mid-fourteenth century, and which 
impels us to the brink of an early general thermo- 
nuclear war for whose war-aims no nation has in fa 
an objeive sitive erest. 

Next, finishing two critical subsidiary s, we 
