foreign licy does not bind a nation's subsequent 
licies  in any competent understanding of affairs 
 it happens that the thrust of Federalist hostility 
toward France in this matter was no blunder, but 
corre, both respeing our nation's most immediate 
praical erests and the notion of a humanist 
community of princie which was the ultimately 
underlying princie of our foreign licy. 

If France had pursued effeively a licy in its 
revolution which paralleled our own humanist con- 
ceptions of progress and republican institutions, we 
would have been obliged to ally ourselves with France 
in princie, although in fa we would have been able 
to pursue that alliance only as means permitted. In- 
deed, if France had pursued a sound domestic licy, 
it did not require our modest assistance for its battles 
against England on the continent. Naleon's 
degeneration, the Naleonic licies which made 
inevitable his downfall, show that the tential 
community of princie we shared with the French 
Revolution was precisely as abortive in auality as 
the Revolution's abortive reception of Tom Paine. 

Our Federalists' foreign licy was not a licy 
based on **Wilsonian" notions of geolitical concerts 
among rag-tag assortments of monetarist obscen- 
tities, petty tyrannies, and struggling republics. Our 
Federalists' foreign licy was on the surface an 
expedient licy prescribed by our weakness, but 
whose objeive, to the extent we had the were to 
express that, was for a world order among nations 
based on their praice and self-conscious perception 
of self-erests un those same humanist notions of 
universal natural law we had adopted for our own. 

These were also the leading thrusts of the Tudor 
renaissance, of the upsurge of the English Common- 
wealth. These were not merely the precedents for the 
hegemonic ideas and outlooks of our revolution, not 
something Franklin et al. had somehow picked up 
from books or gossip, but the sensuous traditions of 
humanism our forefathers, in the main, brought to the 
shores. 

We did not break with England so much because we 
had changed. We broke with England because its 
government had repudiated in form, and praice 
toward us, the princies on which its own Tudor and 
Commonwealth development had been premised. If 
England, notably beginning with the Stuart 
Restoration of , and worse, after the  ac- 
cession of the House of Orange, had not repudiated an 
impulse for humanist licy in favor of a monetarist 
licy, our forefathers would not have gone to war 
with the mother country. That break, as we have 
emphasized just above, was not caused merely by a 
difference in fundamental philosophical outlook, but 
because those differences in outlook were inevitably 







 

olerable to us respeing our most vital praical 
erests. 

Who cares to make a great fuss because the or 
babbling fool down the street esuses Keynes, or, 
even worse, Friedman? But when that same fool down 
the street pursues his follies to loot our wages, unge 
us o unemoyment, eliminate our vital social 
services, and imse diatorial rule over us to en- 
force those conditions, then his babbling becomes 
occasion for forceful remedies. 

Since at least the time of Charlemagne, European 
culture has been dominated successively by two ruling 
conceptions of a universal natural law and also by a 
third view, which denies the existence of such uni- 
versality. These are, as we have developed the notions 
thus far, Aristotelianism, neo-atonic humanism and 
nominalism. As we have already shown, these differ- 
ences in conception are not merely differences of rul- 
ing opinion  the dorine of uralism, in which these 
could be regarded merely juridically equal before 
law, as differing opinions, is peculiar to nominalism. 
In both scholasticism (specifically) and neo-atonic 
views, opinion, insofar as it expresses outlook and 
method, is either right or wrong, and when two bodies 
of opinion clash on such s not more than one can 
be properly, relatively right. 

The history of the succession of Aristotelianism and 
neo-atonic outlooks, as articulated refleions of 
social licy, social praice, corresnd to the suc- 
cession of two great lawful orders of human society. 
The first was feudal, its law best identified in terms of 
the princies embedded in Charlemagne's inventory 
and the Norman Domesday Book. The second was 
capitalist industrial development, for which socialist 
development is a special case, the latter a different 
litical instrument for realizing the essential func- 
tions otherwise embedded in capitalist industrial 
development. Nominalism arises in opsition to both 
great forms of lawful ordering, both universalities, as 
either a breakdown of lawful societies or as a sub- 
jeive failure of the praice of those societies. 

The crucial proof of the unique correness of the 
neo-atonic humanist conception of a universal 
lawful ordering was historically demonstrated by the 
way in which the preceding, feudal order collapsed in 
the processes of the Crusades and the Black Death. 

The reaionary element of Thomism, the degrada- 
tion of man in the praical world to the condition of a 
preordained, fixed rationality, is an expression of the 
charaeristics of Charlemagne's inventory of the 
realm and the Norman Domesday Book, The  is 
not the ideas refleed by such documents as such, but 
that those ideas corresnded to ruling ideas govern- 
ing social praice. Feudal law degraded the serf to a 
beast-like condition in the praical world. Not 



because the serf was badly treated and so forth, not 
for the maudlin reasons usually offered by muddle- 
headed romantics. Feudal man was epistemologically 
degraded to a beast-likeness because he was sub- 
stantially denied that which is most charaeristically 
human, the exercise of his creative mental weres to 
effe, transmit, assimilate, and commit to impulses 
of willful praice those new technologies, that new 
scientific comprehension, which process uniquely dis- 
tinguishes man self-consciously from the lowere 
beasts. 

Relatively speaking, the conditions of the feudal serf 
were not so oppressive  nor, so idyllic  in success- 
ful estates as is  variously  usually rtrayed. It is 
the praice of the successful estates which represents 
the praical reference for feudalism's ideal of itself, 
and hence the key to the scholastic's efforts to define a 
praicable form of universal law appropriate to 
