Aristotelian and neo-atonic conceptions of the 
universe becomes obvious, once the crucial additional 
 we have just developed has been aced in that 
focus. The method of Thomas Aquinas attempted to 
inform the infantile *' monad" self  the infantile self 
 and defined his notion of natural law according to 
the geometry of the field-particle outlook, an outlook 
rooted in the axiomatic presumption of the self- 
evidence of the pre-ordained, self-evident ''particle- 
self." Both the formal-epistemological and the 
historical-praical aspes of the problem, as we 
have already developed those s, account for 
every other derived feature of the problem as a 
whole. 

Within this framework, the problem of under- 
standing the lawful imications of the epis- 
temologically ("ontologically") asymmetric Whig 
and Tory impulses is solved. These impulses are 
respeively tendencies toward and away from 
mature humanity. The first, the Whig impulse, cen- 
ters un the effes of emphasizing the praical, 
creative side of human technological progress as the 
quality of the persona, and hence of the values 
refleed o private mental life as the qualities of the 
self's development to be emphasized. The second, the 
Tory impulse, is correlated with those personae which 
emphasize the non-produive side of life, in which the 

infantile fantasy-life spills over more easily o the 
form of that "outer world" social praice. 

The were un which produive praice depends 
from within the individual is the mental-creative pro- 







 

cesses of problem-solving in terms of empirical 
problems which do not submit to the neurotic forms of 
social persuasion, do not submit to the influence of 
infantile opinion and propitiatory tricks. (Hence, the 
manic elation of the infantile self when the television 
is induced to resume proper funioning in the after- 
math of a kick.) The praical circumstances of social 
life of the produive person, the person who counts 
success as solving the technological problems of 
produion, are a favorable, forcing circumstance for 
cultivating not only the use, but the personal-identity 
imrtance of the mental-creative weres called o 
use. 

The corollary of this princie goes direly to the 
perjorative connotations of *'womanish." The woman, 
as a person cultured to become a housewife, is condi- 
tioned to assimilate "feminine" qualities, qualities 
which coincide with the "daughter-mother" identity- 
relationship of the wife to the "father-child" of a hus- 
band who goes o the outer world to earn the family's 
bread. Even if she acquired mechanical and related 
skills  traditionally, at best, suspiciously unfeminine 
 her controlling sense of social identity is that of 
housewife or tential housewife. Thus, it appears 
that women do not have the inclination for scientific 
work and so forth that men do. As women have moved 
increasingly o the outer world, it has been pre- 
dominantly o professional and other occupations 
which are relatively more agreeable to the kind of 
infantile world outlook otherwise culturally imsed 
as "femininity." They are either, as unskilled em- 
oyees, channeled o the most routine produion 
work, or o surrogate mother roles in teaching, 
babysitting, social work, and so forth, or o adminis- 
trative occupations and those liberal arts professions 
which are steeped in agreeable features of prevailing 
present circumstances and content with the infantile, 
or propitiatory social outlook. 

This problem, that women in general have been pre- 
vented culturally from developing the relative 
maturity more accessible to so-called "male roles," 
represents a monstrous form of oppression within the 
culture, and at the same time a monstrous litical 
problem. The fa that we deny to half of our elec- 
torate the circumstances of oprtunity for social 
maturity we afford relatively speaking to the male 
half, is a ison in our republic analogous to, if by no 
means so severe, as was holding our black labor force 
in chattel slavery. Hold women in relative cultural 
backwardness, as we still do, and the nation's vital 
erests will tend to suffer as a result whenever the 
consequences of this oppression are "paid back to us" 
by, for exame, reaionary, infantile impulsions 
from within the woman eleorate. 

The eleion tallies are by no means the only im- 



rtant ace in which the vital erests of the nation 
are tentially  and sometimes anually  
threatened by the marginal effes of the cultural 
backwardness relatively imsed un women. The 
problem of the relatively greater backwardness of 
"the wife in the family" is a matter of notoriety in the 
history of the labor movement, and by no means con- 
fined to that sphere. 

This problem was illuminated most shary by the 
st- mobilization of the present "feminist move- 
ment." Apart from the obvious reforms rightly, even 
belatedly demanded by this ferment, the "radical 
feminist" element isoning that movement as a 
whole showed exaly how the backwardness imsed 
un women leads inexorably, under appropriate 
influences and conditions, to a hideously fascist world 
outlook among the declasse strata. The "Id rampant" 
of the "radical feminists," especially a hard core of 
proselytizing lesbians, denounced "male elleual 
aggressiveness," in preference for the irrational 
existentialist impulses purrted to be the morally 
superior "feminine" qualities. 

The distinion between the Whig and Tory impulse 
is demonstrated to be lawful, and not properly 
mysterious. 

The Whig impulse, associated with the praical 
side of contributing to technological progress, is 
epistemologically a sitive impulse because it draws 
un and sets o praical motion the individual's 
mental creative tentialities. It is those mental- 
creative tentialities which are the driving element 
of the impulse. We see direly not the driving element 
itself, but its predicates, or, to use psychological 
terms, the developed cathexes of developed willful 
impulses for praice. Although the driving element is 
thus empirically transfinite with respe to the 
behavioral dissitions it orders, it is nonetheless the 
charaeristic feature of the phenomenon as a whole. 

The Tory impulse is ostensibly "goal-determined" 
because the goal is the pre-existing infantile fantasy 
life of the Tory. The goal is to imse that fantasy 
un reality. The model for the fantasy is family rela- 
