
Heine affords a foretaste of the Rothschild, and later 
Rockefeller praices toward talented scientists and 
other elleuals in Europe (and elsewhere) general- 
ly. The Rothschilds and Rockefellers colleed people 
the way a nouveau riche Mrs. Malaprop colles art 
objes. This is most relevant to the cases of the 
Frankfurt School's founding, and the influences of 
financial and related patronage operating in decaying 
Old Vienna. 

Heinrich Heine, one of Germany's greatest in- 
telles, and its greatest et, was born to a well-to-do 
Jewish family of Hamburg, incidentally notable for its 
association with the London-conneed Hamburg 
House of Salomon Heine. Living in exile in Paris, 
Heine attraed the lust of Baron James, who was ob- 
viously determined to have the great et by hook or 
crook  emoying both deorable methods to secure 

this goal. 

Heine was entitled to a legacy, which, had he receiv- 
ed it as was his due, would have enabled him to func- 
tion independent of corrupting influences of patron- 
age. Baron James, sensible of this tential obstacle 
to his desire, used his influence with the management 
of Salomon Heine to block Heinrich's receipt of such 
sums, and added the influence of the Hamburg Heine 
family to push Heinrich o the patronage of Baron 
James. Even Heine's ironical insults of Baron James 
before other guests in the Baron's house, did not en- 
able Heinrich to escape the desire of the unwanted 
patron. 

Hence, permitting himself to be snared by this Roth- 
schild scenario, the great Heinrich Heine ebbed inevit- 
ably o the moral deqay and self-repudiation which 
charaerized his miserable last years of life. 

Some foretaste of the nature of the moral decay of 
nineteenth century Old Vienna was exhibited in 
London circles of the beginning of that century, in the 
degeneration of English ets  and etry, and the 
reception given to Beethoven's music during the 
period of its initial presentations there. 

England has  not accidentally  not produced a 
decent comser since the deaths of Purcell and Wil- 
liam Byrd, subsisting thereafter by imrting (princi- 
pally) German musicians. () During the period 
Monteverdi, Buxtehude, Schiitz, and Bach were ef- 
feing a sweeping revolution in music  never to be 
superseded significantly in fundamentals except by 
Beethoven himself, English music and etry, which 
had been the cream of European culture during the 
Tudor period, briefly resurging during the seven- 
teenth century, unged o decay. Dryden, Pope, and 



. Just as English paing looted Italy. 



their logical outcome, David Hume's Hannoverian 
Scottish empiricism, were on the order of the day. 
English etry recovered slightly, once again, in an 
outburst of what was then a kind of neo-classicism 
typified by Keats and Shelley, but excepting that 
aborted episode in English literature, the British 
culture was overall on the way downhill. 

The literary code for the decay in British cultural 
morality was a radical erpretation of a widely 
circulated sixteenth-century Italian booklet entitled 
**The Courtier." In opsition to the profoundly im- 
passioned ^'conception of man and nature" which 
Shelley properly attributed to the periods of the 
Tudors and Milton, the British **uppah clawsses" af- 
feed a rabidly amoral diffidence  a stiff upper lip, 
presumably as compensation for lack of funion in 
other aspes of the person. The flatulent stench of 
dilettantism respeing everything but were and 
colleion of ground rent, became the preferred s- 
ture of an eminently respeable personage. Art should 
be **clever," "witty" ( in the deorable sense of that 
term), "amusing," and broadly achieve approval as a 
"nice little effort"  but it must not violate the prin- 
cie of psychological distance which rabid dilettant- 
ism prescribed. One is therefore not astonished by the 
banality of the published criticisms of Beethoven's 
works by the London press of the early nineteenth 
century. 

Granted, even the aristocratic dilettante often had 
strong concealed passions concerning were and 
ground-rent matters, but even in those few ense, 
bestial preoccupations, it was preferred form to pre- 
tend to be bored even by one's own obsessive am- 
bitions. There is happily a lawfully determined under- 
current of "American Whiggery'* in the British people 

 as the Rockefellers have lately noted with dismay 

 but it was formerly considered obligatory to sup- 
press such tendencies as "lowere class" egregiousness. 

The influence of City of London-centered finance in 
reenforcing the already bestial impulses radiating 
from the Hapsburg relic were accelerated by the 
circumstances following . 

After the - period, the influential, rich in- 
telleual life of pre- German culture overall al- 
most collapsed. Intelleual life retreated from all 
areas of inquiry but produion and the physical 
sciences. It was this, which was not only a German 
phenomenon, which produced the now century-old 
myth of the dichotomy between science and litics. 
As we have noted, the monetarist faion never 
adopted such a distinion. The monetarists rightly 
regarded science as the litical enemy of monetar- 
ism, because of its crucial funion in promoting the 
Idea of Progress. Just as the rabid Carter Administra- 
tion so recently attempted to negotiate a halt to fur- 



ther necessity for ernal scientific progress in the 
USA and Western Europe, by demanding that the 
Soviets agree to halt militarily relevant scientific pro- 
gress, the Rothschilds and Rockefellers have at- 
tempted to check science by various means, including 
cooptation and control of leading scientists through 
the sort of patronage Baron James Rothschild im- 
sed un Heinrich Heine. The credulous viims of 
the monetarists, however, submitted to the delusion 
that science and philosophy had been somehow 
separated on proper grounds of princie. 

The efforts of the Ernst Mach-linked **energet- 
icists'* to demoralize Ludwig Boltzmann, and the hid- 
eous campaign against Boltzmann's student Erwin 
Schrodinger by the foul pack of scientist-mercenary 
consciences led by Niels Bohr, are exemary of what 
was in progress in late-nineteenth century and early 
twentieth century Old Vienna. 

The elleual belongs sociologically to the petit- 
