Tories during the American Revolution. It was a 
difference between a republican licy of industrial 
and agricultural expansion in terms of technological 
progress, and a monetarist licy centering around an 
Anglo-American (Atlanticist) le of New York City- 
centered financial erest. 

To those who know Lippmann's career in some 
principal detail, his effort to skid quietly through the 
role of the elder Senator Henry Cabot Lodge  
Wilson's opnent  and the Republican administra- 
tions of the - period, evokes a sense of con- 
temptuous amusement at the pettiness of Lippmann 
on this account. 

In , left-liberal, quasi-socialist young Walter 
Lippmann made a pilgrimage to the great Fabian 
centers in England. There, screened, indorinated, 
and patted on the head by such old imperialist hands 
as Sidney Webb and George Bernard Shaw, the duly- 
processed Lippmann was made acquaed with the 
innards of the codors of were, and became in the 
course of that a celebrated writer for the New 
Republic  which, in those days, was the "sh" 
association for up-and-coming Fabian Wunderkinder 
of the litical elligence establishment. His status 
skyrocketed under the Wilson administration. He be- 
came a licy-leak and confidant of the great and 
wereful, rev,elling in the thieves' and swindlers' orgy 
that was the Versailles Treaty proceedings. Abruptly, 
as Wilson broke down in face of defeat, Lippmann, the 
Fabian Wunderkind, abruptly found himself almost an 
"outsider" to the innards of national litical were. 

Senator Lodge, in large part the cause of Lipp- 
mann's temrary descent in status, is best under- 



President Woodrow Wilson, ri 

stood as a consciously Hamiltonian sort of early 
twentieth century Federalist. Beyond that, what he 
may or may not have been becomes less imrtant to 
our present inquiry, except to emphasize that the 
Whig strain in the pre- Republican Party had a 
sensibility of those things which violated the erests 
of the United States as an industrial nation, but lacked 
a sitive, contrary licy to counterse effeively 
to the evils they were resisting. Their party organiza- 



, with Colonel House, 

tion and to a large degree their systematic world 
outlook was by then deey taed with the monetarist 
corruption of U,S, capitalist thinking. Increasingly, 
the Whig current maained a social base among 
smaller industrialist erests and among a pular 
constituency of farmers, trade unionists, and black 
voters. In the financial-litical realities of that time, 
the Whig "patricians" of the Republican Party were 
caught up in scenarios featuring brawls among the 







 

major financier faions, domestically and er- 
nationally. 

From approximately  onwards, and especially 
after -, the Whig tendency in U.S. outlook and 
licy did express itself, but not as a major in- 
dependent litical force in its own right. Insofar as 
industrial development represented an erest which 
was refleed within the finance capital with which it 
was associated, that Whig tentiality expressed itself 
in a deformed way as a veor within various 
monetarist faions. 

This was most shary expressed in foreign licy 
in the "Open Door'' licy. By the end of the century, 
it had become the established special feature of the 
U.S. that our industries could out-produce the old 
world quicker, more, better, and cheaper. The U.S. 
industrialist and his financier were thus impelled to 
regard the flag-colony and other colonial institutions of 
the European weres  and the backward litical- 
economic institutions of the colonial and semi-colon- 
ial tential markets themselves, as olerable, even 
insufferable obstacles to U.S. national erests. At the 
same time that U.S. erests diated a desire for 
independence of the colonies and semi-colonies, it also 
required that these markets enjoy stable govern- 
ments, whose modest governmental credit and 
similar advantages ensured a solvent purchaser at 
that end of transaions with the U.S. 

To the extent that licy was expressed, it had the 
following notable imications. The Whig licy, of en- 
couraging stable, republican forms of government in 
colonial and semi-colonial regions, was expressed not 
as the consciously humanist litical licy of the 
Federalists and so forth, but as an agreement between 
republican institutions and the national erests of 
U.S. trade and investment. In this form, even the 
'*Open Door" and related U.S. challenges to Britain 
and British licy were a deformed expression of 
U.S. revolutionary (capitalist-republican) tradition 
springing from the source of U.S. industrial progress. 
Its contradiion was that, in its opsition to Roths- 
childs, Credit Lyonnais, and so forth, American licy 
was anti-monetarist in respe to its opnents, while 
already itself expressed in an increasingly monetarist 
form. 

The turning- was Versailles. The Versailles 
Treaty's German war-reparations provision was the 
crucial problem. Either Germany was encouraged to 
resume industrial development, therefore requiring 
levels of wages, working conditions, social services, 
and investment capital adequate to that purse, or 
the prosed and adopted war reparations would loot 
Germany of the variable and constant capital of even 
its existing, stalled labor force and industry. The 
former licy, which meant a general capitalist 



recovery of the classical type, would have required 
the U.S. to write off. in one guise or another, rtions 
of the debts of Britain, France, and other allied 
countries. The choice was either to prop up the Wall 
Street financiers through the leverage of Germany's 
imssible war reparations, or to have an economic 
recovery. Versailles chose In favor of Rockefeller, et 
al. The Allies at Versailles chose in favor of an early 
general economic collapse, a collapse which the 
Dawes Plan stned, but could not prevent. 

So, the United States slammed down all but the 
smallest gates of Ellis Island, instituted such 
atrocities as the "Palmer Raids," and, after a brief 
stwar depression, settled in for a period of the s 
