pression, provided that the credit issued is efficiently 
direed to a ''hard commodity'' licy of delimiting 
loans to cranking up and expanding existing produc- 
tive capacities to, first, an approximate full-produion 
level and then beyond. 

Such measures require ermediate-term dracon- 
ian financial measures, but not exotic or "utopian" 
measures. Debt moratoria against financial debt ser- 
vice for industry, agriculture, and government are not 
a repudiation of debt obligations, but an ordinary 
bankruptcy's financial-reorganization praice. To 
apy them on a much larger scale than that of a 
corration requires supementary procedures to 
prevent the echoing collapse of essential institutions of 
credit and desit, but the procedure is eminently well 
known and praicable, and gives everyone an opr- 
tunity to sort out the blocked debt-service demands at 
litical-economic leisure. We have already specified 
the necessary measures in other published locations, 
so we need not restate them in full here. () 

The  is, once a viable economy (i.e., the pro- 
duion and circulation of tangible forms of wealth) 
has been cranked up well above its real-economic 



. Lyndon LaRouche, "How the International Development Bank 
Will Work," in How the International Development Bank Will Work 
(New York: Campaigner Publications, Inc., ), issued by the U.S. 
Labor Party, pp. -; Lyndon LaRouche, "The Emergency Emoy- 
ment A of " in The Emergency Emoyment A of  (New 
York: Campaigner Publications, Inc., ), issued by the U.S. Labor 
Party, pp. -. 



Mp;//www.d)®(Buirgi(gfe.(S®[ffli/ 







 

break-even  (above the tangible costs of pro- 
duion, including maenance of produive forces), 
alternative feasible solutions of various litical pref- 
erences are realistically available. Below the econ- 
omic break-even , no solution exists but one form 
of horror or another. 

That "Hamiltonian" approach to domestic econ- 
omic problems would have required a comementary 
foreign licy. Since the full-produion level opera- 
tion of the U.S. produive economy depended (and 
depends) un a significant and ever-growing volume 
and ratio of exrts and imrts, national erest 
would have required organizing a new, dollar-cen- 
tered block of countries going through the same sort 
of ernal financial reorganization. These countries 
would serve as our primary trading partners. Such 
aion would have brought down sterling entirely, and 
quickly brought a financially reorganized British 
industry and agriculture o a new, gold-reserve- 
based dollar monetary system  which shock-treat- 
ment would have been the greatest boon the U.S. could 
have given to Britain at that time. 

Roosevelt took the opsite direion in his admin- 
istration's approach to the unavoidable **bank holi- 
day.'* Although he **triaged" the most vulnerable 
fringe rtions of the financial debt struure, he did 
so in order to reduce the margin of debt overhang only 
to the prortions which probably could be maained 
through primitive accumulation against the U.S. 
produive forces operating near or below a break- 
even . His approach paralleled Schacht's reor- 
ganization of the Nazi economy in method if not in 
detailed form. 

Instead of freeing industry and agriculture of im- 
mediate debt and related financial requirements out- 
side circulating capital flow, and pushing in credits 
o industry and agriculture direly, he resorted to 
**pump-priming" methods, principally through the 
Federal Reserve System and through make-work pro- 
jes. Even at erest rates in the range of  percent, 
credit refused to move through the Federal Reserve 
System o industry. The various make- work pro- 
jes amounted to inducing the unemoyed to **work 
off welfare checks." Relative to restarting the econ- 
omy, the make-work itself was predominantly re- 
latively useless or done at such a primitive level of 
technology as to be abysmally uneconomical on that 
account. The "pump-priming" approach, even if well- 
ended, could have accomished nothing toward 
genuine recovery under such circumstances. What it 
did was serve as a manipulative social-work palliative 
and a buffering of total purchasing were of the in- 
ternal economy, but buffered at levels which were 
rinsically still way below the levels of purchasing 
were which would have been required to bring pro- 



duion levels above a true economic break-even 
 and self-feeding recovery. 

The - war economy illustrated the right 
princies in the wrong way. Once credit was ured 
direly o industrial and agricultural produion, 
the depressed economy, despite the worn bearings of 
the machinery and the gray-faced deetion of the 
labor force, began to crank up o a war-produion 
boom. The problems of the - war economy 
were twofold. First, the substitution of military pro- 
duion for consumable capital and consumer goods is 
inherently econoniicay inflationary (as distin from 
purely monetary inflation). Second, under the taed 
Federal Reserve System, the economic-inflationary 
impulse was cancerously multiied o a monetary 
inflation which threatened to exode during the - 
 period. On the first account, when government 
credit is used to generate useful produion of capital 
goods and consumer goods, rather than military hard- 
ware, the produs become additional ant and the 
emoyment of labor operating such ants. In that 
case, the scale of wealth is expanding, if modern tech- 
nology is emphasized, more rapidly than the credit ex- 
pansion is generating debt service demands. 

In short, the problem of the st- period was that 
then, as now, the monetarist approach must divert 
such large rtions of credit created o refinancing 
old debt struures and related paper, that the infusion 
of sufficient credit o an illiquid monetary system, to 
resume produion on an overall profitable level, can- 
not be approached without generating a hyperinflat- 
ionary spiral. The war-economy approach, because it 
simulates genuine economic recovery at the outset, 
temrarily succeeds where the "New Deal" could 
not, for that reason. However, the war-economy ap- 
proach to a sick monetary system inherently produces 
an economic-inflationary crisis, and when war eco- 
nomy is used as a "permanent" approach to propping 
up such an already bankrupt monetary system, as was 
