*Eliminate DHEW, HUD, Transrtation. 

*Dissolve the National Security Council. 
Establish the Cabinet as the sole executive body 

within the Executive for all questions of licy, includ- 
ing national security. Establish a sition of Under- 
Secretary for each Department, who is the permanent 
sitting representative of the Department in the Cab- 
inet as a continuously funioning body. 

All funions of the Executive Branch are assigned 
to their most appropriate Department, with a dire 
chain-of-command within the Department deter- 
mining accountability of each seion and funion to 
the Secretary, the Cabinet and the Office of the Presi- 
dent. 

The Cabinet  us the Vice-President  funions, 
together with the President, as the dire erface 
between the Executive and the Congress. All legis- 
lative and related prosals developed within the Exec- 
utive pass through mis channel-erface, except for 
funions of congressional inquiry o the condu of 
government operations, and o matters pertinent to 
other normal and special aivities of inquiry initiated 
properly by the Congress. 

On condition that the Vice-President is seleed 



I© E^iD©i 



according to his proper qualifications as a tential 
President, the Vice-President and his personal office 
is the most dire special erface between the Cabin- 
et and the Senate, and should be resnsible for coord- 
inating especially respeing matters pertaining to 
the Senate's special weres and duties of advice and 
consent. 

The following subsumed features of that reorgani- 
zation concerning detail and licy-direions are 
recommended as those presently seen as most appro- 
priate. First, the details, and then the licy- 
direions. 

Secretary of Political Intelligence: Perhaps there is 
a better choice of name, but the suggested name given 
here emphasizes the relevant s : 

Through the history of the writer's experience in the 
development of his own organization's litical-elli- 
gence funions, beginning Autumn, , he argues 
this matter with unusual competence, both concerning 
the praice of litical elligence and the indis- 
pensable role it properly performs within government 
as a whole. 

Most notably, beginning mid- January , when the 
writer and his associates first solved the basic riddle 
of the **Watergate" proceedings against President 
Richard Nixon, there has been an ongoing, growing 
erface between the writer's organization and lead- 
ing litical and related forces in the United States 
and other parts of the world. This culminated in the 
September-December discussions between the U.S. 
Labor Party and Republican, Democratic, trade- 
union, industrialist leading circles concerning our 
forecast of the imications of a Carter inauguration. 
The same mistaken doubts and reservations ex- 
pressed toward the Labor Party analysis by a 
majority of these domestic U.S. leading circles were 
experienced among developing seor and Western 
European circles. It is now clear that the Labor Party 
was corre and the doubts mistaken. That latter 
experience is consistent with the pattern during the 
- period as a whole. 

Although the reality of the matter has not yet be- 
come the perception of the man-in-the-street, every 
significant faional current in world and various na- 
tional litical frameworks today is hitched to liti- 
cal-elligence circles to the extent that each has a 
definable elligence-network **pedigree." There are 
several principal pedigrees  including two princi- 
pal Soviet-linked varieties  governing litics be- 
hind the scenes in every part of the world today. At 
this moment, you cannot walk o a Masonic circle in 
Western Europe, for exame, without being in the 
midst of a hot brawl between ''American" (pro-terror- 
ism taics) and ''British" (anti-terrorist) faions... a 
curious fa which, incidentally, requires some insight 







I- 



o the history of the Scottish Rite. The piure of glo- 
bal and national litical life peddled to the credulous 
in the **civics lesson'* and the principal news media 
has no corresndence with the governing reality 
which anually operates. () 

Granted, many influential liticians included in va- 
rious faions, either simy profess slyly not to know 
this, or even genuinely do not know that they are in 
fa a part of an elligence network. That is of no 
great relevance in itself; the briefings they receive 
from leaders of their faion, the flow of background 
information across luncheon tables, and so forth, is 
generated as "perceptions" in one or another circle 
operating just behind the scenes in an exicitly liti- 
cal-elligence mode, and erfacing with one or 
more exicitly litical-elligence and other lice 
and elligence governmental and private agencies. 

Consequently, the resnses to Labor Party brief- 
ings have been determined, predominantly not merely 
by the way in which corrupt major national press and 
lling organizations shape the elleual environ- 
ment. Each circle has its ^'sources,*' which are, 
mainly, either dire or indire ^'pipelines'* to a liti- 
cal-elligence network. (These, amusingly, have 
been often the same influential individuals who com- 
ain against ''conspiracy theories!") Consequently, 
in large part, the conflis between our estimations 
and those of others have been conflis in methods of 
litical-elligence evaluations  in which the wri- 
ter and his associates have, on balance, been predomi- 
nantly corre, despite the relatively more massive 
resources available to the other litical-elligence 
networks participating in these eerie shadowboxings. 

Two broad conclusions of dire relevance to gov- 
ernment reorganization arise from this background 
knowledge. First, the competent funioning of gov- 
ernment  especially of the Executive and Con- 
gress  requires the highest quality of regular liti- 
cal elligence. Second, the notable advantage of 
the writer's litical elligence over competing 
