a refleion of the aversive influences created by 
David Rockefeller and his allies. Beginning with the 
Kennedy administration, and more notably as a result 
of the "Mutt-and-Jeff** manipulations associated most 
prominently with Messrs. Henry Kissinger, Cyrus 
Vance, and Zbigniew Brzezinski, a majority of the 
world's governments have been **attitudinally con- 
ditioned'* in principal features of their current foreign 
and domestic licies, frequently adopting licies 
and stures direly contrary to their own nation's 
most vital erests. 



 

Take away from the world the pressure of a mone- 
tarist United States foreign licy, and reace the 
perception of the might of the United States as em- 
bodied in its industrial and associated technological 
were, and an entirely new global litical geometry 
is brought o being. If the nations of the world also 
understand that the United States' people and 
government, in turn, understand the might our nation 
represents in the world, and that the United iStates is 
committed to deoying that might in behalf of its 
well-defined national and global self-erests  
immediately, a substantial number and variety of 
very desirable changes in governments and licies 
will sntaneously erupt around the globe. 

On the further condition that that government of 
the United States proceeds toward a community of 
princie with the Soviet republic, a subje to which 
we have devoted appropriately larger attention here, 
' the world's affairs are brought overall under control 
of the forceful rule of reason, and on the way to rule by 
consciously defined constitutional ernational law. 

Within that fortunate overall state of global affairs, 
the next two decades will be nonetheless charaer- 
ized by many localized troubles. The ugly vestiges of 
the past will be refleed repeatedly in difficulties con- 
fronting the condu of our foreign relations. The 
might of the United States, a might linked to an e- 
merging, strong community of princie with other na- 
tions, will moderate the heteronomic impulses of the 
eng. Hence, we do not anticipate the need for mili- 
tary undertakings, but that risk can be minimized only 
if it is clear that our licy has a fist within it, a fist we 
will use only if necessary, but which we will use if ne- 
cessary. If our economic fist is used elligently, our 
military were will remain probably only a visible 
tentiality. 

If we take these steps  before our Tory traitors 
have taken us past the  of no return toward 
general war and biological catastrophe  then we may 
be certain that by approximately - man's on- 
ly further conquests will be in science and outer space. 



P^OF-T(o)(Q)llOT. OEM© E^iD©i 



The Federalist Presidency 



These coherent foreign and domestic licies can- 
not be efficiently served under those conditions of 
constitutional and funional degeneracy which ex- 
tended Tory rule has brought to the organization and 
funions of the Executive Branch of government. It 
would be a Utopian dream to assign to the Presidency 
certain duties if that branch of government is not a 
competent emoyee for the performances of the 
duties assigned to it. 

The Presidency is not a dutiful errand boy, merely 
to apy to the letter the law and licy given to it. This 
is understood negatively by the Congress, in terms of 
those notable cases in which a Presidency makes a 
travesty of a law according to the methods of the 
"Good Soldier Schweik**  just as eng federal 
courts have aed to transform the NEPA o the 
abominable horror that statute has become in prac- 
tice. It is understood sitively by Congress, or in a 
different negative sense, in the failure of the Exe- 
cutive to submit competently defined prosed legis- 
lation to the legislative branch. 

This same problem to which we refer in that way, is 
also cumulatively refleed in an excess of legislative 
law at this time. Instead of a body of legislative law 
developed to make efficient a coherent licy shared 
by the President and the majority of the Congress, a 
narrow facet of national life becomes a semi-autarki- 
cal licy domain unto itself. Even within the fiefdoms 
so narrowly defined, there is no aual princie of 
licy, but a tumult of confliing and short-term im- 
pulses, with methods and praices defined which are 



more or less inappropriate to an acceptable ex- 
pression of the stated legislative purse. 

This chaos and incompetence has become insti- 
tutionalized in the heteronomy within the Executive 

Branch itself. The "sitive feedback'* heurism is 
most appropriate. 

The heteronomy imparted to the Executive Branch 
in turn imparts itself to the overall body of legislation 
prosed to the Congress by the Executive as a whole. 
The Congress, in turn, struggling to make its ent 
efficient with respe to the Executive's funioning, is 
impelled to patch o the existing Executive new 
features of resnsibilities, which, in turn, foster new 
bureaucratic fiefdoms or sub-fiefdoms, whose het- 
eronomic independence from control by the Presi- 
dency has been given to it by legislative specification, 
executive order pursuant to or in attempted defleion 
of legislative ent, or in associated fashions. This 
aggravation of the bureaucratic heteronomy becomes 
the new reality affeing executive funioning and 
legislative prosals. This becomes, in turn, the more 
awful mess with which the Congress is confronted. 

It is clear that the "Gordian Knot" cannot be 
patiently untied. How is it to be cut? 

Some new, sweeping Executive reorganization? On 
the basis of past performance, we know that such 
methods may temrarily check the growth of the 
bureaucracy, expunge a few dead cats from the filing 
draweres  and generally turn up all sorts of curious 
little things to astonish and titillate pular opinion. 
When it is done, the same old crap resumes afresh  

 





