ian, linearized litical geometry of pre-capitalist 
systems. In a world governed by capitalist and social- 
ist economies, the forecastable real consequences of 
aions taken in this ech for the succeeding erval 
cannot be determined by methods modeled un 
those emoyed for mapping according to a deter- 
ministic system of linear equations. 

To the extent that one might consider it epistemolo- 
gically feasible to use Rand Corration "gaming- 
simulation," computerized methods for matters of 
litical, economic, military strategies, the methods 
one might emoy for such praices are inherently in- 
competent. 

There are, of course, instances for which Rand-type 
methods of prediion appear to succeed. This occurs 
only when the prediion is of the epistemologically- 
computerizable form of **curve-fitting,'' or belongs to 
the degenerate case of non-linear systems, which 
apparently coincide with the linearizable form. In the 
'^curve-fitting" case of such exceptions, the effeive- 
ness of the prediion depends un appropriate pre- 
determination of the **f union'* to be fitted, a pre- 
determination which occurs entirely outside the 
'*curve-fitting" aivity itself. 

Those exceptions noted, the statement that de- 
duive-determinist and related induive ("borrowed 
deduion") methods of prediion are inherently in- 
competent stands as a clearly-defined, rigorous state- 
ment of fa. 

This s to and refles the larger fa to be con- 
sidered, that the rinsic epistemological form of the 
problem confronting us at this junure is that the 
dominant institutions of the world, including some 
currents within the Soviet leadership, funion on the 
adopted basis of a variously Aristotelian or nominalist 
set of rules, methods which are rinsically not in 
corresndence with the lawful, ''geometric," negen- 
tropic ordering of reality immediately rinsic to an 
industrial-capitalist or industrial-socialist basis. We 
shall come quickly to that . 

In the terms of reference we have cited for this 
analysis, all perceptions and judgments, most notably 



those pertaining to institutionalized licies and cus- 
toms of general praice, are either forecasts  as 
this writer judges conditions and events  or pre- 
diions. They may be either exicitly forecasts or 
prediions, or merely imicitly so. For the latter 
case, it must be recognized that the processes of per- 
ception are inseparable from a judgment-forming con- 
sulting of the willful impulses for praice. No judg- 
ment can exist without an included, determining con- 
sideration of an anticipated dissition for a definable 
range of imied praical resnses to the event or 
condition prompting the judgment itself. Thus, all 
thought anually or tentially anticipates praice  
we are considering here praices bearing on funda- 
mental erests, and has the imied significance of 
being either a forecast or a prediion. 

If the notion of forecast is associated properly with 
both the methods of analyzing the irrational ruling be- 
havior we summarized at the outset of this general 
seion, and with the prescriptions for study of negen- 
tropic societal geometries, which we developed in the 
preceding epistemological subseion, the rigorous 
distinion to be made between a forecast and a 
prediion onght to become corresndingly clear. 

It is precisely the effort to imse a degenerate 
Aristotelian method ('^geometry") un the reality of 
a negentropic "geometry" of industrial-capitalist 
forms of lawful generation of the material conditions 
of human existence  and, hence capitalism and its 
real erests  which is the casual element gener- 
ating such derived discrepancies within those geo- 
metries as depressions, monetary breakdown crisis, 
global forced underdevelopment, the Rockefeller- 
Carter energy and de-industrialization licies, the 
decisions of financier erests to imse the Ver- 
sailles reparations and later Hitler un Germany, 
and so forth. To attempt to solve the licy-problems 
created in that way by apication of the same 
methods of prediion which charaerize the cause of 
those problems, prediably leads to nothing but a 
worsening of the discrepancies being considered. 

This brings us back to the  we roduced at the 
outset of this sub-seion, and to the basis for then 
direly attacking the next two, erconneed prob- 
lems successively next to be considered in this seion 

as a whole. 

The two geometries involved in (immediately) the 
present direing of the capitalist system represent 
the causally efficient, but not prediable in- 
terreaion of two distin "universes." In the one, the 
"underlying" negentropic geometry, the real or ob- 
jeive causal relationships generating the praical 
consequences of praical aions in respe to nature 
are lawfully ordered. In the other, presently a degen- 
erated form of Aristotelian-Euclidean geometry, the 
judgments and licies informing praice are deter- 



P^OF-T(o)(Q)llOT. OEM© E^^ 




Plato, left, and Aristotle, shown in a detail of The School of Athens by Raphael. 







 

mined. This is the problem to be solved, and the 
combined comprehension of this problem and its 
principal praical imications is real litics. 

Insofar as the writer and his organization develop 
forecasts, as in the form of strategic analyses and so 
forth, this contribution in itself Aaif-satisfies the prob- 
lem of real litics. We have thus examined, as from 
the outside, the combined result of the erreaing 
two geometries. Such forecasting properly defines the 
problem not only with respe to its immediate 
analytical aspe, but also the lawful imications of 
the range of alternatives which best typify the de- 
limited range of consequences which must lawfully 
ensue from not altering the present form of er- 
conneion of the two geometries forming the present 
system of events. 

Having stated the problem in that forecast form, the 
praical question, whose solution must be derived by 
the same conceptual method used in forecasting, is 
