World War II developments. 

The years  and , the years the material in 
the book was first published, were the aftermath of a 
series of licy setting negotiations among Roosevelt, 
Churchill, and Stalin, notably including the Teheran 
agreement. Churchill and Roosevelt were satisfied that 
they had brought Stalin to terms, to the  that the 
basic lines of Anglo-American foreign licy could be 
defined for decades ahead with a large measure of cer- 
tay beforehand. Something more substantial than 
**Wilsonian** swindles, such as the sententious hy- 
crisy of the so-called "Atlantic Charter,** was wanted. 

Moreover, President Roosevelt, at the acme of his 
litical influence over the U.S. eleorate, was dying. 
The weres associated with Roosevelt, including 
notably John D. Rockefeller II and his sons, urgently 
needed to have Roosevelt run for one more term  
which he would not live out  so that they might use 
the Roosevelt charisma to commit the USA and 
other nations to a more specific version of that 
"American Century*' dorine through which the 
Rockefellers and their associates prosed to estab- 
lish an indefinite future period of increasing domina- 
tion over the entire world. 



The - period of preparation for Roosevelt's 
last eleion campaign was the crucial period of the 
big selling job  to use that campaign to imse un 
the U.S. government and eleorate's conscience that 
licy of ended Rockefeller world rule. Lippmann, 
then at the peak of his public influence, was the key 
Fabian publicist in the effort to indorinate the 
nation's editorial writers and others with the new 
elaboration of the "American Century'* dorine. In 
that conneion, Lippmann contributed more than 
marginally to the shaping of that licy o the forms 
deemed litically digestible to the credulous. The 
book in question thus represents one of the more 
imrtant pieces of Atlanticist litical-campaign 
literature of the present century. 

In most of its crucial features, the version of the 
"American Century" dorine set forth in Lippmann's 
book is the basis for the present-day foreign licies of 
the U.S. government, the dorine on which the 
current, Utopian, crisis-management and related 
schemes of the Rockefellers' Carter puppet- 
Administration are premised. In some specific 
features, the strategic alternatives adopted during 
- were made obsolete even before the final 
defeat of Nazi Germany, other conditions were super- 
seded by , and still others made obsolete by the 
developments of the - period. Large, but easily 
distinguishable chunks of Lippmann's writings were 
never to be taken seriously  Lippmann only far less 
than Woodrow Wilson, had a tendency to gush out gobs 
of sententious hycrisy. Such cautions noted, the 
Lippmann book represents the "American Century** 
dorine as it was to be passed down, without much 
modification of its essential kernel, to the present day. 

It is that overall significance of Lippmann's book, 
us certain advantages provided the critic by the fa 
that it is of superior reference quality to con- 
temrary Atlanticist effluvia, which has governed 
the text*s seleion as the  of reference for the 
discussion immediately at hand. 

Although Lippmann outrageously falsifies entire 
sweeps of U.S. national and diomatic history, on 
some s going so far as baldfaced lying, the in- 
telleual quality of his work nonetheless stands far 
above the almost incoherent and often babbling output 
of leading present-day "think-tankers,*' such as a 
Lester Brown, Zbigniew Brzezinski, James Schle- 
singer, and so forth. As was emphasized at the 
outset, the first broad impression of turning from the 
- Lippmann to present-day Trilateraloids is an 
immediate, overall perception of the progress toward 
advanced elleual and moral decay, presently to a 
 resembling the state of the corpse near the end of 
Poe*s tale. 

This relative quality of Lippmann's formulation is 



P^OF-T(o)(Q)llOT. OEM© E^^ 




Benjamin Franklin, the founder of our country. 



 



best identified as an effort to take the preceding  
years of world history in its entireties, attempting to 
show, if merely in a pragmatisms fashion, some order- 
ing princies giving coherence to that totality. In this 
process, Lippmann adheres to the canonical forms of 
historical scholarship  however often he is a pious 
fraud respeing matters of content. Wrong as his 
view may be, both in fa and in perspeive, his is a 
worldview with a certain kind of relative elleual 
coherence. Consequently, as Lippmann uses that 
worldview as the supsed empirical body of know- 
ledge for the formulation of strategic dorines, he 
presents the result in a form that is immediately 
susceptible of systematic criticism. 

We do not unjustly deprecate the comparative 
qualities of contemrary Atlanticist skesmen. Put 
aside for a moment the question of the unfortunate 
Jimmy Carter. () 

Too many credulous people, of the sort who imagine 
that a wealthy individual is necessarily more elli- 
gent, fall prey to the reaion-formation delusion that 
the minions of the Rockefeller brothers must be 
^'awesomely clever." On the contrary, what cowards 
frequently mistake for personal qualities in that lot is 
predominantly their own fear of the vast weres 
concentrated in the hands of the Rockefeller-led 
machinery of ernational finance and litical in- 
telligence networks. 

This fa has been illustrated by the David-Goliath 
struggles of the U.S. Labor Party and Labor Com- 
mittees against the Rockefeller machine during, most 
notably, the period beginning December . Given 
the were prortionately at the dissal of the two 
opsing forces, which is  by far  the more in- 
telleually qualified to deal with crisis-issues on a 
national and global scale? Beginning Oober  and 
continuing over the wer of -, a certain 
perceptible tential parallel to the case of the Tudor 
fleet against the Hapsburg Armada became noted by 
an increasing number of observers. The beneficial 
correlated consequence of observations tending 
toward that judgment has been to somewhat 
demystify ''Rockefeller were.*' Given the were at 
