

adversaries or not, we have a vital erest of prin- 
cie and associated praical considerations in secur- 
ing the rights of (for emphasis) the white pulation of 
that nation to a viable sovereignty. If the Soviet Union 
were to ally itself to the offending government's ad- 
versaries under those conditions, we could not obje 
rightly to the imications of that. However, we would 
have a quarrel with the Soviet Union and its African 
allies if the rights of humanity and right to exist under 
a viable sovereign government, sovereignly deter- 
mined, were denied to any seion of the defeated 
nation's general pulation. 

By imication of natural law, the right of sovereign- 
ty must be a very tough princie, otherwise it has no 
efficient meaning. We must adhere to the princied 
differences John Quincy Adams sed against 
British foreign minister Canning's government on this 
. We do not follow British precedents in this 
matter; in ernational law we follow our own 
Federalist-originated notions of constitutional law. 

It is imssible to get past the topic of foreign licy 
toward the southern hemisphere without  alas!  
stumbling over the United Nations Organization. 
Generically, that organization is history's most 
flatulent living monument to parliamentary 
cretinism, of which for the present we are obliged to 

make the best. 

As for praical authority, that institution has none 
but as much as either or both of the two great weres 
choose to lend to it. 

From the stand of any reasonable approxi- 
mation of constitutional forms of ernational law, 
the United Nations' Charter is a nominalist abomi- 
nation  whose coincidence with the corresnding 
prosals of Walter Lippmann's - book is in no 

degree accidental. 

Otherwise, to a **new Federalist" administration, 
the fa that other, credulous governments have a cer- 
tain emotional attachment to the thing obliges us to 
respe their sensibilities as far as tolerable. To us, 
the UNO is like some abominable gift from a lovable 
Aunt. For her sake, we have to keep it, but what, with- 
in the outer limits of our imagination, are we going to 
do with the blasted thing?" 

It does have included special tentialities for an 
administration which wants to honor a contributor or 
a contributor's protege, but at the same time wishes to 
keep the problematic apee at a maximum 
distance from serious matters of government. (That is, 
of course, already almost a U.S. tradition, now being 
utilized.) Broadly, the entity has its uses as a forum, 
some of the administrative funions are useful, and if 
some serious matter arises, a resnsible represen- 
tative of the government can step over to New York 
City and take over the matter from the primarily- 



 

decorative official UNO Ambassador. Nothing really 
good could be developed out of the UNO proceedings 
as that agency is constituted, but it can serve a 
collateral role while we wait out the emergence of 
some competent institution of ernational law. 

The usefulness of the UNO is not its formal arrange- 
ments, but those qualities typified by its dining room 
and lounges. It has the same princied sort of utility 
as the famous old U.S. neighborhood corner drug 
store. The issue was not whether the store's ice- 
cream-and-soda cuisine was good or not; it was a con- 
venient location at which one might run o a relevant 
person during a wide range of odd hours. As a ace  
rather than as a litical institution  it serves as a 
useful meeting ace for discussions which might lead 
to some useful result. Even aspes of the formal fes- 
tivities occasionally might collaterally contribute to 
that same effe. 

This is to emphasize that the UNO is not in fa or in 
proper princie a principal feature of United States 
foreign licy. During the past, a number of charades 
have been staged which might suggest the contrary to 
the credulous  but credulities, while fas in them- 
selves, do not represent the sort of fas which 
presently occupy our praical concern. 

While the United States will be suitably respeful of 
its incurred relationship to the UNO, United States 
foreign licy must pursue a course independent of 
that institution's more objeionable pretenses to 
authority in fa or law. We are properly bound in all 
aspes of foreign licy by the governance of those 
princies of natural law which were embodied in the 
original ent of our nation's constitutional law. This 
signifies that our foreign licy refles what we 
imicitly regard as the proper constitutional form of 
ernational law. It is that imicit ernational law 
which governs our approach to establishing the insti- 
tutions and instruments of our foreign licy. 

By establishing approaches to a community of 
princie with other nations, inclusive of the Soviet 
Union, we will thus set o motion those processes 
through which an aual body of competently consti- 
tutional ernational law will emerge to brush aside 
the olerable hodge-dge currently deemed pre- 
vailing. We will, in that course, assimilate those as- 
pes of customary licy and law which are con- 
sistent with purses and requirements of proper 
ernational law, and, in the erim will be tolerant 
of the emotional attachment of other nations to which- 
ever outstanding fiions we can in fa tolerate. The 
emerging instrument, around whose aivities such a 
proper body of ernational law is catalyzed o 
being will be the International Development Bank. 
That perspeive is the guiding praical orientation of 
the United States toward the establishment of a body 



P^OF-T(o)(Q)llOT. OEM© E^iD©i 



 

of ernational-law praices consistent with the 
notions of natural law. 

This same problem of ernational law coheres 
with our proper foreign licy distinions of commu- 
nity of princie, agreement for praice, toleration, 
and abhorrence, and the apication of those distin- 
ions to nations and their incumbent governments 
respeively  and somewhat distinly. 

Some will quibble at the distinion. Radical nomi- 
nalists will naturally profess  in criticizing us  that 
