Broadly, the argument against financial reorgani- 
zation or a National Bank today is identical to the 
argument made against the republic, the Constitution, 
and the National Bank two hundred years ago. 

This is aptly illustrative of the way in which the 
monetarists erse the heteronomic tentialities of 
private ownership, to make fiitious, nominal wealth 
the obje of perceived heteronomic self-erest, 
succeeding to the  that those thus-seized persons 
a persistently, viciously direly against their most 
vital individual erests by aing against that univer- 
sal erest on which their real individual erest 
depends. 



P^OF-T(o)(Q)llOT. OEM© E^iD©i 



The Micro Approach 



SO far, in developing this , we have consid- 
ered the matter of litical impulses from the 
stand of the universal, of overall causes and 
overall consequences, situating the particular in- 
dividual and his heteronomic tendencies as anti- 
universalist impulses, as included exceptions to the 
rule of reason in respe of the whole taken as 
primary. Now, we must reverse the approach. We 
must momentarily put aside the telescope for the 
microscope. 

As we shift the  of empirical focus to the 
''molecular" aspe of ernal United States li- 
tical and proto-litical life during recent decades, we 
are properly confronted with two erconneed con- 
ceptions respeing the way the proto-Whig and proto- 
Tory differentiation in social-litical tendencies is 
expressed. In respe of the first, we can rigorously 
distinguish two charaeristic classes of individual 
impulse, a distinion which broadly accounts for the 
associated tendencies. In respe of the second, we 
discover that the quality of the two impulses is not 
only different in sense of litical imications, but in 
a more profound respe. It is as if the proto- 
Whig quality of impulse were appropriately measured 
in "grams" and the proto-Tory in "acres." In fa, 
the qualitative distinion of the impulses is 
epistemologically more profound than that first il- 
lustration imies. 

The Whig impulse is, as we have emphasized 
repeatedly before, empirically found to be relatively 
predominant among skilled and semi-skilled working 
people, technology-proud farmers, scientists, 
engineers, and industrialists. It is recognized as 
converging un a sense of personal moral identity 
involving a commitment to contribute to the 
achievement of "newere, better, and more" by the 
society as a whole. It is ontologically a proto-humanist 
impulse. Developing new weres of problem-solving 
which are demonstrably in dire or effeively im- 
icit agreement with a broader comprehension of the 
laws of natural processes, is the adducible praical 
imication of that impulsion. 



To contrast this impulse with its opsite, the proto- 
Tory, it is not ssible at first to do other than extend 
the analysis of the proto-Whig impulse another step. 
This, as we shall show, refles the "ontological" 
differences in quality of the two opsing tendencies. 
The superficial aspe of the matter is that they are 
funionally contrasting as diverging tendencies, 
causing different consequences in the same "ernal 
configuration" of litical behavior. That first glance 
suggests that causes which so a in an opsite man- 
ner must be therefore different forms of the same 
"ontological" quality of causation. This judgment is 
proven to be entirely wrong. 

The relatively raw, proto-Whig impulse has in itself 
no "rationally "-associated praical notions of a 
corresnding universality. That is its taical 
weakness, but also, as we shall demonstrate, its 
tentiality for merit. The proto-Whig does not 
"rationally" pre-define a corresnding universal 
order beyond the axiomatic prescription that that 
order must be in agreement with circumstances of the 
more fruitful expression of the bare impulse itself. 

The proto-Tory impulse is immediately charac- 
terized by imicit goals for generating a "Utopian" 
kind of universality. This is the charaeristic feature 
of the liberal and corresnding radical impulse. This 
gives the liberal and radical proto-Tory a certain 
immediate tential for taical advantage over the 
proto-Whig, in the respe that the proto-Tory can 
more readily adopt licies based on what appear to 
him to represent "universalizing" goals. It would be a 
profound error to imagine that therefore the proto- 
Tory has an epistemological advantage, in the sense of 
being more immediately susceptible to a universalist 
outlook. His universalities are always, and lawfully 
so, convergent un "Utopias" of the degenerate- 
Aristotelian or nominalist form: they are paradises of 
historically purseless heteronomy. 

These "paradises" are usefully compared to certain 
types of children's games. 

"Let's ay cowboys and Indians." 

"Okay. I'll be the captain who brings the soldiers." 



 



PEF=T(o)®Bi(o)X. E)EM@ E^SD@M 



*'No, you be the Indian chief/' 

"Wham you be?" Sourly. 

**The boss of the cowboys.** 

**It's your turn to be Indian/' Morally indignant. 

Mother ervenes: **I think it is your turn to be the 
Indian/' addressing her hosting son; **Freddie was 
the Indian yesterday." 

Although the child*s development, just because it is 
development of mental and related weres for com- 
prehending the **outside world" and natural 
processes, contains a tendency for associating an 
inner, preconscious sense of identity with that aivity 
of self-development  hence, making him a tential 
American Whig in that respe, he is also still a child. 
As a child, he caes forward the need for infantile 
