autocannibalism. 

The Albigensian Crusade, not trips toward 
Jerusalem, is the proper prototype for the Crusades as 
a whole. 

The growing new source of wealth during that 
period was the **proto-capitalist" urban development 
associated with the Hohenstaufen licy of such deli- 
berate development in various parts of the Holy 
Roman Empire, including parts of present-day 
Germany as notable exames of this building of ur- 
ban centers. This Hohenstaufen licy's confli with 
the old feudal order  made famous by the setback to 
human progress compaed at Canossa  was the 
basis for the emergence of those margins of new kinds 
of wealth on which creatures such as the Bardi and 
Peruzzi founded the beginnings of their financial 
were. 

Through the emergence of small but marginally 
decisive commerce around the developing urban 
centers of Europe, Europe-wide banking emerged 
through a symbiotic relationship to the papal treasury 
and the colleion of papal revenues (Peter's Pence) 
from all regions of Europe. The small margin of ac- 
tual capital advanced to the indebted feudal nobility 
for their monstrously usurious and more usuriously 
refinanced debts, focused un the produs of the 
urban center's trade and produion. Hence, the issue 
of credit by an Italian banker to a tentate in some 
distant locality of Europe took the form of credit 
against means of payment required in large part for 
delivery to relatively local urban centers. Excepting 
the refinancing of old debts  which was essentially 
the same fiitious swindle then as the Eurodollar 
market is today  this arrangement provided the 
basis on which pieces of paper coordinated by the 
Bardi could control the flow of critical margins of 
wealth throughout most of Europe. 

With its profitable association with the papal 
treasury, the charaer of the Bardi shifted from an 
original basis in produive aspes of proto-capitalist 
produion and trade, o a basis in the extraion of 
the surus  and much of the basic capital  of 
feudal estates. The more this debt system ate o both 



PEF=T(o)® i()X. E)EM© E^S 



surus and the basic **capitar' of feudal estates, the 
more savage became the cannibalistic crusading 
against one's neighbors. 

In consequence, much of the feudal nobility were 
turned o raving Friedmanites. To increase the 
profitability of the estates, holidays were slashed, 
ratios of work on the serf's ot were reduced in favor 
of work on the lord's ots, while the exaions from 
the serf's ot were increased. This labor-ensive 
driving-down of the biological and cultural conditions 
of life of the serf was comemented by a phenomenon 
modally unlawful to feudalism  unemoyment!" A 
growing ratio of the serf and other peasant pula- 
tions was driven o vagabondage. The attempt to re- 
finance old debts still further, the increased impulse 
for feudal cannibalism, produced the preconditions for 
the Black Death. 

The mode of feudal produion charaeristically 
involved a significant, determining margin of social 
surus. However, the primitiveness of the agri- 
cultural mode and the fragmentation of the feudal 
society economically o estates meant that ebbs and 
flows in the conditions of agricultural produion led to 
famines, which occurred periodically over much of 
feudalism, and local famines erupted frequently 
under conditions in which suruses existed in 
reasonably adjoining regions. The overall driving 
down of the biological and cultural conditions of life of 
the serfs and other peasants, the growth of vaga- 
bondage, and the ensified looting of the basic 
''capital" of the estates, produced a condition of 
breakdown in the system at many s. This break- 
down is analogous to what erupted later in the jac- 
queries, peasant wars and so forth during the period 
from approximately - under conditions 

produced predominantly by the Bardi's most notable 
successor bankers, the Fuggers. Under such 
biological and economic conditions combined, one 
additional blow to a litical-economic system (to 
apy the term in an inclusively retroaive fashion) 
suffices to set off a general biological catastrophe. The 
Black Death was the principal feature of just such a 
general biological catastrophe. 

This process of crisis-linked degeneration of the 
feudal order represented in praice the most ugly and 
profound violation of the Christian ordering of a 
universal feudal law. Every human right, every 
established vital erest prescribed by law was 
successively violated and then made a dead letter or 
repudiated in the effort to save the system of feudal 
estates under conditions of maaining debt obliga- 
tions to the Lombard bankers. 

This overthrown system of Christian universal law, 
the law which Thomas Aquinas (principally) made 
rational (conscious) at the  the breakdown was 



 

already in progress, was in fa in corresndence 
with the universal erest of humanity under feudal- 
ism. Feudalism lacked a consciousness of the causal 
princies which determined that to be the case, but in 
the form of feudal Christendom, it attempted to define 
those norms of general (lawful) praice and in- 
dividual condu and method of willful praice which 
coincided empirically with the universal self-erest 
of the society and its individual members  under the 
constitutional princie embedded in such notions as 
Charlemagne's inventory of the realm. 

The deliberate violation of such princies of uni- 
versal law, the denial of the properly efficient 
authority of universal law, was and is nominalism. 
That is the essence of the issue between Thomas 
Aquinas and the regrettable William of Ockham. 

The form of the breakdown in respe to universal 
law was that the feudal lords, the papal treasury, and 
the Bardi and Peruzzi defined their apparent short- 
term special erests as the primary erest of 
society. Wherever that perception of special primary 
self-erest conflied with a contrary princie of 
universal self-erest, universal law, they denied and 
crushed that aspe of the law. This is the essence of 
heteronomy. 

By extending that empirical observation from the 
exemary case of the Bardi and papal treasury to the 
isolated individual in the most obvious way, the 
