basis  as a self-evident imperative, and as the indis- 
pensable basis for viable, sustainable industrial and 
infrastruural development throughout the seor. 

Although the development of capital goods indus- 
tries within the developing seor should become in- 
creasingly a part of the ernational division of labor 
in capital goods produion, the wretched infrastruc- 
ture and or average quality of the labor force will 
persist, even optimistically, as an obstacle to high- 
technology produion methods for approximately a 
generation. The relative emphasis will be on establish- 
ing consumer goods produion, wherever the combi- 
nations of regional consumption requirements and 
capabilities of the labor force available permit the em- 
oyment of technologies which are competitive with 
those existing for the same kinds of industries in the 
industrialized seor. 

This will be associated with development of primary 
commodities produion, emphasizing more modern 
technologies of extraion and agronomy. These com- 
modities are to be priced at equitable prices, which 
shall be determined as world-market competitive with 
necessary prices prevailing for the same catgories of 
commodities in the produive output of OECD-CMEA 
nations. We shall not fear deetion of mineral de- 
sits in this process, so long as that deetion will not 
occur as a cumulative world-wide problem within  to 
. decades. This is premised on the commitment to 
establishing new technologies associated with fusion 
energy development. 

This primary commodities aspe of foreign 
relations with developing nations will be for an un- 
determined period an endemic area of licy confli, 
a source of tential disruptions of global develop- 
ment, which threats we must efficiently check. 

For principally two reasons, parts of the developing- 
seor pulations and their litical institutions are 
infeed with the ignorant and barbaric delusion that 
primary commodities as presently defined for their 
knowledge, represent rinsically natural wealth. 

This idea was impressed un such governmental 
faions by the charaer of their long-standing econo- 
mic relations with the British Empire and other mone- 
tarist colonial and semi-colonial weres. The mone- 
tarists' licy degraded these regions to the crudest 
forms of ground-rent looting, emphasizing the exrt 
of primary mineral and agricultural commodities 
from these regions  mines and antations. In the 
historical praice of their nations' economic relations 







with the world market, such bestialized ground-rent 
economics is, in the main, the only economic dorine 
they have been taught by general experience. 

This same source of infeion with dangerously non- 
sensical ideas was aggravated by the circumstance 
that the educated strata of these countries were mis- 
educated in significant part at such cessols of rav- 
ing monetarism as the London School of Economics. 
Vienna and our own Cornell, Princeton, Berkeley, Co- 
lumbia, Johns Hopkins and Harvard have not repre- 
sented exaly happy alternatives to the notorious 
LSE. The viims of such miseducation, in turn, pro- 
vided the core of the faculties of educational institu- 
tions established back in the home country. 

This disorientation among leading litical and in- 
telleual strata is aggravated and reenforced by con- 
vergent native ideologies. 

Not only were the charaeristic pre-capitalist 
social relations in those countries in the main broadly 
describable as semi-feudal, feudal, barbaric and so 
forth, but in numbers of cases the worst features of 
those backward cultures were seleively cultivated 
by Anglo-American '^cultural relativist'* administra- 
tive and counterinsurgency dorines. 
The British pattern is exemary. 
The happier effes of conta with modern techno- 
logy have been, by way of various contributing chan- 
nels, to develop a pro-capitalist hardcore of ellec- 
tuals and urban and semi-urbanized labor in these 
countries. This force, which formerly represented a 
tendency for national capitalist, anti-colonial revolu- 
tions, has shifted in recent times to tend to a as the 
leading pro-socialist force. 

Most consistently from the time of William Pitt the 
Younger, British licy, informed by both the Ameri- 
can Revolution and Latin American revolts against 
Spain (notably), was consciously determined to check 
and abort such infeious tentials for new '* Ameri- 
can Revolutions.*' Hence, notably beginning with Pitt 
the Younger, the barbaric licy of Adam Smith's 
fraudulent Wealth of Nations was enforced through a 
British Foreign Office licy of using social relics 
(barbaric tentates, tribal chiefs, and so forth) as lo- 
cal *'agents of influence" and litical instruments 
and institutions of colonial and semi-colonial rule. 
Obscene relics and British-remodeled caricatures of 
* 'native culture'* were propped up and deoyed 
against the ** modernizing," urban-oriented ellec- 
tual and labor movements. 

Hence, the imsition of the British colonialists* 
dorine of "cultural relativism.*' 

Under our lowere Manhattan monetarists, the United 
States was exoited by those monetarists to enforce 
the British colonial and semi-colonial licies in a 



 

slightly altered outward litical form. Instead of flag 
colonies, lowere Manhattan ruled through geo-litical 
**zones of influence,'* smeared over with attorney 
John Foster Dulles' legal-fiion ungent of regional 
treaty organizations. This was not original to Dulles 
himself; it was prescribed as a new dorine by Roose- 
velt (Lippmann) in -. Colonial rule by foreign 
debt accomished the reacement of the Union Jack 
by the Dollar Sign. Underneath these cosmetic altera- 
tions in colonialism, the duped government and people 
of the United States permitted the Rockefellers et al. 
to freely deoy our nation's were to perpetrate the 
same bestial, "cultural relativist" licy which the 
British had established before us. 

There was once hardly a week in which some bab- 
bling, brutal semiliterate from an African, Latin Ame- 
rican or other parody of a Viennese operetta was not 
paraded through Washington and generally patted 
and coddled, while being heralded in the U.S. press as 
a bastion of the "Free World*' and its noble culture. 
Among those of us so rudely incredulous as to examine 
more closely the paradise of liberty the visiting digni- 
tary was supsed to represent, we saw a savage dic- 
