dents. Some are not fiively dissidents, because they 
are among alternate faions within the Communist 
parties, and thus are either dominant faions, notably 
as part of the "hard line" currents or their allies 
against the Oblomovist currents, or in the opsition 
within the leadership. Others are fiively dissidents 
because their opsition to the leadership  critics for 

I 

corre or wrong reasons, or a mixture of both  has 
put them outside the party's "family" orbit. This is 
aggravated by bitternesses from the s and st- 
war Stalin purges, and comicated by the litical ec- 
centricities endemic to a de fao controlled social- 
elleual environment. 

From the stand of republican notions of 
universal law, we are obliged to examine the endemic 
dissidence from within the Soviet Union in particular 
by the same methodological standards we properly 
apy to our own ernal constitutional law's ap- 
ication. The sovereign and auxiliary institutions of a 
republic properly check heteronomic impulses at the 
 of a praical threat to either vital erests as 
such or a credible praical threat to the egrity of 



P^OF-T(o)(Q)llOT. OEM© E^iD©i 



the constitutional law and its institutions. The same 
institutions may otherwise abuse their lawful weres 
to deprive individuals and groups of the proper liberty 
to develop and express innovations. In United States 
licy proper we distinguish qualitatively between the 
two kinds of ostensible oppression both domestically 
and in our foreign licy. 

In respe to lawfully proper containment of the 
liberties of criminal elements, and other heteronomic 
elements, we will not obje to the fa of such op- 
pression by other republics. Our tential criticism in 
such matters is delimited by concern for the 
humaneness of the methods and praices emoyed. 
The obje of the proper oppressive apications of law 
is to check the heteronomy while preserving to the 
praical extent ssible the tentialities for good 
within the person. We prosecute the sin, not the sinner 
 to the extent that such distinions are ssible in 
praice. The obligatory objeive of the penal law is 
correion, to save the sinner if ssible. 

In respe to the abuses of the law, insofar as the 
Soviet Union violates those liberties imicit in its 
proper constitution as a republic, we abhor such 
abuses  no matter how many kindred or even far 
worse abuses exist in our own backyard. On this, we 
oblige ourselves afresh to focus on the key issue: the 
charac ter of th e Soviet repu blic . 

However, our stand in this matter is not the 
merely sitive law in and of itself. We reje ab- 
solutely the dorine of *'force of sovereignity'* 
associated with Justice Holmes. Rather, we judge 
sitive law from the stand of the proper higher 
authority of natural law  as is prescribed, in fa, in 
the exicit ent set forth by the authors of our U.S. 
Constitution. It is not the constitutional law of the 
Soviet republic as it is, but what it must be from the 
stand of rigorous apication of natural law that 
is our constant  of reference for licy. 

Our foreign licy toward the Soviet Union con- 
cerning matters of its citizens' liberties is twofold. We 
recognize, first of all, the conneion between the 
aversive conditions fostered by agencies which it is 
our resnsibility to control, and the effes of this 
aversive condition un the ernal life of the Soviet 
Union. Some of these aversive conditions involve 
aivities whose combined charaer and objeives 
are abhorrent to us in any case. These we 
categorically check under any circumstance. These 
aversive conditions also include elements which are 
determined by the form and content of relations 
between our two countries. These vary according to 
the distinguishable degrees of the sperum from 
adversary, tential adversary, to agreement based 
on community of princie. We adopt the con- 
sequences of such aversive conditions created and or 



 

maained by agencies properly under our control as 
peculiarly our lawful resnsibility. In these matters, 
the relevant aions of the United States are dire and 
autonomous. 

In the second category, the issues of humanity and 
of categorical abuses of proper Soviet law are among 
those ernal affairs of the Soviet republic which 
properly lie within the province of the United States' 
foreign licy. To the extent that they bear un the 
assessment of the ernal quality of the Soviet 
republic as a republic, such considerations properly 
color the determination of our foreign licy toward 
the Soviet Union. How we approach such ernal 
aspes of the Soviet republic in praice is deter- 
mined by those broader, subsuming considerations 
which arise immediately in the effort to determine 
whether or not either a tential or present basis for 
agreement to community of princie is to thus define 
the generative outlook of the United States' Soviet 
foreign licy. 

In any case, there are certain things we will not do. 
We will not tolerate aions by agencies under our 
control or by private agencies of U.S. citizens or 
residents whose methods, purses and consequences 
are abhorrent to us. Otherwise, the fa that the 
princie of sovereign, viable republics is an 
associated fundamental princie of U.S. foreign 
licy, does not mean that we adopt the nominalist 
absurdities of a Walter Lippmann (Roosevelt), by 
demanding an establishment of capitalist litical 
institutions within the Soviet Union, or the scrapping 
of the proper constitutional princies and institutions 
of the Soviet republic  to the extent we regard it as a 
republic in fa  in favor of that anti-republican, 
**uralist" obscenity which our own rabid Tories 
demagogically herald as **pure democracy!" We are, 
under no circumstances, going to prose to the Soviet 
leadership that it transform itself o a Tory freak 
show merely to gratify the lunatic's sensibilities of our 
neo-Fabian liberal-radical minority. 

In approaching the overall question of the United 
States' Soviet foreign licy, we begin, we have noted, 
with the truism that the United States and the Soviet 
Union are the **two great weres," whose respeive 
influences and mutual relations will determine the 
fate of every other nation for decades yet to come. 
Contrary to the revisionist Tory Walter Lippmann 
(Franklin Roosevelt), we cannot approach this 
crucial, central question of United States domestic 
and foreign licy by those childish doll-aying 
