these two rates of change of the rate of negentropy is 
the only "axiomatic" conceptual feature of the 
analytical apparatus apied. It is not measured with 
respe to a priori determinations of (e.g., clock) 
time, of space, of mass, or anything else of that sort. 
Rather the emoyed notions of time, space, mass, 
and so forth are defined relative to the process 
represented by the errelationship between the two 
rates. 

In economic analysis, each set of values defined by 
that single base-parameter corresnds in fa to a 
qualitative form of society. The necessary charac- 
teristic rate of increase in the rate if negentropy 
defines the society, and the rate of effeive negen- 
tropy associated with that society transforms the 
notion o the required notion of primary form of 
cause. 

The initial apication of that notion to aual 
processes, such as societies, biosphere, and so forth, is 
the process of mapping the subje matter in terms of 
that conceptual approach concerning causality to 
"measurement" of the qualitative charaeristics of 
lawful relationship within the whole of the domain and 
ech being exored empirically. The elaboration 
effeed through such approaches to empirical in- 
vestigation of the charaeristics of that physical 
space defines a "geometry" in the sense required. 

The further, indispensable effort involves the 
similar mapping of the successor ech of develop- 
ment in that domain, and requires the resolution of the 
two defined geometries in such a way as to show how 
the impulses erpreted according to the terms of the 
notion of the world-line accomish the transformation 
of the domain from one ech to another. 

This method of analysis is, in historical retrospe, 
apicable to every ech of human history and pre- 
history, and also to the "history" of the biosphere in 
general. It is also, obviously, appropriate to solution of 
the kinds of problems confronted by the cited 
problems of physics. 

However, respeing society, until the neo-atonic 
humanists' conscious establishment of the princies 
and licies for the initiation of what became in- 



 

dustrial-capitalist development, no form of society 
existed in which the operation of the society depended 
un the included governance of development by a 
consciousness of the constant imperative of suc- 
cessive technological progress. The society does not 
operate successfully on the basis of "blind" laws 
governing "field-particle" relationships, but un 
laws which depend un the included feature of the 
"particles' consciousness" of the constant necessity to 
willfully determine their behavior to a predetermined 
effe. He;ce, the aively-negentropic ''geometry'' of 
capitalist development! 

The notion of "freedom" peculiar to neo-atonic 
humanism, and the emerging princie of the notion of 
the republican form as the society's necessary in- 
strument, are both dire refleions of that role of 
consciousness. 

To the extent our American culture has subsided, to 
the effe that large rtions of our pulation have 
become either relatively allonians or dionysians in 
outlook and mood, it must indeed seem incredible to 
such relatively-unfortunate persons that our Constitu- 
tion, our American Revolution were determined in 
fa by broad majority commitment to fight for such 
humanist princies, such humanist outlooks and 
moods. The apllonian (Aristotelian) and dionysian 

(nominalist) each regard their moods and outlooks as 
self-evident, innate, "common sense." Hence, they 
find it incredible that the contrary to (their own) con- 
notations of terms, fas, and so forth guided our 
Federalists, as persons of a humanist outlook. 

Fortunately, humanist impulses  if not broadly 
developed for consciousness  are deey embedded 
as impulses in our trade unionists (to the extent they 
think as skilled or semi-skilled working people) and 
our industrialists, scientists, engineers (to the extent 
their perception of vital national erests corresnds 
to that experience). Thus, although the licies which 
governed the establishment of our nation have sub- 
stantially lost the degree of conscious hegemony they 
enjoyed at that time, the vital self-erests of our 
nation are more emphatically those of an industrial- 
capitalist nation than at that past time. Hence, 
although the impulses corresnding to our nation's 
vital erests are embedded chiefly in such social 
strata as our industrialists, farmers, and working 
people, and even only in a fragmented, half-conscious 
way, that sensuous perception of self-erests in such 
a fragmented form waits only to be made conscious to 
become again the efficient and hegemonic force 
consciously shaping our nation's licies and prac- 
tices. 

To neo-atonic humanists, to our nation's founding 
fathers  despite vacillations on this  by Jef- 
ferson and others  freedom never meant freedom in 
the anarchist's glosses on that term. Nor did it mean 







 

freedom of rational choice in the scholastic's sense of 
choice. On both s, the concepts of freedom and 
toleration have been so often confused that the stri 
epistemological distinions between the two distin 
conceptions has almost been forgotten. 

Toleration of violations of universal law and its 
proper derivatives is not generated as a sitive ex- 
pression of freedom. Exaly the opsite. Freedom, 
sitively understood, is the abhorrence of such error. 

We properly tolerate on two principal premises. We 
tolerate what we rightly know to be error in belief and 
in respes of praice, because the root of the were 
for freedom in the individual is not obedience, but self- 
development; for that reason, a society which is 
dedicated to developing the weres and moral per- 
ceptions of freedom within its individual members is 
advised to be as tolerant as its overall vital self- 
erests allow. We also tolerate because we fear to 
encroach on areas of ostensible deviation which may 
be, despite our momentary misjudgment to the 
contrary, a kind of deviation  e.g., '^unorthodox" but 
sitive scientific discovery  which represents the 
advancement of our culture's freedom. 

Wha t we do not tolera te in proper licy and la w is a 
