dire violation of humanist outlook and methods 
which threatens vital erests as defined from the 
humanist stand. 

The ssibility of ordering a litical domain of 
freedom (in the proper, humanist perception of that 
term) has been demonstrated to be inseparable from 
the licy of ordering our affairs as a republic, and not 
a monarchy or democracy. In princie, without 
restating here fully what has been identified earlier on 
this , the ssibility of ordering an entire society 
according to an efficient notion of the necessary 
technological progress of its overall development 
demands human agencies whose consciousness of 
praical affairs is not only focused on the 

technological progress of the society as a whole, but 
which, situated in that sition of resnsibilities, have 

the qualifications of outlook, method, and efficient 
moral commitment to those criteria, to consciously 
lead the overall praice of the society from moment 
to moment with approximate effeiveness. 

The republican form is not and was not adopted as a 
form of government which must be superior to 
democracy for all time to come. John Milton is better 
than Tom Paine in including that consideration in 
argument against the adoption of the democratic 
form. The fa that an anti-humanist incompetent 
such as Jimmy Carter or, earlier an Andrew Jackson, 
could be President of the United States (by means of 
both hook and crook), is not an argument against 
perpetuating the republican form today, but a warn- 
ing of what horrors may await us if we imagine that 



the time has come when the proper purses of a 
republican form could be superseded by "pure 

litical democracy.'* 
The princie of our republic  its proper princie, 

without whose enforcement it does not funion ac- 
cording to the ent of our Constitution  is that all 
persons eleed to principal offices of our national 
government ought to be seleed by the parties and the 
mass of the eleorate as competent representatives 
of the humanist outlook. They ought to be persons 
deey committed to the princie of technological 
progress, both respeing produion as such, and 
those features of the education and associated con- 
ditions of life of the general pulation essential to 
realizing the furtherance of industrial and 
agricultural technological progress. They ought to be 
not only committed to such outlooks and methods of 
judgment, but be efficient both in perceiving the ex- 
pression of such erests in praice and in the moral 
qualities which tend to preclude violations of that obli- 
gation by deed of a or omission in the duties for 
which they were eleed. Such persons express the 
vital erests of our nation, the erests of the nation 
which otherwise impinge in a fragmentary form un 
the individual citizen's immediate and future circum- 
stances. The people, the eleorate, must refleively 
sele suitable representatives by processes of careful 
deliberation, and must judge and check those eleed 
on performance by the same processes and criteria. 

When such a centralized deliberative process, based 
in the humanist perception of the crucial role of 
technological progress, is the refleive judgment of 
our government and eleorate, as institutions of a 
republican process, that process, that sovereign in- 
strument of humanist self-government, is the means 
by which the juridical and related questions deter- 
mining the notion of freedom for praice are removed 
from the realm of anarchic conflis of contending 
opinion. Without those humanist princies, our 
republic's institutions are turned o an empty gar- 
bage can, o which any government force, chosen 
without consideration of Constitutional princies, 
may desit its peculiar refuse, and in the name of 
sovereignty, recommend such ordure as our national 
erest. 

Our republic, our Constitution, were established 
under the certain conviion of the existence of a truth, 
the truth of universal natural law as prescribed by 
humanism. It was on the authority of that perception 
of truth that the majority of the people of the North 
American English colonies adopted the Declaration of 
Independence, and later adopted a Constitution based 

un that same, freshly tested princie of truth. 
Remove that truth  that humanist princie of 
technologically-focused progress  from the Consti- 



PEF=T(o)® i()X. E)EM© E^S 



tution and its institutions, and the republic is turned 
o a sham, a uralisms ideological refuse-dump. () 

This humanist freedom  distin from mere tolera- 
tion  which we properly prize is identical in effe 
and ent with the more sophisticated representation 
of it we have given here in conneion with the notion 
of the primary form of causality in human affairs. 

Necessity, as most broadly determined by the rate 
of technological and related progress we require to 
maain our current condition o the forseeable 
future, demands realized scientific discoveries and 
subsumed innovations in detail which enable us to 
exceed the appetites of that necessity. To survive, we 
depend un the creative mental weres of the in- 
dividual member of society  to make discoveries, to 
communicate new conceptions, to assimilate more 
advanced conceptions, and to convey that more ad- 
vanced knowledge o the governing impulses of 
willful social praice. 

That form of exercise of individual mental creative 
tentials for knowledge and praice is the only 
essential meaning of freedom. 

Freedom is thus emphasized in respe of what the 
individual gives to the society. What the individual 
sees as freedom in what the society affords to him, is 
education, appropriate conditions of life for his cul- 
tural progress, latitude to develop and test new 
weres of creative judgment, the right to innovate in 
direions consistent with the purse of progress, and 
to enjoy the right to attempt to persuade others con- 
cerning such enterprises. 

It is both s of viewing freedom combined o a 
single notion which represents freedom in its most 
essential and comprehensive form. The society  e.g., 
the state  does not **concede*' freedom to the indi- 
vidual, but demands that he or she partake of it in the 
general erest of the state (society). The individual 



