Fabian-coordinated, *' egalitarian" movement 
developed through Fabian manipulation of the Civil 
Rights ferment, and developed similarly through the 
relevant litical-elligence agencies' design and 
fostering of the so-called New Left ferment and its 
''scenario-molded" offshoots. 

The germs of the **new radical" ferment were 
developed, in a coordinated way, out of the old Fabian 
litical-elligence networks in Western Europe 
and North America (principally), including Fabian 
nests in and around the old Americans for Democratic 
Aion, the Socialist Party of America, the old New 
Republic orbit, with an overlapping hard-core of law 
firms and other networks springing chiefly from the 
Roosevelt administration. These contributed the seeds 
of the "grand scenario" through which the social 
ferment among university students and ghetto youth, 
the social by-produ of the  recession and its 
aftermath, were channelled through various, suc- 
cessive, variously programmed and almost- 
programmed scenarios o creating a New Left. 



PEF=T(o)® i()X. E)EM© E^S 



This scenario began, as any effeive psychological 
manipulation of pulations must do to be successful, 

with a relatively credible focal issue, civil rights for 
blacks in the southern states. () Once the southern 
civil rights movement had been developed among 
university youth strata in the northern centers, the 
dorine of "Up South" was roduced (beginning 
with the judo taic of the Wool worth picketing 
campaign), to deoy the white university-youth civil 
rights aivists and their indispensable core-seeding 
of radical organizations o the ghettoes of the north- 
ern cities. 

By maaining a climate of confrontation 
throughout, first in the southern states, and then in the 
northern ghetto aivities, the liberal attorneys, the 
Rockefeller- and Rothschild- denominated funding and 
licy conduits ervened as the **good guy" allies of 
the duped and manipulated aivists, against the **bad 
guys," the also-manipulated conservatives. On the 
latter count, the imrtant countergang role of 
William Buckley and his nests becomes clear. 

The aual, root problem of the northern ghettoes 
and so forth was chiefly a stagnation of the nation's 
industrial growth, a monetarist system of real estate 
finance imanted in the U.S. through imrtation of 
British and Dutch influences, and a correlated 
degradation of the northern cities notably as economic 
entities. By diverting the issue focus away from the 
American princies of industrial progress to the 
Fabian prosition of equitable "redistribution" of 
existing economic decay, the white liberal and radical 
youth associated (most prominently) with the Depart- 
ment of Health, Education and Welfare, Ford Founda- 
tion and Russell Sage Foundation projes, were 
sensuously conditioned in a climate of low-grade 
confrontation o an anti-industrial, anually proto- 
fascist mass of white radicals and lumpen youth  in 
the image of the s Weimar Germany counter- 
cultural ferment on which the Nazi Jugendbewegung 
("youth movement") was based. 

The attempts to crush  and later assassinate  
Reverend Martin Luther King, the issuance of the 
"Trie Revolution" st-industrial society thesis ^ the 
role of Fabian operative Stokely Carmichael in the 

"Rap" Brown "Black Powere" turn, the killing of 
Malcolm X, and the first roduions of the Nazi 
Volksgemeinschaft licy and related dorines of 
"community control" and "cultural nationalism," 
were all exemary, coordinate expressions of the 
degree and form of molding of "new radical" outlooks 
in a proto-fascist direion by the middle of the s. 



IL We have analyzed the civil rights movement in an issue of The 
Campaigner devoted to that subje ("What Happened to In- 
tegration?", Vol. VIII, No. . Aug. , pp. -). 



 

In this process, the Kennedy administration was 
crucial. It was the Rockefellers' "Kennedy Mafia" 
which provided the essential circumstances and much 
of the impetus for this hideous "attitudinal condition- 
ing" of much of our nation's youth, both before and 
after Kennedy's decease. 

The ernal social convulsions produced by the 
prolongation of the Vietnam War provided the energiz- 
ing climate, through which, around the catalyst of the 
"Anti-War Movement," broader layers of liberals 
were direly infused with the ideologies anted 
among the mid-s ghetto-oriented radical aivists. 
The role of the Socialist Workers Party is one of the 
most accessible paradigms for this process. 

The  New York City teachers' strike, and related 
convulsions throughout the nation at that time  in- 
cluding the provocateur-steeped, orchestrated affair 
at the  Chicago Democratic Convention  are 
crucial to understanding this process. 

The fa that the hard-core of the developing proto- 
fascist movement included such traditionally 
"Marxist'* organizations as the Communist Party 
(after ) and the Socialist Workers Party 
(throughout) , prompts special attention to the fa that 
the traditional socialist outlook is toward the 
organized labor movement, and to the organization of 
the unorganized o trade-union formations affiliated 
or allied with other trade unions generally. Yet, the 
charaeristic impulse of the "Up South" movement 
from the beginning was bitterly anti-labor. 

The Socialist Workers Party, which no longer had a 
significant praical erest within the trade-union 
organizations, quickly adapted to this anti-labor 
impulse. The Communist Party, whose gate-receipts 
still significantly depended un a prortionately 
significant base in trade unions, could not make such 
a transition toward an anti-labor impulse credible to 
its membership until approximately -. In , 
every nominal socialist organization left over from the 
s and s but the Socialist Party of America 
openly and consciously led an effort dedicated to 
breaking up the largest single municipal trade-union 
in the U.S. (It happened also to be a major trade-union 
base of the New York SP of A organization.) Fur- 
thermore, those nominal socialists and their ac- 
comices were consciously dedicated already to 
breaking up municipal unions and construion unions 
throughout the U.S. in behalf of the same "community 
control" licy of union-busting. 

