

he following study of U.S. foreign licy was 
written during a three-week period, preceding 
April , as an urgent contribution to the dialogue then 
 and still  proceeding within leading circles both in 
the USA and abroad. 

Leading forces representing a majority of the U.S. 
eleorate now, increasingly desire to rid the nation of 
this monstrosity called the Jimmy Carter Administra- 
tion. This opsition to Carter is based most visibly on 
deep anger against the so-called Carter energy 
licy." Among the best informed circles, both inside 
the U.S. and abroad, checking  and removing  the 
Carter Administration is also seen as necessary to 
prevent a general thermonuclear war which no nation 
desires and from which no nation could benefit. 



The method emoyed to that purse is to exse 
the roots of the current Carter Administration 
licies. The Carter Administration is exsed as the 
degenerated phase of a persisting American Tory 
effort to subvert and overthrow our constitutional 
republic, a subversion beginning most notably with 
the fraud-permeated  eleion of New York 
bankers' puppet-President Andrew Jackson, a sub- 
version which has accelerated during the present 
century under the influence of a Fabian bankers' 
licy now called the **Atlanticist" or '^American 
Century" dorine. 

The approach emoyed for this purse is to study 
that **Atlanticist Dorine" at its mid-, through 
Fabian Walter Lippmann's - articulation of 



The weakness among most of Carter's critics is that the Roosevelt stwar licy which has dominated 



 excepting energy licy as such  the critics are 
not yet agreed on a sitive set of foreign and 
domestic licies which in fa represent a genuine 
alternative to the licies diated by the Rockefellers 
and their allies. As the prophet Isaiah rightly warned: 
If the trumpet shall sound an uncertain note, who then 
shall heed the call to battle? 

The following study attacks that problem in a two- 
fold way. The primary task undertaken is to se a 
new coherent set of foreign and domestic licies, 
which are shown to be in the aual erests of a 
capitalist United States at this junure. These 
alternative, sitive licies are carefully defined in 
terms of the clear ent of the American Revolution, 
our Declaration of Independence, our Constitution and 
our republic. 



our foreign and domestic licies every since. 

The undertaking is in three logical parts, the three 
seions o which the study as a whole is divided. In 
the first seion, the insanity of the Atlanticist foreign 
licy is exsed. In the third, final seion, the si- 
tive alternative licy is prosed. The second, middle 
seion is the theoretical rtion of the study, in which 
the historical and organic roots of the American Tory 
Ideology are rigorously exsed, for the purse of 
defining the notions of natural law and constitutional 
law un which our republic was founded and which 
must be reestablished today as the princie of a 

"government of law, not men." 

The immediate purse of this study is to provide 
the basis on which Whig strata of Republican and 
Democratic leaderships summon the informed con- 



P^OF-T(o)(Q)llOT. OEM© E^iD©i 




President Woodrow Wilson, right, with Colonel House. 

stood as a consciously Hamiltonian sort of early tion and to a large degree their systematic worl 
twentieth century Federalist. Beyond that, what he outlook was by then deey taed with the monetarii 



P^OF-T(o)(Q)llOT. OEM© E^iD©i 



viion to rid our nation of a treasonous **American 
Century" dorine. 

That use of the word treason is no metaphor, no 
hyperbole. The Constitution is exicit: Article III, 
Seion : * 'Treason against the United States shall 
consist only in levying war against them, or in 
adhering to their Enemies, giving them Aid and 
Comfort." Although the Founding Fathers did not 
anticipate the emergence of supranational weres, 
such as the International Monetary Fund-World Bank- 
Eurodollar market, as an adversary of the nation, 
such a force presently exists, and is pursuing its alien 
erest by using its U.S. agents and agents of in- 
fluence in the effort to overthrow our republic and 
destroy our vital industrial and agricultural erests, 
our nation*s credit, to the same kind of effe as our 
former adversary Great Britain attempted in the 
issues of the American Revolution and War of . 
The Carter Administration's ^'energy licy," a licy 
roduced in the erest of the cited alien supra- 
national were, is thus an A of Treason in the stri 
terms of the Constitution. 

Moreover, such an a as President Carter's April  
telegram to President Valery Giscard d'Estaing of 
France  endorsing French efforts to embroil the 
United States in a thermonuclear war with the Soviet 
Union  represents the attempt to use war as a way of 
shutting off U.S. access to essential primary com- 
modities in Africa and elsewhere. The Carter Ad- 
ministration's use of the '^breakaway ally" scenario 
for projeed Israeli operations against the Gulf oil- 
exrting states is a similar fostering of war against 
the vital erests of the United States. This is nothing 
but treason by the Carter Administration. 

It is treason, not mere folly. President Carter was a 
member and protege of David Rockefeller's Trilateral 
Commission, a supranational licy-formulating and 
coordinating body dedicated to imsing these of- 
fenses un the United States. Furthermore, the 
Carter Administration is comsed chiefly of mem- 
bers of the Trilateral Commission and that organ- 
ization's allies. President Carter,- National Security 
Council chief Zbigniew Brzezinski, Secretary of State 
Cyrus Vance, and others are variously agents-in-fa 
or agents of influence of the alien, supranational in- 
