exames of primitive ones. We stress that until the 
period of about the seventh through fifth centuries 
B.C., science did not exist as science. Granted, we can 
look back un the development of abstra forms of 
technical knowledge among earlier Egyptian and 
Mesotamian cultures, and call such artifas 
elements of scientific progress ; we are entitled to do 
so only if we recognize that it is our modern analysis of 
those artifas which brings them within the body of 
our science. 

Science, as the case of the Ionian philosophers un- 
derlines, is a consciousness of science as a princied, 
lawfully ordered form of creative aivity, direed to 
effeing technological advances in specific aspes of 
knowledge as by-produs of a principal effort 
direed toward discovering the fundamental ordering 
princies of man's universe. Not the universe without 
man, but the universe in which man*s lawful mastery 
of its domain is the  of reference for determining 
the notion of order. If we can scientifically look back to 
pre-human, pre-biological eras of earth and the 
galaxies, that is ssible only on the presumption of 
the coherence and continuity of past existence with 
man's present ervention in the same universe 
today. 

Science is therefore essentially neo-atonic 
humanist epistemology. Science is a matter of 
discovering the ordering princies generating the 
succession of creative human discovery of the laws of 
the universe in general. 

Science is indeed concerned in particular with the 
appropriateness of a formulation as a prediion or at 
least a forecast of experimental behavior of some 
aspe of its work. It is also indeed concerned to 
establish consistency among such formulations, to the 
effe that the entirety of domains of overlapping 
experimental subjes provides for consistent predic- 
tions and forecasts. Those are included aivities of 
scientific work, but they are not science. 

No number of isolated experiments as such could 
prove a single princie of scientific knowledge. 
Science is not the abstraion of praical experience 
in any such sense of *'common law*' aggregates of 
localized behavior. The essential feature of all 
scientific work is the rigorous formulation of hy- 
thesesy most notably those hytheses we associate 
with so-called crucial experiments. It is the disciin- 
ing of the scientific mind to ave at the sing of such 
crucial-experimental hytheses, with a forecastable, 



direed sitive advance of scientific knowledge as a 
result of either sitive or negative experimental 
results, which is the core of science, which is epis- 
temology. 

Every scientist knows  but most laymen do not  
that it is a rigorously demonstrated princie that no 
amount of statistical knowledge gained from ordinary 
experiments can, in itself, disprove or prove a single 
hythesis. Any person who imagines that science is 
statistical-experimental method is, relative to the 
professional praice of science, a raving imbecile. 

This does not mean that highly significant statistical 
results of a properly defined experiment or observa- 
tion do not have authority for science. They do, but 
that authority is situated outside any cocktail-hour 
dorine of "science is statistics." The authority is 
embedded mediately in the theory of experiments 
itself. The governing princie of all the useful and 
authoritative features of the theory of experiments is 
that these restriions concerning the design of experi- 
ments and observations are a dire refleion of es- 
tablished fundamental princies of science. We tend 
to accept significant experimental results on condition 
that the experiment has been **struured"to conform 
to standards of coherence and consistency with **back- 
ground" laws of the universe. 

The  emphasized is that science-in-general is 
not a summation or other sort of abstraion of some 
common features adduced on the authority of a brick- 
laying architeure, based in isolated experimental 
findings concerning local evidence. Exaly the 
reverse. An experiment is not better than the appro- 
priateness to the aual laws of the universe  as 
universal laws  of the conceptions which govern the 
design of the experiment. 

If aggregations of local experiments cannot ssibly 
add up to science, where do we obtain the empirical 
evidence on which to base the notion of science? This, 
as we shall show, exains the reason the particle-field 
paradox of science exists, and why that same fa is 
crucially symptomatic of the lawful processes govern- 
ing the historical process of development of the 

nominalist form of core ideology. 
The question we have just sed concerning science 

is imicitly answered by stating that Keer, not 
Galileo, is the **father" of modern physical science. 

The significance of Keer*s approach  without 
which the useful physics work of Galileo would have 
proven nothing for science  is that Keer based his 
empirical-theoretical investigations on a crucial- 
experimental study of a relatively-universal subje 
matter, the lawful ordering of man's observations of 
the relationships among the known bodies of the solar 
system. Without Keer, Galileo's physics work could 
not have contributed anything notably meaningful to 
the main body of science. By proving the universality 



PEF=T(o)® i()X. E)EM© E^S 



of an ordering princie within that aspe of man's 
study of the solar system, Keer established the basis 
on which Newton and others, by direly inverting 
Keer's (and other) princies o the corresnding 
form of Newton's princies, could incorrate other- 
wise inconclusive findings of a Galileo to produce the 
hythesis, based on Keer's universal princies, 
through which Galileo's useful work could be re- 
examined in terms of experimental hytheses ap- 
proximating a crucial experiment. 

The case of Keer is heuristically ermediate 
between the matter of the localized experiment and 
the more fundamental problem it symbolizes. 

The proof and empirical source of the authority of 
science is that the progress of a society, effeed 
through a relatively deliberate ordering of its pro- 
duive and related technologies, effes the basis for 
an increase in the pulation at a higher per capita 
standard of gross output, and moreover establishes 
the preconditions for an acceleration of the further 
rate of such advances. It is the embodiment of the 
universality of a mode of technological and related 
