Rheinische Zeitung, was not a refleion of any 
misunderstanding of one another's commitments. The 
Communist Manifesto not only proses the establish- 
ment of a German national capitalist republic, but 
sets forth a conscious licy under which the German 
working class was to be mobilized as an independent 
litical force as an indispensable agency to secure 
capitalist success. Marx's licy toward the United 
States during the s and s is identical in 
strategic princie to the licy of the Communist 
Manifesto. As leader of the International Working- 
men's Association (IWMA), he performed a signi- 
ficant catalytic role in contributing toward the viory 
of the U.S. against the Rothschild-direed forces then 
attempting to destroy our nation. () 

The viable independent litical role of the labor 
movement develops, as Marx specified correly in 
the Communist Manifesto, through the conscious 
struggle to realize the litical and economic ten- 
tialities of capitalist development. That licy is 
correly rooted in the fa that the form of extended 
reproduion proper to industrial capitalism and to 
socialism is identical in every respe but the hetero- 
nomic litical form of capitalist ownership of the 
basic means of produion and distribution. 

As long as industrial capitalism fulfills its self- 
erested funion of technologically advancing 
enlargement of the produive forces, with the private 



. Marx's role in conneion with the U.S. Civil War was at least suf- 
ficiently effeive that the injured Rothschilds  Lincoln's viory 
was their first major defeat in history  expended large sums and the 
coordinated efforts of their entire House, including their creation of 
the Bakuninist anarchist movement, in the effort to wreck the 
IWMA and ace Marx himself under a virtually total containment, 
from which Marx personally virtually never escaped throughout the 
remainder of his life. As for Lincoln himself, they assassinated him. 
Once the truth is recognized concerning the German and Austrian 
social democratic leaderships of the nineteenth century, the true 
extent of the containment against Marx funded and most prominently 
coordinated by, first, the Rothschilds and then the Rothschild- 
spawned Fabian Society begins to be appreciated. Rockefeller 
praice of buying up and even sometimes creating "leftist" organiz- 
ations in job-lot quantities is by no means a twentieth century in- 
novation. 



Mp;//www.d)®(Buirgi(gfe.(S®[ffli/ 



PEF=T(o)® i()X. E)EM© E^S 



ownership feature included, a socialist transformation 
is unfeasible. The socialist transformation properly 
occurs either because the capitalists abort industrial 
capitalist development, or because the general pro- 
gress of culture under capitalist development reaches 
the  that capitalist heteronomic forms are 
broadly regarded as obsolete and impediments to 
some specific and urgent task of further extended 
reproduion. 

The question of whether a socialist transformation 
anually occurs at such appropriate junures is a 
subjeive, litical question, a question of whether 
appropriately developed leading institutions of the 
litical labor movement are qualified to undertake 
the successful continuation of those economic and 
related duties which the capitalists have, for one 
reason or another, abandoned. The fragmented 
working class as such could not conceivably assemble 
itself to competently dire a modern economy. 
Hence, socialism becomes a ssibility only if the 
litical labor movement develops the universalizing 
qualities of consciousness and culture needed to 
assume such a task. The school for such tentialities' 
development is the proper role of the litical labor 
movement in allying litically with the industrial 
capitalists against monetarist and other abysmal 
litical forces opsing technological progress and 
economic growth. 

Meanwhile, pending the challenge of assuming sole 
resnsibility for continued technological progress, 
the litical labor movement best defends its own 
erests most fundamentally by allying with indus- 
trial capitalism against monetarism (e.g., against 
Keynesian, Schachtian, Friedmanite obscenities), 
and using its sition as an ally of the industrial 
capitalists as the setting for preventing primitive- 
accumulation licies from developing. 

Prevailing incompetent contrary opinion con- 
cerning this princie arises notably from such in- 
cluded causes as the predominance of lunatic 
socialism among even self-styled Marxian socialist 
organizations, and the teaching of lunatic socialism as 
Marxism in our university survey courses and texts in 
this conneion. The anti-Marx socialists  the 
Utopians, the anarchists, the anarchosyndicalists, and 
by-produs of Fabianism generally  are epis- 
temologically bestialists, who therefore deny the 
primary imrtance of economic growth, tech- 
nological progress, and creative scientific knowledge 
in respe to both society and individual human 
qualities. Their stand is, like that of the authors 
of the Norman Domesday Book, to regard existing 
modes and scales of produion as if admissibly or 
properly fixed, and to reduce everything to conflis 



 

over the shares of **goodies*' in terms of the existing 
scale and mode of produion of wealth. Therefore, the 
very existence of profit, as the necessary basis for 
expansion and technological progress, is at best a 
matter of indifference to them, as it was to the most 
feudal-minded among the French eighteenth century, 
anti-Colbertian Physiocrats. Accordingly, er- 
preting the world and economic processes in terms 
of the most reaionary among eighteenth century 
notions of ground rent, their ground-rent*' socialism 
is premised essentially and axiomatically un the 
bestialists' presumption that the very existence of 
profit is the central issue of confli between the 
capitalists and labor. 

Out of that anti-humanist variety of lunatic or 
''ground-rent" socialism, for which anarchism is the 
purest lunacy, the * 'ground-rent" socialists variously 
prose, according to their degrees of **radicalness," 
the partial or total * 'redistribution" of profit for 
personal household income. 

Marx's view and method are totally opsite to such 
' 'ground-rent" or "egalitarian' ' pseudo-socialism . 
Marx's view demands a maximization of the mass and 

rate of profit  not its elimination. However, Marx 
adds the stipulation that this profit, as capitalist in- 
