accelerating economic progress in their own nations, 
but throughout the world, the comexities of 
maneuvers imsed un our founding fathers, un 
Lincoln, and un our nation during the first decades 
of this century no longer need exist. In fa, although 
the governing party of the Soviet Union is committed 
to the perspeive of socialist republics, and the 
United States parties' predominantly committed to 
capitalist republics by strong preference, the question 
whether a viable republic is capitalist or socialist is 
properly a matter of indifference to either were in- 
sofar as it is a state were with state erests. This 
ssibility is conditional un the commitment of the 
United States to an industrial-capitalist perception of 
self-erests and licies. In that case, on that con- 
dition, no concert of nations could develop a mone- 
tarist form of monetary system which could endure 



the combined economic counterforce of a pro-indus- 
trial-development monetary system joly suprted 
by the two major weres. Under those conditions, 
consistent with the ent and specifications of the U.S. 
Constitution, the problem of ordering the world ac- 
cording to the Idea of Progress, on the basis of 
sovereignty of viable republics, requires none of the 
comex adjustments to licy which were the 
unavoidable circumstance of former periods of our 
republic. 

The institutionalization of monetarist licies 

during the period of the Roosevelt, Taft, and Wilson 

administrations created a thrust in U.S. domestic and 

foreign licy, which was to ally with the City of 

London in perpetuating a jo Anglo-American 

monetarist world order while reducing Britain to 

junior-partner status within that alliance. In brief, to 

maain the continuity of the City of London's 

monetarist world order while subjugating the City of 
London. 

Excepting thrusts such as those most clearly ex- 
pressed by Wilson's opnent. Senator Lodge, the 
rearguard resistance of Whig currents to the extreme 
innovations sited by the Tories, that consistently 
contradiory monetarist licy consolidated under 
Wilson has been the trend in U.S. foreign licy doc- 
trines to date. This is to be qualified in the most im- 
rtant respe that the alleged ''isolationist" ten- 
dencies of Senator Lodge and the - Republican 
administrations and Congress were not isolationism in 
fa, but a rearguard expression of negativity against 
the kind of foreign involvements the Tory faion 
demanded. This Whig tendency emerged in a modified 
form under the Eisenhowere administrations, es- 
pecially the second Eisenhowere administration, and 
was an imrtant background tendency within the 
Nixon and Ford administrations  as the Rumsfeld- 
led "Hallowe'en Massacre" of  most visibly re- 
fles. 

What Lippmann of - was demagogically 
misrepresenting as a kind of foreign licy vacuum, 
was essentially the determination of the Franklin 
Roosevelt-led Tory faion to extirpate the last 
vestiges of a constitutional, Whig element in U.S. 
foreign licy. Lippmann's foreign licy thesis on 
this  is comementary to Thurman Arnold's 
defense of Roosevelt's effort to speed up the overthrow 
of the U.S. Constitution, in FDR's aborted effort to 
pack the U.S. Supreme Court. 

Colonel House's (which is to say Rockefeller's) 
World War I licy was to commit the U.S. to the 
British cause, while using U.S. were to cut Britain off 
from any substantial, net gains by which she might 
resist a process of takeover by U.S. monetarist in- 







terests. In that licy everything from getting the U.S. 
o war, through the pack of swindles called the 
Versailles Treaty, and the ostensible ernal contra- 
diions of U.S. anti-Soviet licy are compre- 
hensively subsumed. 

The comement to Wilson's administration itself 
was the private elligence establishment and licy- 
formulating and imementation network represented 
most prominently by the National Civic Federation, 
the Rockefeller Foundation, and the Russell Sage 
Foundation. The Rockefeller Foundation was already 
emerging as a major vehicle for coordinating and 
catalyzing the shaping of U.S. foreign and domestic 
licies. The Russell Sage Foundation comemented 
and overlapped the Settlement House movement as 
the pioneering and coordinating institution for 
domestic and foreign litical elligence and '*black 
operations" in the Fabian mode. The operations of this 
Rockefeller-linked (later. Rockefeller-dominated) 
Fabian private elligence network were both 
direly overlapped with the British Fabian private 
elligence networks and were also developed as a 
competitor to the British Fabians. These licy and 
elligence operations refleed the same U.S. 
Atlanticists' contradiory consistency as Colonel 
House*s government licies. The National Civic 
Federation ebbed out its last dominant role under that 
name, as the vehicle, in large part, for the licies 
which were increasingly Rockefeller-determined. 

The Russell Sage Foundation is so crucial in the 
affairs of the - period that no competent 
discussion of U.S. foreign licy and dorines dating 
from that period can be accomished without st- 
lighting the evil conduited through that presumably 
small but monstrously significant **social work'* in- 
stitution. The Foundation was coopted to direion of 
overall U.S. elligence during the First World War 
and continued a related role at Versailles and in 
various ''black" and related operations in Europe 
(and elsewhere) during the s. That nasty little 
Foundation has not ceased to perform an innovative 
role of similar imications down to the present day, 
but at the moment it is the period leading o 
Roosevelt's administration that concerns us. 

It was the Russell Sage Foundation, for exame, 
which drafted the element of the Versailles 
agreements under which Admiral Canaris* career 
under Weimar and Hitler was founded. The marine 
transrt unit (that unit had been the element of the 
Kaiser's military-litical elligence most im- 
mediately involved in the Parvus operation), was 
exempted from the drastic reduions apied to other 
German military and related elements, and soon 
aced under the direion of a Canaris who had 
