
* 'brands" was essentially a matter of method. That 
method has been essentially represented in this licy 
study. The correlative judgment is that such methods 
should be incorrated in governmental litical-in- 
telligence funions. 

In consequence of this, the writer proses that the 
time has been reached and passed at which the proper 
litical-elligence funions of the Executive ought 
to "come out o the open," and be aced direly at 
the dissal of the Executive and Congress as a whole. 



. Not to single out the Federal Republic of Germany in what is a 
widespread fa, it is notable that some wag, refeng to the ''sok 
conneions" involved, prosed that the Bundestag ought to be 
renamed the BundesnachV. 



The redireed Central Intelligence Agency should ob- 
viously be the only branch of the Executive engaged in 
this funion, and freed, meanwhile, from "special 
operations'* and related defleions from its resnsi- 
bilities. 

This funion must be controlled at the Cabinet 
level, with Cabinet-level accountability. It must be an 
information agency in form, with an included and 
growing resnsibility for basic scientific research 
and research and development. It must also be em- 
oyed, under Cabinet-level control as a special capa- 
bility for auditing the performance of the ernal func- 
tions of the Executive as a whole. 

The military and related elligence funions 
should be consolidated in the Defense Intelligence 
Agency, the domestic security funions of enforce- 
ment prescribed by law should be consolidated under 
the Secretary for Domestic Security (if that is the pro- 
per choice of title), and "everything else closed 
down," except for the restried investigative func- 
tions of the Attorney General, Treasury, and National 
Bank, immediately pursuant to their specific duties 
and resnsibilities. 

Things which should be respeively at some degree 
of arm's length must be aced at arm's length, and 
brought together only according to courses of aion 
prescribed by law or through the funions of the Of- 
fice of the President and Cabinet. This government's 
Executive Branch must be brought under control and 
made efficiently accountable to the President and 
Congress. 

The Secretary of the National Bank's funions are 
obvious, as it is obvious that this aspe of licy must 
be resnsible and accountable at the Cabinet level. It 
is also clear that the National Bank and Treasury 
must be kept at arm's length, so that the specific ac- 
countabilities of each are respeively balanced. 

The Secretary for Domestic Security should take 
over and reorganize the Federal Bureau of Investiga- 
tion, the Secret Service, and other enforcement and 
security agencies of the Executive Branch. Within the 
limits aced un such constituent agencies by law, 
the Department must funion as a law-enforcement 
agency, within the limits appropriate to a law-enforce- 
ment agency. It must be accountable at the Cabinet le- 
vel, and must operate in an environment in which it is 
balanced by the Justice Department and the audit 
funions of the Secretary for Political Intelligence. 

Otherwise, stri, coherent definitions of Cabinet 
areas of resnsibility should rule, by agreement be- 
tween the President and Congress and appropriate stip- 
ulations of law to this effe. State is foreign licy; 
Agriculture is biosphere; Interior is custody of real as- 
sets of the federal government; Commerce is every 
aspe of science, industry, transrtation, construe- 

tion and commerce, excepting those funions as- 
signed to Agriculture and the National Bank; Labor is 
the labor force in all respes bearing un the well- 
being and development of the pulation which produ- 
ces the labor force. Defense is defense. The areas of 
confli among the Departments are areas in which 
we desire confli to be expressed for purses of li- 
cy deliberation. 

In addition to these rearrangements within the Ex- 
ecutive, the Executive must resnd to the realities of 
the modern world by establishing an official govern- 
ment press agency, funioning under the direion of 
the Secretary for Political Intelligence, Government 
has been too long manipulated by the abuse of the de 
fao were of a core of national media to create an en- 
vironment of disinformation and distortion around the 
processes of government. If we are to have a free 
press in fa, the government must provide the radio 
station and newspaper in the proverbial **East Po- 
dunk" with an alternative source of information, 
against which to compare the packaged output of the 
national TV, wire-service and major newsweekly and 
metrolitan news sources. What the editor in **East 
Podunk" does with government information is a mat- 
ter of his choice, but he and his community have the 
right to be given that choice. 

The obscene situation, in which officials and eleed 
representatives of government  in the Executive 
and Congress  are pressed o propitiating the 
Washington Post, the New York Times, and so forth, 
for fear of what disinformation may otherwise "get 
back home," must end. Insofar as a government news 
service accounts the issues mooted within the Con- 
gress, Congress should prescribe what it deems ac- 
ceptable standards  since in this aspe of the mat- 
ter, the Executive must properly refle the ent of 
the government as a whole. With that sort of restric- 
tion, the government has the right and obligation to 



defend itself by its own independent means against 
disinformation. 
