how to alter the dualistic configuration to shift the de- 
limiting, forecastable "path" of world developments 
to an effe within the range of acceptable real in- 
terests of our nation. 

This is the thrust of our organization's strategic 
analyses, including the present, admittedly and 
necessarily rather thorough thesis statement respe- 
ing a reconstruion of our nation's licy stures. 

A competent forecast is, first of all, a forecast in the 
sense we have so far prescribed. To be a competent 
and cometely litical forecast, it must inclusively 
identify those s of ervention in the imme- 
diately-developing sperum of events at which ac- 
tions within both the real capabilities and the present 
or imminent subjeive capabilities of aual forces 
can, variously, ervene to more or less **catalyti- 
cally" shift the eraions of the two geometries 
away from the pathways leading toward the worst 
variants specifiable within the forecast. These er- 
ventions may effe merely slightly shifted pathways, 
which represent a slowere approach to preconditions of 
irreversible catastrophe, which '*buy time" or which, 
preferably represent a pathway leading out of the 
pathological track altogether. The princies remain 
broadly the same for all cases. 

Since the generative feature of the problem con- 
fronting us is properly regarded as a monetarists' 
subversion of the U.S. Constitution and of the ended 
content of our nation's republican institutions, if it 
were feasible to restore the essential, aive features 
of that Federalist- Whig humanist outlook and method 
to the dominant institutions consciously so shaping our 
nation's licies, that alteration would put our nation 
and the world on a track in which all of the problems 
foreseeable during the next two to three decades 
would be imicitly soluble in praice throughout that 
period* 



That is not merely a satisfaory formal solution to 
the present and looming horrors, but the overwhelm- 
ing majority of the nation's working people, farmers, 
industrialists, scientists, and so forth have Whiggish 
erests and Whiggish impulses. However, these im- 
pulses are aborted in overall effe for lack of substan* 
tial litical institutions committed to transforming 
such impulses efficiently o their corresnding 
expressions as conscious national licies. Relative to 
the liberal and radical minority, and also the tiny 
monetarist cabal running part of the Republican 
Party and the White House and certain Congressional 
top elements of the Democratic Party, the Whiggish 
forces of our nation ( conservative Republicans and 
Democrats, farmers, traditionalist trade unions, and 
the U.S. Labor Party) represent the vital erests and 
corresnding impulses of the overwhelming majority 
of the eleorate in fa. The headlong efforts of the 

Tories to destroy  with wild foreign adventures and 
attacks on our most vital national domestic self- 
erests  those material and cultural conditions 
which represent the most urgent immediate self- 
erests of the majority, create the conditions 
respeing "thresholds" under which the old Tory 

pattern can be broken, to constitute a "Whiggish" 
humanist coalition of labor, farmers, and indus- 
trialists as the governing institutionalized form of 
national domestic and foreign licy. 

Those derived strategic princies, which have 
imications to the same general effe in most 
nations of the world today, represent real litics. 

In order to imement such a crucial strategic 
licy, we must know our enemy  immediately the 
Tory alliance of monetarists, liberals and radicals  
and must understand how degenerative influences 
have created our Tories from top to bottom of that un- 
wholesome formation. We must understand the 

development of their isonous core ideology, and 
how the insidious influence of the same ideological and 
related forces has induced our nation's fundamentally 
Whiggish majority to tolerate, for so long up to this 
time, the growing rule of such an unwholesome 
minority force. 

Thus the dire attack on the problem identified at 
the outset of this seion requires two erconneed 
steps, both indispensably advantaged by tlje epis- 

temological apparatus we have erlated for that 
purse. We must account for the development of the 

nominalist core ideology of today's U.S. liberals and 
radicals as the charaeristic outlook and method of 
monetarism. We must then demonstrate, rigorously 
rather than merely descriptively, how the geolitics- 
centered Atlanticist Dorine has developed those 
obsessional, irrational features through which it now 
hysterically pushes the United States toward the brink 
of national suicide. 







From the outside, as Western Europeans and others 
view the United States so credulously  through our 
official stures, our major Eastern Seaboard news- 
papers and leading national newsweeklies, our 
movies, our television produion, and so forth  what 

we are exsing for correion is what such Western 
Europeans and others would tend to term '*the Ameri- 
can ideology.'* It is more correly that special, 
United States' adaptation of the same monetarist- 
linked nominalism which, in different adaptations, 
has been a ruling ideology in Europe itself. In con- 
sequence of the conflis of vital erests, now in full 
flood, between the Carter Administration and Western 
Europe, Western Europeans are advantaged to see 
such faults in our apparent official ideology much 
more clearly than they dete kindred ideological dis- 
orders within their own national charaers. 

The operative phrase to be stressed in that con- 
neion is *'from the outside." 

The "American ideology" in that sense is ad- 
mittedly the charaeristic ideology of our liberals 
and radicals  what Karl Marx distinguished as the 
liberal petit-bourgeois and the radical declasse and 
lumpenproletarian social strata. Admittedly these 
strata, the pular base-forces of lowere Manhattan 
monetarism, have run amok for decades lluting our 
national institutions with tiieir ideology. Admittedly, 
they have thus compelled the working class, indus- 
trialist and other innately Whiggish, ''Idea of Pro- 
gress "-defined strata of our nation to endure such 
llution of their own and their children's moralities. 
Nominalism  empiricism, pragmatism, sitivism, 
behaviorism, cultural relativism, *'egalitarianism," 
