uals. That is the long and the short of the princie 
involved. 

If evil  for exame, a Ralph Nader demanding 
destruion of our nation's vital erests  demands 
that it has equal rights to realize its desires and per- 
ceived self-erest with the scientist, engineer, trade 
unionist concerned to develop our produive forces, 
then we say to Ralph Nader: Evil is not equal to good 
before the law. The same rule apies to foreign l- 
icy. 

For exame. The nation of Mexico, like Brazil, has 
a substantial foreign financial debt outstanding. Some 
of this indebtedness represents useful goods delivered 







 

to Mexico in good faith on fair terms. Another rtion 
of the debt represents the fiitious capitalization of 
old debts, and similar questionable origins. Shall we, 
as the United States drawn o U.S. citizens' claims 
against Mexico, declare simy that a **debt is a 
debt?*' That would be moral imbecility. Should the 
credit of a National Bank of the United States be 
deoyed to guarantee a U.S. exrter's delivery of 
capital goods and related installation services to a for- 
eign nation for a viable development purse? Ab- 
solutely. Should the credit of the United States be 
hythecated to the International Monetary Fund or 
some like institutions to bail out the fiitious capitali- 
zations some U.S. citizen has piled up through the 
Cayman-Bermuda off-shore Eurodollar swindle? 
Absolutely not. Not to make such lawful distinions 
would be moral imbecility. The law must not be based 
on the mere formalities of fiions, in either national 
or foreign matters, but on the content of the issue, the 
morally defensible aspe of ent refleed in the fic- 
tions of law. 

For exame. Federal court decisions respeing 
enforcement of the National Environmental Policy 

A. It is a fa that the session of the U.S. Congress 
which passed that particular abomination was insen- 
sible in the main of the ent and imications of the 

legislation itself. That, unfortunately, has been 
commonly the case. Nonetheless, it is admissible in 
law to consider the negative ent of Congress, By 
any stretch of the imagination, can it be construed to 
have been the will of Congress that our vital national 
erests in produive development, emoyment, 
and so forth should be systematically savaged through 
court aions, in the way we have witnessed through 
the cumulative effe of patterns of federal and other 
court decisions? 

Either the courts perpetrating such a construion 
of the legislative ent are perpetrating a fraud re- 
speing any reasonable construion of ent in fa, 
or they are violating the Constitution by arrogating the 
weres reserved to the legislative branch. It is the 
ain duty of the other constitutional branches of 
government to nullify such violations of the Constitu- 



. We do not deny that the Supreme Court and federal courts have a 
specific were of de fao taw-making authority. However that 
authority is delimited to and generated by the specifications and clear 
ent of the Constitution. This is categorically delimited to matters in 
which legislators or executives have overstepped a constitutional 
boundary in form or praical effe, or in which matters direly 
affeing the ent of the Constitution for praice must be decided in 
the absence of subordinate sitive law for that category of praical 
issue. The federal courts, aing under the clear ent of the Consti- 
tution obviously must be equally sensitive to the omissions of law in 



tion by the courts, and to remove those judges who 
manifest a pattern of such tentially impeachable 
offenses. () 

The princies of licy and law just summarized 
are eternal They are the expression of the primary 
driving force of natural law, the primary causal force 
in human development which generates the proper 
ordering of successive evolutionary developments 
within society. 

The princie of sovereign, viable republics is also a 
universal princie of present natural law, but is 
historically specific to the modern period of European 
culture*s development up to the present time. A feudal 
republic is an absurd contradiion in terms; the 
present cultural development of the general pula- 
tion in the most advanced nations neither warrants a 
pure democratic form nor would an existing pula- 
tion be capable of effeively adapting  through a 
reasonable period of trial-and error  to a pure 
democratic form if it were bestowed un them. The 
arguments of John Milton and Federalist Tom Paine 
against the follies of democracy are appropriate in 
princie to the present circumstances. For the 
present, the republic form agrees with the universal 
praical requirements of natural law; but, it is 
not an eternal princie, rather a specific form 

bounded before-and-after by preceding and future 
developments. 

Naturally, numerous liberals and radicals will howl, 
shriek and stamp their feet in objeions to this. 
Respeing their objeions, it is most emphatically 
the fa that their sort continues to exist in excessive 
prortions that absolutely prohibit a workable pure 
democracy. Hence, in princie, their objeions have 
no competent standing before the law. In praice, we 
Whigs are the overwhelming majority, who must and 
who will govern. We shall keep the U.S. Constitution, 
follow it in accordance with its original ent, and we 
shall keep the republic  and, so, for the immediately 
foreseeable future, any Tory's objeions to this licy 
must remain moot. That settled, the liberals and radi- 
cals should stop their noisemaking, the better to follow 
a lesson they sorely require. 



imrtant matters aced before them as to the improprieties of 
enament and apication of law. 

There is no such proper use of weres in the kinds of decisions we 
have denounced. Not only was there no competent premise in the 
attributable ent of Congress to enable the consequences against our 
vitai erests those decisions involve, but the "legislative initiative'* 
of the court aion was on the same  in dire violation of the 
ent of the Constitution. Whether on grounds of folly or a revis- 
ionist's malice against the Constitution, such a pattern of decisions 
contrary to our vital national erests is the clearest basis for 
removal of such judges. 

