Out of this came direly not only linguistics itself, 
the effort to destroy music entirely through such 
methods (e.g., Princeton's Babbitt), information 
theory, and programmed instruion. It is neither 
metaphor, hyperbole, nor simile to identify the entire 
unwholesome mess as exicitly fascist. One should 
also note a dire relationship to the way in which the 
computer-related methods of mass manipulation and 
pulation-information data-banks are developed and 
used today. 

The Frankfurt School extension of this same 
linguistics proje to such wartime. Office of War 
Information-related nastiness as the "Radio Research 
Proje," was crucial in extending this to the ranks of 
journalists. Neo-Fabian networks, erseing the 
journalism schools of our major universities, and 
coordinated through agencies associated in part with 
the Russell Sage Foundation, are the produion line 
for today's corrupt journalist liberal-to-radical shock 
troops. It is these Fabian journalists who do the detail- 
work in creating a coordinated atmosphere of lies and 
twisted fa  which has become recently such a 
monstrous feature of the role of certain leading 
pred and eleronic media in corrupting our institu- 
tions. These are notable instruments in disrupting the 
Constitutional processes of government by means of 
scenario-coordinated hoaxes, in which such des- 
picable "journalists" perform a key role. 

So, even such a purrtedly "alitical" domain of 
academic life as English language instruion (and 
language-instruion generally) is thus and in other 
ways permeated with the influence of the linguistics 
dorine. Linguistics, and such gimmicks as "speed- 
reading," cultivate the emphasis on an in-fa- 
schizophrenic approach to the use of language. By 
such ruses, the elligent use of language  its 
cognitive essentials  is either outlawed (in the most 
radical approaches) or merely tolerated. 



P^OF-T(o)(Q)llOT. OEM© E^iD©i 



The Macro Approach 



We turn to the state of the mathematical physi- 
cal sciences last in this series, because our rele- 
vant observations on that area lead us direly to for- 
mulating the principal  to be made for tracing the 
history of nominalist influences systematically, 

Neo-Fabian subversion is confronted with an in- 
soluble problem in the case of the physical sciences. 
Since experimentally linked methods tie dorine 
immediately to the impa of universally lawful 
processes, it is imssible to sustain basic scientific 
development of industrially emoyable technologies 
under the dire rule of the sweeping epistemological 
fraud feasible in the so-called "social sciences*' and 
"arts/* Here, granting purely hythetical extensions 
of **pure mathematics*' along lines of '^mathematical 
logic," and including the schizophrenic fantasy life of 
certain branches of **pure tology,** the Rockefellers 
have failed thus far in their dogged efforts to brain- 
wash the Creator. 

Although the nominal subjes of the corrupted 
**social sciences'* and **arts"  i.e., people  are also 
real, human beings are capable of being induced, 
under appropriate circumstances, to regulate their 
behavior according to the diates of a delusion. .Non- 
living processes, lacking the were of consciousness, 
are deprived of such advantages of mental aberration. 
Hence, people can be induced, within limits, to defy a 
lawfully self-erested ordering of their behavior in 
favor of a delusion-linked arbitrary set of artificial 
rules of behavior. This does not invalidate the violated 
real laws of the processes involved. Rather, 
depressions, wars, famines, biological catastrophes of 
extreme forms, assert the operation of the violated 
laws even to the remedy of the extinion of the 
violators. Within the range of tolerated absurdity so 
defined by law, absurdity can charaerize behavior 
to the extent required to make today's rampant 
delusions called university liberal arts ausible to 
their perpetrators and to a significant number of 
dupes. 

Mathematicians  pure mathematicians  under 
conditions of isolation from physics can be driven 



insane rather readily. Physicists, colleively, cannot 
 as long as they pursue the praice of physics as a 
scientific aivity oriented to lawfully-demonstrated 
workable results in the real universe. Hence the 
Copenhagen School, the Solvay Conference, and 
similar ironical phenomena. Niels Bohr could be a thug 
against Erwin Schrodinger and others, but to the 
extent he was a physicist, he had to be a praicing 
physicist. Hence, on the one side, Bohr served his 
financial backers as a credible skesman in the ef- 
fort to halt the progress of basic science at its most 
crucial . However, within the bounds which thug- 
Bohr and his associates helped to imse un general 
scientific progress, physicist-Bohr, working within 
such bounds, had to remain in large the physicist he 
remained  if in morally reduced degree. 

For such delimiting reasons, the roduion of 
nominalist ideology to the domain of the physical 
sciences involves the halting of scientific progress in 
some direion, and the reification of the pretext for 
that halting o the form of a ''sitive" dorine of 
the nominalist form. Nominalism can funion within 
the house of praiced physical science only as a 
statement concerning those aspes of the universe 
o which the rigorous aivity of basic scientific 
work has been prohibited. 

The "indeterminacy dorine** associated with 
Werner Heisenberg exemifies this. Epistem- 
ologically, Heisenberg's autobiographical allusion to 
the elleual influence of Fries is relevant. 

Fries, whom Hegel honors with extreme generosity 
by giving Fries one-half of a short sentence within his 
three-volume History of Philosophy, was among those 
collateral professional frauds who set themselves up 
as exicators and correors of Kant. These were 
persons justly held in obscurity beside such more 
notable Kantian epigonoi as Fichte, Herbart, and 
beside even retailers of the diluted varieties of Kant- 
ianism which trickled o early-nineteenth century 
Concord, Massachusetts. Fries, who would not be 
notable at all, if part-time pro-fascist aivists of - 
 such as Heisenberg had not picked him out of his 



 


