Peru or not, if Peru wishes our alliance at this , 



. Perhaps we should do the generous thing, since they are in a 
sense our property, and take them in, thus establishing in some 
suitably managed "living museum," a ace where social scientists 
from around the world can study these exotic relics of a bygone time. 
Perhaps Pocantico is the appropriate location. 



Mp;//www.d)®(Buirgi(gfe.(S®[ffli/ 







 

we deliver appropriate force to clean the mess up as 
quickly and '^surgically*' as ssible. 

It is not ssible to foresee what other configur- 
ations might exist among Peru's and Chile's neighbors 
at that  of a hythetical war. If the conditions in 
any way approximated those presently and recently 
existing, we would not only have the right to offer Peru 
a military alliance, but strategic imperatives for 
desiring this. If such a war can be settled before it pre- 
cipitates a chain reaion among other states, we are 
obliged to pursue our erests in the matter in a 
Clausewitzian way, and settle the war at the inception. 

Having engaged in the hythetical war beside our 
ally Peru, we would not stop our aion at Chile's 
borders. In the improbable hythetical case Peru and 
Mexico foolishly were involved in wars on opsite 
sides, our aion would be bounded by our self-erest 
in preserving the entire sovereignty of both the belli- 
gerents. In the case of an outlaw regime, such as to- 
day's Chilean regime, we pursue the matter of belli- 
gerency until the offensive cabal has been rooted out 
of its control of the institutions of government. There, 
our military objeives end. We may assist the 
Chileans to establish their own government, but their 
constitution of a government is their sovereign affair. 

Let us consider the different case of Brazil. Brazil 
has acquired hideous included features, dating 
notably from the operations of David Rockefeller's 
Cyrus Vance in the course and wake of the Kennedy 
administration. However, there are viable aive and 
tential impulses within the Brazilian government, 
which in any reasonable estimation would come to 
the fore within the existing government if United 
States' foreign licy toward Brazil came o effi- 
cient corresndence with vital Brazilian national 
erests. 

Let us be more specific on the latter. Brazil has 
developed a monstrosity deadly to both its national 
erests and the effes of global weather-pattern 
shifts in the destruion of the Amazon rain forest's 
viability. Under any circumstances, without regard to 
any foreseeable coloration of the Brazilian govern- 
ment, it is the diate of U.S. foreign licy erests in 
general and the matter in particular that we seek to 
reach agreement with Brazil enabling whatever ex- 
ternal assistance is required to corre that Amazon 
problem, and to provide the Brazilian government and 
economy with whatever other such assistance is caus- 
ally relevant to correing the causes of the creation 
and perpetuation of the problem. Such other measures 
prominently include consummation of the fission 
were agreements between the BRD and Brazil, 
which it is in our urgent national erest to foster. 

It is, similarly, in the vital erests of the United 
States that Brazil, Argentina, and Uruguay should 



prosper in the development of the agricultural and in- 
dustrial tentials of the Rio de la Plata region. We 
must offer dire cooperation to that specific purse 
and must a to foster an economic environment in 
which such developments will be efficiently pursued 
through the sovereign choice of those governments. 

By citing these two cases, one emphatically more 
hythetically, the other representing a current state 
of affairs, we are emphasizing that there are dis- 
tinguishable specific routes within the United States' 
self-rule of its foreign licy by its perception of 
natural law, in which routes exist along which United 
States military force will be emoyed to accomish 
the termination of a foreign government. Such an 
exame as that we have given for the Chile case 
should be understood as a model and warning of the 
corresnding  even sudden  tentialities of a 
**new Federalist" foreign licy. 

We are also emphasizing on the contrary, by taking 
Brazil  a nation which also operates significantly in 
terms of a U.S. -diated Friedmanite ernal licy 
 that adversary sture is not to be used generally 
for problematic cases. Most of the problematic cases 
emphatically do not lean toward becoming tential- 
adversary cases, if the United States is able to secure 
a degree of agreement for praice through which we 
may create an economic environment favorable to the 
expression of the most desirable impulses within the 
governing forces. Assistance and persuasion are the 
normal best means for conduing foreign licy. 

Moreover, we wish to emphasize by these exames, 
that there is no admissible condition under imputable 
princies of constitutional forms of ernational law 
corresnding to a dorine of ^'limited sovereignty." 
Either a nation is sovereign or it is not. The mere fa 
that a nation may have become an adversary of the 
United States does not in itself impair that nation's 
sovereignty in the foreign licy of the United States. 
Ordinarily, unlike the Chile case, we seek the defeat of 
an adversary, not the violation of his sovereignty one 
inch beyond what may be properly required to effe 
that defeat. Even in the exception, as in the hy- 
thetical case we cited for Chile, the fa that we 
repudiate the sovereignty of a government does not 

mean that we do not accept axiomatically the 
sovereignty of a reacement government for the 
same nation. 

Consider a not-so-hythetical exame which may 
be mooted concerning the ^'Republic of South Africa." 
If that government as to promote general war in the 
region, not only is the sovereignty of the government 
lawfully open to nullification by its adversaries, in our 
view of ernational law, that opens the door for the 
dissolution of the nation itself as now constituted. 
Even then, whether as an ally of that government's 



I 

