comm unity of princie. 

Our immediate objeive, in this sub-rtion of our 
inquiry, is to determine, as a matter of princie and 
fa, whether the reestablishment of constitutional 
government in the United States subsumes the condi- 
tions and preconditions under which such a com- 
munity of princie might be direly established or 
approached. 

What we have just stated concerning the kernel of 
the problem  in the way in which we have stated that 
 imicitly solves all of the princied, generative 
problematics of our nation's Soviet foreign licy. 

The problem immediately associated with that im- 
ication is that up to this , neither a majority of 
the representatives and eleorate of the United States 
nor the corresnding forces of the Soviet Union have 
properly comprehended the fas un which such for- 
mulations must be premised. In this the writer is not 
speaking of the United States under Tory rule  in 
which case war between the two weres is irrepress- 
ibly imminent; he is writing as a skesman for the 
*new Federalist" or Whig majority forces of our na- 
tion. Even after eliminating Tory control of our gov- 
ernment, neither the Whig majority of the representa- 
tives and eleorate of our nation, nor the corresnd- 
ing forces in the Soviet Union have yet assimilated the 
form and degree of rigorous insight o this problem 
to a efficiently according to the proper imications. 
This we must promptly corre. 

The most prominent of the associated difficulties is 
that the representatives of the indicated forces in both 
republics have committed, in the main, the recung 
fallacy of prejudice which we have systematically de- 
fined in several locations above. That is to emphasize, 
they have viewed the existence of the distinguishing 
constitutional institutions of their nation more or less 
as self-evidently traditional They have not under- 
stood the inner, aive content of those institutions as 

 







 

(primarily) lawfully determined. They view those 

institutions as if they were to be defined as self-evident 
particles. 

To describe those prejudices in their worst expres- 
sion on both sides: 

In the United States, there persists a strong tenden- 
cy among the ingenuous to regard the institutions of 
capitalist ownership in terms of the progress of prime- 
val capitalist germs dated more or less from the Crea- 
tion. They know neither the fa, nor the significance 
of the fa that modern industrial capitalist forms 
were established by choice during the sixteenth cen- 
tury. Although that choice of capitalism had, in some 
part, the effe of bringing order out of chaotic proto- 
capitalist eruptions on a small scale beginning ap- 
proximately the thirteenth century in England, the 
roots of an order of law appropriate to creating indus- 
trial capitalist litical forms of ownership date from 
sixteenth century Tudor England. The layman does 
not know, or at best does not understand the imica- 
tions of the fa, that the establishment of the Constitu- 
tion and republic of the United States represented the 
first time in history that the institutions of industrial 
capitalist litical forms of ownership were secured in 
terms of a coherent body of constitutional law  that, 
which cannot be overemphasied, the American Revo- 
lution was an industrial capitalist revolution against 
British * 'pseudo-feudal" monetarism. 

Not understanding that the industrial capitalist 
forms of ownership were willfully established for a 
universal, lawful purse, it follows that ignorant pro- 
capitalist prejudice, viewing capitalist litical forms 
as merely traditional, attributes the good within those 
forms to be derived from an axiomatic capitalist form 
of '^rinsic goodness," and thus foolishly regards the 
absence of such special litical institutions as neces- 
sarily evil. 

Ignorant Communists' prejudice returns the comi- 
ment, so to speak. Although such Communists genu- 
fle before Marx's stipulation that industrial capital- 
ist development has been a great step forward in hu- 
man development  because this statement is attri- 
buted variously to Karl Marx and V.I. Lenin  they do 
not believe it. 

We are not speaking of Communists as a whole. The 
rule-of-thumb dividing line between elligent Com- 
munists and Soviet and leading fools calling them- 
selves "Communists*' is represented by the ongoing 
faional difference of approximately two decades to 
date, between those Soviet and Eastern European 
forces which regard the Rockefellers as exemifying 
the Soviets' adversary within the United States, and 
those or fools who suprt agreement for praice 
alliances with the **realist" Rockefellers against the 
**military-industrial comex/' 



The Soviet **Tories" associated with the Arbatov 
Dorine regard what Marx and Lenin defined as the 
progressive force within capitalist development as the 
adversary, and ally themselves with those anti-indus- 
trialist forces whose hegemony is the immediate 
cause and proper motive for socialist transforma- 
tions. 

What monstrous fools they are, those Soviet 
''Tories. Seized by their abominable stupidity, they 
profess themselves to be pursuing peace, when in 
praice they are contributing, from their side, to the 
preconditions for irreversible impulses leading dire- 
ly and early o general thermonuclear holocaust. 

To account for the insanity of Communists who sup- 
rt the lunatic Arbatov Dorine, one has to recog- 
nize principally the carry-forward of pseudo-feudal 
Physiocratic attitudes of peasant hostility against in- 
dustrial development. The stinking litical mess of 
Soviet agriculture, and those Communist Party strata 
who defend such bungling or who ally with the bung- 
lers, is the centerpiece of the problem. 

The agricultural budget for the projeed new Soviet 
an exemifies the way in which issues of Soviet do- 
mestic and foreign licy are ermixed. Granted, 
the lag in the technological development of Soviet 
agriculture is a crucial ernal problem, the principal 
ernal bottleneck of the Soviet economy. In that re- 
spe, the agricultural budget within the projeed 
Soviet Plan appears to concur with what this writer 
has prosed to the Soviets and others as a  of 
