

The Dorine of Atlanticism 



It is Lippmann's development of a literary defense 
for the concept of an Atlanticist dorine which 
properly next occupies our attention here. What is of 
most current relevance in this conneion is both the 
way in which he depends un sweeping falsifications 
of U.S. history to establish precedents for such a 
licy, and his reliance un geolitical and related 
reduionist and pragmatist methods in prosing the 
edifice. In his defes, he is superior, if only relatively 
speaking, to his present-day successors  descen- 
dants who are nonetheless governed by the thrust of 
the Lippmann conception as almost by a set of axioms. 

The gist of Lippmann's Atlanticism is this. He starts 
from the Pitt-Rothschild-Palmerston-Canning-Russell 
dorines identifiable as '^concert" and ^'influence*'  
but without ever accounting for the development of 
such innovations. He adds a persisting, thematic 
truism, to the effe that commitments and means 
must be kept in prortion. Those  us geolitical 
nostrums  are the axioms un which he premises 
the struure for which he argues. He then seeks a 
legal precedent for modern Atlanticist dorine in the 
concurrence of three U.S. Presidents in the adoption of 
the ** Monroe Dorine." He then makes a twofold 
argument concerning the - period. First, that 
the imied Atlanticist dorine as organically em- 
bedded in the *'Monroe Dorine*' was consistent U.S. 
foreign licy throughout that period. Second, that the 
failure of the U.S. to extend the proto-Atlanticist 
foreign licy o a global alliance with Britain after 
 was the failure of U.S. foreign licy during the 
- period. 

The whole argument is charaerized by the in- 
terweaving of assorted frauds: fallacy of comsition 
(usually willful), turning exicit licy statements of 
leading figures o an assertion of a  opsite to 
that anually made, and a generous dose of downright 
lying. Despite such criping defes, the result he 
construs by such means is essentially Atlanticist 
dorine as understood and operational down to the 
present  in U.S. licy, and the arguments he 



uses, while in some particulars peculiar to himself, 
are broadly identical with the arguments used by most 
pronents of the same dorine. 

First, Lippmann falsifies the most crucial fas of 
U.S. history of the period to  and from  to . 
This error may sometimes involve innocent ignorance 
or miseducation on Lippmann's part; more often, the 
text itself shows that Lippmann has consulted rele- 
vant sources which must have informed him of such 
error. Hence, we write not of mistakes, but falsifica- 
tions. Falsification not of erpretation alone, but 
falsification also of fa. 

Lippmann ignores entirely the issues causing and 
shaping the American Revolution, emoys fallacy of 
comsition to misrepresent Federalist U.S. foreign 
licy during the - period, and brushes aside 
the War of . He does not go as far as Charles A. 
Beard, probably disagreed with Thurman Arnold's 
wilder distortions of the Constitution, and must have 

been disgusted by such later revisionist writers as 
William A. Williams. Even so, he belongs to the spec- 
trum of Fabian revisionism respeing U.S. history. 

As we have listed the  above, the  of 
departure he emoys for arguing the case for 
Atlanticism is the  **Monroe Dorine." In 
charaerizing that convention, he emoys three lies 
and one further major distortion. He lies in represent- 
ing the *'Monroe Dorine" as a de fao British-U.S. 
alliance against Holy Alliance ervention in the 
Western Hemisphere. He lies in asserting that such a 
view of the Monroe Dorine was in U.S. national in- 
terests at that time. He lies in accounting for the pro- 
cess by which it was originated. He distorts the views 
of U.S. leaders, notably John Quincy Adams, govern- 
ing the reasons for its adoption. 

The Holy Alliance was a British creation and a 
British instrument for governing the European con- 
tinent and Mediterranean region. It was a British 
contrivance of the form known as a "concert"  the 
''concert of Europe.'* Apart from the British manage- 
ment of the ''checks and balances" built o the 







 

arrangement, the aual fine-tuning of ernal control 
of the Holy Alliance was established by the Barings 
and taken over before  by the House of Rothschild. 
The Rothschilds effeively controlled the credit of 
every member of the Holy Alliance and direly con- 
trolled their bought-and-paid-for puppet Metternich. 
By controlling the credit of nations, with the aid of the 
monstrous debt of the City of London imsed un 
Europe under Treaty of Vienna conditions, the City of 
London determined the ability of the weres to field 
armies and to undertake other major enterprises. 
From the British stand of its controlling erest 
in the Holy Alliance, Canning^s prosed treaty with 
the United States was ended in effe to extend the 
Holy Alliance's ''concert of Europe" to the Western 
Hemisphere. 

U.S. hemispheric licy up to  was for the 
establishment of viable independent republics 
throughout the hemisphere, republics which would 
remove the perilous conditions of military and 
economic insecurity flowing from European weres' 
controlling presence within the hemisphere. In a 
broad sense the U.S. had a licy, shared by the 
Federalists and also largely by Jefferson, of 
recognizing viable or probably viable newly created 
republics in the hemisphere  analogous to Soviet 
licies of a similar effe relative to the present 
developing seor. 

The Canning prosal was direly contrary to U.S. 
licy and erests at that time. Under the almost- 
"Wilsonian" sentimental hycrisy of the 'Tanning- 
Rush" draft forwarded to Monroe, the U.S. was of- 
fered the face-saving formula which has been passed 
down for the edification of credulous schoolchildren 
and others to the present day. In fa, the praical 
content of the draft was to secure U.S. consent to free 
and virtually exclusive operations of the British fleet 
in the Western Hemisphere, and to ace the 
struggling republics of Latin America at the mercy of 
the British fleet and the Baring and Rothschild 
financial houses. 
