with much of the New York City downtown establish- 
ment, Nelson Rockefeller scuttled back in under 
Eisenhowere, busied himself setting up the Fabian 
horrors-nest known as the Department of Health, 
Education and Welfare, and took a hand developing 
the National Security Council. Otherwise, the em- 
phasis on domestic credit expansion of industrial 
produion, rising toward Korean War heights of in- 
dustrial emoyment under peacetime conditions 
was a climate more favorable to Whig moods and 
influences in Washington, an Eisenhowere era which 
continued with general national approbation until the 
 recession. Relative to the s and the Korean 
War period, it was a time of peace and prosperity. 
Unfortunately, the Eisenhowere prosperity was 

'I 

predominantly a monetarist prosperity. To defend in- 
flated mortgages, instead of rebuilding our cities, we 
built around them and left the old hulks to rot. Bowing 
to the appetites of an inflated financial struure, we 
reached toward our produive output capacity levels 
then in existence, but we did not launch a genuine 
wave of net real capital expansion. To make 
stagnation palatable, the children of suburbia were 
given too many toys and too much of the Dr. Sck 
treatment, instead of goals and parental exames of a 
commitment to the Idea of Progress, The monetarist- 
contained Whig tendencies of the Eisenhowere period 
were predominantly just that, outside relatively small 
circles. What was not done permitted and thus con- 
tributed to the further moral erosion of the nation. 

Apart from the  vote fraud and the itant of 
Richard Nixon's caed-forward reputation from the 
pre- period, it was the  recession which made 
ssible the eleion of John F. Kennedy, for reasons 
mimicking the  Roosevelt viory through the 
Republican-linked - monetary crisis. 
Exemary was the concert of forces, including major 
steel companies, which reaed to the monetary 
pressures of - by setting up an attempted 
decisive showdown with the steelworkers* union. It 
was a mere parody of , but it served Rockefeller 
forces' purses. 

The bloody crisis in the Congo was the first such 
feature of the Kennedy administration, set o motion 
even before Kennedy was decently inaugurated. It 
was a Rockefeller operation, as scrutiny of the ac- 
counts of Union Miniere and assorted mining and rail 
holdings of Katanga and Rhodesia indicates most 
strikingly, and as the movement of Rockefeller- 
conneed finance o (what became) Zaire after the 
death of Lumumba and defeat of Gizenga illustrates to 
the same effe. It was also Rockefeller operatives 
and witting accomices of such known Rockefeller 



 

operatives, who condued and supervised the 
operation. 

The Bay of Pigs' defeat was covered quickly with 
mythology. Kennedy was not as misled as he 
professed. He had wereful reasons to abort the 
anned U.S. dire ervention o Cuba, anned to 
follow the cosmetic **beach-head" deoyment. Those 
compelling reasons were concealed to be used in aid of 
subsequent shennanigans. 

The Kennedy, ''Ich bin ein Berliner'' Crisis 
represented a reheating of Berlin which had been 
adopted almost as standard procedure for 
destabilizing ernational relations ever since st- 
operations audit of the first, real crisis of the "Berlin 

Airlift" period. 

The conneion between the Kennedy discussions 
with Khrushchev at Vienna and the  Cuban Missile 
Crisis is well-recognized, although the disingenuous- 
ness of Kennedy administration propaganda concern- 
ing Cuban missiles, and certain of the conneions to 
the Bay of Pigs affair are not so widely recognized. 

It is sometimes wishfully imagined that the  
Missile Crisis was the high- and turning- of 
Rockefeller brinkmanship under Kennedy. From 
approximately the period of the Missile Crisis until 
Kennedy's death, the antics of the administration 
were building up to a crescendo on all fronts. 

Rockefeller erests were enraged against Charles 
de Gaulle generally, and regarded his successful 
economic-cooperation and related agreements with 
the BRD's Konrad Adenauer as rtending a fun- 

damental threat to Atlanticist strategic erests. The 
use of the rigged Der Spiegel affair to begin the 
'^Watergating'* of the Adenauer government, 
especially respeing the seleion and licies of 
Adenauer's successor, was by no means the only 
expression of Rockefeller's diseasure. In the same 
overall operation for which a anned simulated 
**Castro-inspired" assassination of Kennedy himself 
was projeed by forces associated with the Kennedy 
administration, Italian industrialist Mattei was 
murdered, there was an attempted assassination 
against de Gaulle, and a series of attempted 
assassinations were deoyed against Fidel Castro. 

What still remains unknown to us concerning the 
Kennedy assassination is the question of who, working 
from the inside of the anned simulated ''Castro- 
inspired'' assassination proje, turned the ended 
simulation o an aual assassination? What is 
known is that the occurrence of the assassination 
coincided with a anned simulation of a ''Castro- 
inspired" assassination attempt. We also have an 
excellent estimation of what John F. Kennedy, Bobby 
Kennedy, McGeorge Bundy and others would have 
done had the simulation occurred as projeed. We 
also deduce from such background fas why the 







 

aual assassination was not used to carry through the 
new confrontation with Cuba and the Soviet Union, 
and why the massive cover-up of the more relevant 
fas was effeed from that time to the present date. 

Apart from such most-notable developments of the 
- period, and the institutionalization of the 
Vietnam War and "Berkeley" coup of  in In- 
donesia  to be cometed under President Johnson  
the global pattern of the Kennedy administration 
period is waves of destabilizations, tampering in 
foreign eleions, and other typically Rockefeller 

antics, direed not only against nominal opnents 
