Kennedy machine's neo-Fabian Institute for Policy 
Studies. That is also the significance of recognizing 
the slum as the breeding-ace of the criminal mind. 
Although the slum has no exclusive claims to that 
funion  as the cases of Mark Rudd and Marcus 
Raskin illustrate at first glance  it is the fa that the 
slums are rinsically seedbeds of rabid heteronomy, 
which exains the phenomenon and illustrates how 
this princie of mens rea is to be apied to criminals 
of other historical social origins. 

Refeng to what often at first appears as inex- 
icable irony to the naive observer  that Rocke- 
feller and associated erests have wittingly created 
terrorism and slum riot-tentials by various covert 
and semi-covert operations  as we summarized ear- 
lier, the most efficient, rule-of-thumb overview of that 
phenomenon is that in this way the Rockefeller forces 
have followed the precedent of Wallenstein, in at- 
tempting to mobilize a horde of social decay's vaga- 
bonds as the battering ram of chaos and terror, to 
undermine opsing forces which might not otherwise 
be successfully confronted by straightforward deliber- 
ative (e.g., parliamentary) confrontation of opsing 
licies. 

More commonly, as in the case of the lawless fron- 
tiersman who is the Turneresque hero or anti-hero of 
our ^'westerns" and our *'feudal," *'Roman" and 
^'prohibition gangster" parodies of those ''westerns," 
the pervasive, endemic problem of heteronomy is an 
ermediate condition *'this side of the law," or just 
slightly outside the bounds of lawful outlooks. The 
relevant movies and TV dramas rarely attempt to r- 
tray the criminal as he was and is in real life. At the 
most, he is rtrayed as a **mad dog" with no inner 
personality. More commonly, among the principal 
dramatis personae, he is a "sympathetic charaer," 
engaged in reconciling his deeper goodness with an in- 







auality-unexained propensity (^'weakness") for 
perpetrating *'bad deeds'' and ''keeping bad com- 
pany/* The significance of such "entertainments** lies 
not in the fiional charaers of the drama  who 
never did nor could have existed as represented  but 
in the heteronomy of those outwardly peaceful, law- 
abiding folk who are purrtedly being entertained. 
Their criminal impulses are being afforded a fantasy- 
expression, a safety valve. What they patronize as 
entertainment reveals their inner selves. 

The problem of the criminal's mind is that he does 
not efficiently know right from wrong. He may know 
of a proscription, but this proscription he sees only in 
its penal imications (if that), and not in respe of 
such knowledge being conneed in a meaningful way 
to his willful impulses for praice. The problem is 
more exaly illustrated by refeng to those neo- 
Fabian ''social work" programs of "prison reform,*' 
in which "radicals'* working in "in-prison** or "out- 
patient** halfway house "sensitivity group" pro- 
grams, "liberate" the felonious personality by condi- 
tioning him to an "attitudinal change*' in outlook. 
Through such "reform," the felon sees his problem as 
one of "struggle against oppression.*' Since the neo- 
Fabian "radicals*' steering this work, either as licy- 
makers, administrators of programs, or operatives, 
are themselves advocates of philosophically fascist 
radical advocacy of heteronomy, the only ssible 
effe of such  to use ain words  "brainwashing" 
of the criminal's mind is to weaken the last categori- 
cal form of moral restra which has heretofore 
checked his behavior. 

The same neo-Fabian dorine has been deoyed 
through the psychological and social work professions 
concerning analogous reforms of our "mental health" 
programs. Since insanity (psychosis) and acute 
neurosis are a special expression of heteronomy, the 
effe of the neo-Fabian radical's "reform,"  stop 
"oppressing" the insane by telling them that they are 
insane  has the effe of reinforcing the mental dis- 
order in the manner demonstrated by the case of 
Heidelberg Mental Patients' Colleive. In that experi- 
mental program, the hard core of about two hundred 
ordinarily afflied young mental patients were 
turned o a "liberation movement*'  modeled un 
the "lesbian feminist movement" lines. This lawfully 
produced the hard-core psychotics who made up the 
initiating bulk of "expendables" of the Baader- 
Meinhof terrorist gang, and some of the worst cri- 
minal elements within the West German Maoist or- 
ganizations (KPD, KBW). The effe of such "re- 
forms," as in the cited case of penal reforms  and 
also "halfway house sensitivity conditioning *' of drug 
addis  by making heteronomy a sitive litical 
princie through fostered "reaion formation,*' des- 
troys those residual, fragile resources on which the 



 

psychotic and acute neurotic depend for their - 
tential recovery. 

It may be true in an imrtant sense that society 
creates its criminals, its lunatics, and its drug addis. 
However, to be a criminal, a lunatic, a drug addi  
including a heavy marijuana user  is to step morally 
outside human society. These as are not immora/ be- 
cause of existing laws. Laws do not in and of them- 
selves make behavior immoral, but only illegal. The 
criminal and lunatic are immoral persons, because 
they have disassociated themselves morally from the 
human race. The drug addi, the heavy marijuana 
user, have willfully rejeed the very essence of hu- 
manity respeing themselves  the sacred egrity 
of their mental creative tentialities. They have 
stepped outside society o heteronomy. They have 
permitted themselves to be degraded o the in- 
human condition of moral outlaws. It is not only in- 
sufficient, but hideously immoral to leave the matter 
of criminality, lunacy and drug addiion at the  
of accounting for "how social conditions made me so.*' 
It is imrtant for society to understand and corre 
such problematic processes, to the extent of its ability 
to do so. However, if the individual criminal, lunatic or 
drug addi uses that same analysis to argue, "there- 
fore, I am a..., and that is my fate,*' such argument 
amounts to moral suicide. Such an individual is 
morally dead. 

It is only another step to reaion formation, to step 
beyond the immorality of such indifferentism, to pro- 
se that "since society has made me this way. 
society must accord to my determined nature the 
same degree of rights of self-expression as everyone 
else's.** That is the criminal mind made conscious, the 
true wensrea. 

Insofar as efficient law and morality coincide, the 
litical approach to such cases of the criminal mind 
is obvious in princie. The broader problem, the 
