solute (national) profit, the effe of such diversions of 
wealth is to corresndingly slow the rate of growth 
below its tential. However, as long as this waste, 
^'shrinkage** of absolute profit, is not capitalized as 
fiitious wealth, no other problem results. No in- 
flationary tendency results from such government 
monetary aivity. 

On the contrary, the tendency of such credit ex- 
pansion is deflationary. A healthy monetary system of 
a capitalist economy is always associated with a 
secular decline in price indices. This aspe of the 
matter leads direly o the second approximation of 
the immediate inquiry. 

As long as capitalist development is governed by the 
princies of technological progress, the realization of 
profit as extension of the produive forces includes 
substantial realization of more advanced produive 
technologies. The increased average energy flux per 
capita in produion and household-and-related 
consumption signifies a relative cheapening per 
capita rate of total output by measure of the values of 
the per capita rate of total output of the preceding 
period. 

This has a twofold consequence. 

In respe to the capitalist economy taken as a 
whole, this deflationary tendency is nothing but pure 
advantage. Not only does it provide the indispensable 
basis for raising the material and cultural conditions 
of life of the pulation, but, relative to current real 
reacement values of capital formation, it con- 
tributes to the acceleration of the rate of absolute 
profit for the economy as a whole. 

However, relative to the nominal, back-capitalized 
valuations of held-over rtions of fixed capital and 
inventories, the margin of deflation represents a 
shrinking (discounting) of such held-over values. As 
the ratio of such capitalized, held-over nominal values 
becomes large in respe to the capitalization of the 



 

value of current real output (rising organic com- 
sition" of capitals) , the real gain in the rate of profit 
from new technologies tends to appear as the cause for 
a larger loss in nominal capital than such profit in- 
creases represent. 

The attempt to evade discountings of overvalued 
*'bad*' capital transforms the margin of nominal 
overvaluation o fiitious capital. The continued 
accumulation of fiitious capitalizations leads to a 
turning , at which the apparent effes of 
technological progress represent a threat to large 
rtions of total nominal holdings. This leads to a 
decline in the ratio of real investment, in favor of 
speculative movements of incomes from one part of 
the economy to another. Even without other com- 
ications, that process, roducing increasing ten- 
dencies toward relative stagnation o the process of 
real investment, causes a corresnding degree of 
apparent "overproduion'* in the economy as a whole 
 and the other phenomena of a capitalist cyclical 
crisis. 

It is to be stressed, as a corollary of this im- 
mediately preceding discussion, that under the con- 
ditions in which the orderly deflationary discounting 
of inflated nominal capital holdings occurs, as well as 
the process of technologically veored realization of 
the largest rtion of absolute profit as extended 
reproduion in balanced development of the 
produive forces, it is imssible for the capitalist 
system to experience any form of devastating ernal 
problems in its economy. 

It was Karl Marx's systematic estimation, in his 
four-volume Capital, that the capitalist economy was 
incapable of disciining itself litically to meet those 
two conditions. Marx's specification of the necessity 
for socialist transformation is that the vital erest of 
a capitalist society required such a transformation at 
the  that capitalist litical refusal to meet such 
requirements represented a major threat to that vital 
erest. That vital erest is represented by the 
conditions of extended investment of real absolute 
profit we have just specified above. Although, as we 
have already shown earlier, Marx was incorre 
historically in analyzing the totality of the causes for 
this litical difficulty within capitalist society, his 
location of the industrial capitalists' susceptibility to 
such a litical incompetence is direly relevant to 
understanding the Rockefeller problem. 

The key word is heteronomy, or what Marx terms 
the ''anarchy" of capitalist accumulation. 

Insofar as the capitalist litical class defines its 
licies in terms of the national economy taken as a 
whole, in terms of increasing the rate of absolute real 
profit through technologically veored extended 
reproduion, the capitalist system has no immediate 







 

ernal flaw relative to the mode of produion or to 
the republican form of capitalist society. However, 
insofar as individual capitalist erest is fiitiously 
defined as that of defending the fiitious nominal 
values of fragmented private holdings (capital), this 
heteronomic impulse direly conflis cumulatively 
with the vital erests both of the society and of the 
vital class erest of industrial capitalists as a whole. 
Excluding for the moment the aggravation of the 
problem by monetarists' forces, it is that iieteronomic 
impulse which is the dire and sole cause for the 
existence of an ordered depression-cycle within in- 
dustrial-capitalist economy. 

Although the Federalists did not understand the 
systematic imications of this problem, they clearly 
perceived the phenomenon itself, and prosed 
sitive provisions for coping with such a threat to the 
vital national erests. This recognition of the 
phenomenon was not accidental; as economists, the 
leading Federalists were in princie far advanced 
beyond a dishonest Adam Smith or muddled David 
Ricardo, and had studied the danger in conneion 
with the American struggle against the form of the 
problem represented by British monetarism. As 
Spannaus rerts, Thomas Jefferson prosed a 
periodic repudiation of debts as national licy; 
Jefferson was clearly sensible of the problem in fa, 
but clearly not of its proper remedy. Alexander 
Hamilton moved in the direion of the approximate 
solution on several counts. This writer and his party 
embodied the thrust of that **Hamiltonian*' solution 
within the programmatic materials advanced during 
