and adversaries, but against governments and parties 
that were nominally U.S. allies. 

The further notable, foreign-licy and related 
heritages of the Kennedy administration include the 
following. () A sweeping reorganization of the 
Atlanticists' global elligence establishment, 
deemphasizing the role of elligence agencies under 
government control, in favor of neo-Fabian and linked 
Interl private litical elligence and elligence 
operations capabilities. McGeorge Bundy is among 
those traditional Rockefeller associates key in that 
process, () An acceleration of drastic licy changes 
within the U.S. Justice Department. Bobby Kennedy 
was at the center of this, but McGeorge Bundy, both in 
the administration and later through a Ford Foun- 
dation base, is of more substantial imrtance, as are 
the Russell Sage Foundation and its networks, us the 
Fab ian law firms associated with the liberal wings of 
the Democratic and Republican parties' "Eastern 
Establishment" bases in Washington and New York 
City. () An upgrading of the Department of Health, 
Education and Welfare as a base of neo-Fabian 
"destabilization" and related elligence-style op- 
erations against both foreign allies and U.S. insti- 
tutions and the U.S. pulation. The same hierarchy 
of foundations, law firms and key individuals involved 
in the Justice Department operation are prominent in 
this conneion. () The institutionalizing of a future 
licy of "deindustrializing" the United States and our 
allies (e.g., "Trie Revolution"). 

The Kennedy administration represents a first 
attempt to launch the kind of entionally-decisive 
successive confrontations with the Soviet leadership, 
along lines outlined in Henry Kissinger's earlier brink- 
manship dorinal piece, for which the present Carter 
Administration is an inflated parody, down to Jimmy 
Carter's cultivation of a "Kennedy coiffure." 

As to the overall charaer of the Rockefellers' 
Kennedy administration, the following erseing 
considerations are causal and on the surface. 

As Henry Kissinger's famous  paper attests  
the document which associated him with the fiional 
"Dr. Strangelove"  the development of what U.S. 
Atlanticists viewed as a credible Soviet strategic de- 



terrent capability, combined with the imications of a 
projeed development of ercontinental ballistic 
missiles during the "Sputnik" period, pushed the 
Atlanticists' Utopians toward a strategic licy of em- 
oying psychological warfare on a strategic scale. 

This required a series of adventurous bluffs. In each 
bluff the U.S. litical command must appear to have 
become sufficiently lunatic to launch thermonuclear 
war if the Soviets did not yield some significant con- 
cession. The rational, hofied Soviets, confronted 

with such lunacy, were supsed to make some signifi- 
cant concession in the direion of the confrontation- 
ists' demand. Next, using various concoed pretexts, 
the operation would be repeated, either with open 
thermoculear confrontation, or the h of such con- 
frontation lurking visibly in the background. By a 
succession of such bluffs, it was prosed that the 
Soviets could be induced to retreat each time to a rela- 
tively more-weakened strategic sture, so that the 
ratio of tential resistance-effeiveness to the next 
would be reduced. 

By such a succession of confrontations, the Soviet 
defense capability would be eroded, converging 
toward a level representing an acceptable risk of pen- 
alty for war from the Atlanticist stand. As a by- 
produ of this process against the Soviet leadership, 
the other governments of the OECD and developing 
seors would be left exsed and tefied, and thus 
malleable in face of Rockefellers' immediate auster- 
ity demands against them. 

The future tential of Soviet economic and defense 
capabilities, the emergence of centrifugal tendencies 
on economic and monetary issues away from lowere 
Manhattan among Europeans, and the  recession, 
represented a configuration of developments and r- 
tents recommending some early draconian measures 
of counteraion by the Atlanticists. An imemen- 
tation of the successive-confrontation-scenario 
against the Soviet leadership was the obvious key- 
stone element for a broad range of measures and insti- 
tutional changes. 

The background to the Missile Crisis and related 
Kennedy capers is identified sufficiently by two note- 
worthy fas. The first is the fraudulent "missile gap" 
theme of the  Kennedy campaign trail. The second 
is New York State Governor Nelson Rockefeller's 
campaign for building air-raid shelters. () 

Someone, shall we say, had induced Khrushchev et 
al. to go against Soviet military dorine, to opt for a 
reduion of the "conventional" war-fighting capa- 



. In a war, air-raid shelters around target cities would simy be 
tombs for the incinerated and suffocated dead, but the duping of the 
pulation o relying un such useless objes convinces an adver- 
sary government that the U.S. pulation is to that degree litically 
conditioned  however credulously  to permit its government to 
make a confrontation. 



Mp;//www.d)®(Buirgi(gfe.(S®[ffli/ 







bility in preference for a shift to a missile-centered 
**mutual strategic deterrence" capability. In fa, 
contrary to the fraudulent '*missile gap'* propaganda 
of the  Kennedy campaign trail, the Soviets had so 
far developed only a token missile force relative to the 
U.S. capabilities. This Khrushchev period licy 
blunder left the Soviets for the ermediate-term in a 
relatively weakened strategic sition, which Atlanti- 
cists might exoit in the near-term or probably 
never. 

Ironically, the consequence of the - Kennedy 
capers was to discredit forever the prosal of a 
**mutual strategic deterrence'* sture and U.S.- 
Soviet agreements within Soviet leading circles. The 
Soviet return to a Clausewitzian sture is associated 
 somewhat ironically  with the abrupt fall of N.S. 
Khrushchev. As one ought to know, Soviet agriculture 
has been a weak  in the litical sition of Soviet 
officials of Khrushchev's and Brezhnev's career his- 
tory, such that it is difficult to assess from the outside 
how the combination of unsuccessful agricultural 
adventurism, unsuccessful sturing, the context of a 
