**thermodynamically" master. 

The bounding of European feudalism, both in 

respe of extent, and in respe of ssibilities for 
more ensive utilization of relatively local primary 
resources for agricultural development in the existing 
modes, meant that feudalism doomed itself to a 
threatened genocidal collapse of European culture  
as old Rome had collapsed before it  by virtue of its 
organic social constitution and exicit law. Although 
the role of the Bardi banking houses and others accele- 
rated, mediated that genocidal collapse in a special 
way in creating the preconditions in which the Black 
Death was inevitable, the Black Death of the four- 
teenth century is properly seen as crucial, absolute 
disproof of the kind of notion of universal natural 
law advanced on behalf of feudal relations by the 
thirteenth and fourteenth century scholastics 
(Aristotelians). 

The development of the rudiments of proto-capital- 
ist culture, neo-atonic humanism, did not occur 
simy because some bright fellows scratched about 
concoing hythetical alternatives to a failed hege- 



. Hence, the Naderite radical "environmentalist" has precisely 
the morality of a lowere beast, a parody of our baboon-like, humanoid 
Pleistocene ancestors ! 



Mp;//www.d)®(Buirgi(gfe.(S®[ffli/ 







 

monic conception of universal law. The same notion of 
causality we stipulated as required by such evidence 
as the special, higher-order physical space of 
asmas, apies precisely to this problem. 

Although feudal society was nominally fixed in its 
technology, this should not be understood as an abso- 
lute fixing. Even under feudalism man is not in fa a 
beast, even though he is by and large juridically 
relatively degraded to a beast-like condition. 

The charaeristic feature of all living systems is 
negentropy. This feature of living processes is caed 
over in human development  hylozoically  in the 
form of the charaeristic ordering princie of human 
willful behavior. This involves not only the tential 
negentropy embodied in abstra conceptions of tech- 
nological innovations, but the tendency of each suc- 
cessful mode of human praice to produce a 
charaeristic social surus, a smaller or larger mar- 
gin of produ above what is required to reace the 
means of produion and consumption consumed (as 
aual or imputable costs) in the course of producing 
the whole output. As Rosa Luxemburg correly em- 
phasized, in correing Lenin's essential, charaer- 
istic blunder in economic analysis, without social sur- 
us, man would not have progressed beyond the stage 
of the paleolithic scraper. All viable forms of human 
culture (technology) are charaerized by thermo- 
dynamic negentropy in respe of the existence of a 
charaeristic tendency for social surus, in the 
sitive, self-subsisting process of self-expansion of 
that process involving the relationship of useful output 
to these inputs imputable as social costs of the pro- 
duion of that output. 

In other terminology, apying the notion of 
capitalist profit (industrial-capitalist profit) retro- 
speively as an aid in preliminary description of 
previous modes of produion, the existence of some 
form of '^profit" as charaeristic of the mode of pro- 
duion is the indispensable, charaeristic feature of 
all successful human modes of produion and exis- 
tence. 

The ^'thermodynamic" problem  which also exists 
in the more-exicitly biological form in the 
necessarily negentropic ordering of the biosphere  is 
that the limits of a successful relatively-fixed mode of 
produion are not defined by an absolutely-fixed 
mode of "zero-profit" produion, but by the fa that 
the rate of increase of the charaeristic rate of ''pro- 
fit" becomes manifestly insufficient to keep pace with 
the increasing social costs of produion arising from 
relative deetion of the existing set of technologi- 
cally defined primary resources. 

The limiting feature of societies is not that they fail 
to make some technological progress, but that the rate 
of technological progress fails to keep pace with the 



social cost effes of the deetion of the primary re- 
sources defined by existing technology. 

What therefore is required constantly is a higher 
rate of technological progress, to the effe that the ex- 
tent of defined primary resources is increasing more 
rapidly than it is being deeted in terms of pre- 
viously dominant technology. The rate of "profit  
used in the specified way as a term of description  is 
the margin of "energy" available to the society to 
advance beyond praice in the existing technological 
forms. 

Provided we emoy technology in its broadest 
imications, as proper to and demanded by the case, 
the basis for defining the general princies required 
is established. 

The most apparent problem faced by societies is the 
problem of direion of utilization of this profit. If the 
profit is direed in its realization toward those forms 
of technological change which converge on a world- 
line of increasing rates of negentropy in produive re- 
lations, then the problem of human existence can be 
solved within the framework of the institutions of that 
society. However, if the profit is diverted away from 
convergence un that world-line, the institutions 
which effe such a diversion thus dire the society 
toward its collapse. 

To the extent that one can approximate aual 
human history by the hythetical case, the progress 
of humanity is represented by a special kind of world- 
line. 

The first-order charaeristic of this world-line is 
that it represents an optimal "path" of rising negen- 
tropy, in respe to advancement of technology at an 
optimal, more rapid rate than mankind is exhausting 
"primary resources" and other preestablished pro- 
duive resources as defined by previous technology. 

This world-line does not depi something which 
