. A Federal Court system which abandons its obligation to 
measure judgments according to that truth, which bows before the 
empty fa of sovereignty or expedient arbitration, has in fa opened 
the doors to high treason against this nation and its Constitution. 



 

does not rightly regard the "constriion" on outlook 
and method of the humanist state as oppressive. For 
without general progress, the state (the society) can- 
not afford the individual members the means for in- 
creasing their capacity and expression of freedom. 

The latter is most ignantly expressed usually in 
conneion with religious belief. Each individual has 
so much life to live. When it is finished, what has it 
meant? If that individual can but contribute during 
life a succession of contributions to the general techno- 
logical and related advancement of society  
creating, transmitting, praicing new technologies  
then his or her life stands as one of immortal imr- 
tance to the society. His or her contributions represent 
the added building of the foundation of future pro- 
gress, an addition which will remain as long as the 
society progresses. Without freedom in the humanist 
sense, the individual in society has no consciously de- 
fensible premise on which to say to his fellows: "I 
have a right to live as a free man, because the ad- 
vancement of our society would be less without my 
creative contributions.** 

Hence, consider the or young raving, homosexual 
marijuana addi protesting against a fission-were 
ant in behalf of this or that obscure, tiny lowere form 
of life, who declares, *'I have the right to do my own 
thing. My opinion is just as good as yours ! " He is not a 
human being in the aive, moral sense, but only a 
or, wretched sinner who has consented to reduce 
himself to a beast-like moral condition. His passing 
would perhaps cause some to weep, not because he 
was in any moral sense a human being, but because 
his tential to have become one was so obscenely 
wasted. 

Against this background, we turn our attention now 
to the disease, nominalism. We shall see in this connec- 
tion, and in respe to certain crucial matters of 
foreign licy, the areas we have covered in the 
preceding epistemological outline have an indis- 
pensable use for most efficiently resolving not only the 
most critical and dangerous problems imsed un 
us by Atlanticist Dorine, but for solving the urgent 
questions otherwise aced before us. 



P^OF-T(o)(Q)llOT. OEM© E^iD©i 



Monetarism and Nominalism 



At this , we erlate an observation 
which is not only imrtant to mastering all of 
the conceptions and included problem-subjes set 
forth in this licy paper as a whole, but also of 
probably considerable imrtance in guiding the rea- 
der to focus more surely the highly praical imr- 
tance of the preceding, unavoidably extended episte- 
mological review, in respe to grounding the more 
obviously, more visibly praical-litical focus to 
which this is direed. 

Not only the proverbial man-in-the-street, but also 
the overwhelming majority of the world's principal 
and other national litical figures, do not understand 
what are in fa the ABCs of "how litics really 
works." Respeing the arts of statecraft, certain 
aspes of the techniques of the litician's crafty the 
writer could benefit from the knowledge, experience 
and counsel to that effe from many professional 
litical figures. Nonetheless, insofar as the processes 
underlying crucial litical developments are con- 
cerned, the typical leading strata of national litical 
figures and parties have yet no rigorous insight o 
the determining ernal features of the overall liti- 
cal process. 

This may be momentarily resented by some, as 
what they regard for a moment as an insufferably 
arrogant statement of the matter. Even so, they dare 
not permanently brush our statement aside. In- 
creasingly, most notably during the recent three years 
to date, key litical strata of various faions of 
nations which presently include most of these of this 



world, have, although for the most part begrudgingly, 
recognized some special quality, some aive prin- 
cie of unusual elleual were, behind the ef- 
feiveness of the special approach to major topics of 
strategy and licy emoyed by the writer's 
associates. Notably, respeing the most crucial 
issues of strategy and licy during the past decade, 
we have been overwhelmingly corre with respe to 
the contrary perceptions of leading forces of all not- 
able faions within the United States, Western 
Europe, the developing seor, and the CMEA nations. 

This litical situation is the typical problem of 
scientific progress. 

The growing curiosity this reluantly perceived 
fa of our competence has evoked among various 
leading circles, has in turn impelled significant r- 
tions of such strata, both here and abroad, o pro- 
sing or briefly adopting various, wrong exan- 
ations concerning the nature of our litical method 
and suspeed special external sources of our unusual 
competencies. The following among those mistaken 
opinions are relevant to the broader praical  at 
hand here. 

The notion that an organization of such limited 
physical means could manifest, repeatedly, such 
striking competence concerning vital issues of U.S. 
domestic and foreign licy was so insufferable in its 
imications to many leading strata, that they more 
credulously accepted at one time or another the cal- 
culated slanders circulated chiefly through neo- 
Fabian networks, to the effe that our organization 



 







was a front for variously the U.S. Central Intelligence 
Agency, some groups of Chicago industrialists, the 
Soviet KGB, a group of Third World governments, or 
