collapse and fragment overall, as a result of the 
erosion and defeat of the Hohenstaufens' role and 
were, the Ostmark emerged from the shambles as 
the Osterreich  Austria  and in course of time 
came under the merged Burgundian-Hapsburg- 
Castilian house of Hapsburg, and the Hapsburg's 
patrons, the Fugger-dominated system of wereful 
monetarist bankers. 

In the course of the combined feudal collapse and 
struggling proto-capitalist emergences of the period 
from the end of the thirteenth through middle of the 
seventeenth centuries, and especially from the fif- 
teenth century, this historical freak known as Austria 
became a major aspe of the growing were of 
monetarist forces  Italian bankers, the German 
bankers typified by the south-German Fugger were, 
the Netherlands bankers, and  following   
growing City of London influences. From the close of 
the fifteenth century through the middle of the seven- 
teenth, these monetarist weres and their litical 
partners, the bucolic obscenities known as Castile and 
Hapsburg Austria, were the horror and shame of all 
European culture, the principal mediating source of 
every monstrosity European culture endured during 
that period and has inherited from that time down to 
the present day. 

The Hapsburgs were originally produs of that area 
of south German culture from which they as well as 
the Hohenzollern and Hohenstaufen houses had 
originated, an historical curiosity  but not an 
historical accident  which aids the historian in 
focusing on the divergencies expressed by the 
histories of the evolution of those houses as they 
shifted their base of were away from their locations 
of origin. The sixteenth century Hapsburgs incorra- 
ted three ruling houses under the Hapsburg name: the 
Austrian Hapsburgs, the blight formerly known as the 
fifteenth century House of Burgundy (Charles the 
Bold), and the social cancer which the fifteenth 
century house of Castile-Aragon had become under 
the evil guidance of Ferdinand. Those latter two added 
elements of the Hapsburgs ayed a key part in 
shaping the history of Europe. 

The notable features acquired from Castile-Aragon 
and Burgundy persist as outstanding charaeristics 
of the Austrian Hapsburgs and Old Vienna down to the 

days of the Adlers, von Mises, the **energeticists** 
around Ernest Mach, Rudolf Hilferding, and Parvus 
sub-agents N. Bukharin and Riazanov. They account, 
on the one side for the presence of such sitive fea- 
tures of Vienna as Mozart, Beethoven, Schubert, and 
Hugo Wolf. They account for such fruitful personali- 
ties as Ludwig Boltzmann and Erwin Schrodinger. 
They account for the moral tragedy of the gifted but 



elleually aborted Gustav Mahler. They account 
for the evil represented by Arnold Schonberg, the 
Vienna Circle, and the appropriateness of Old Vienna 
of the s and early s as the headquarters for the 
Rockefeller-created and always fascist-headed Inter- 
l organization. 

Charles V, the first Hapsburg monarch of Spain and 
the or fool the Fugger*s finance put o the st of 
Holy Roman Emperor, was a creature pathetically 
ruled by his conceptually petty (if grandiose) dynastic 
delusions. He was elleually only slightly above a 
modern scion of John D. Rockefeller II. He was there- 
fore more easily ruled by the cabal of monetarist 
bankers, led by his patron, the Fugger house, who con- 
trolled the skyrocketing Hapsburg debt, and the spigot 
of credit through which Charles's dynastic enterprises 

were molded. 
It is the Burgundian and Castilian features of the 

Hapsburg charaer which are notably relevant, as 
differentia specifica, to the Hapsburg side of Haps- 
burg licy in general and in Austria in particular. 

The fifteenth century House of Burgundy controlled 
the rtions of (principally) France and Switzerland 
then known as Burgundy proper, and also had 
dynastic control over Alsace-Lorraine and parts of the 
Netherlands. The special charaer of the Burgundian 
palace was its sharp contrast between the bestiality of 
its nobility and the magnificence of the predominantly 
Flemish paings and musical culture, which 
decorated the palace in accompaniment to the swinish 
gustatory festivities of the anachronistic Burgundian 
nobility and knighthood. The military and litical 
charaeristics of the fifteenth century Burgundian 
rule were a monstrous parody of the worst heritages 
from the feudal order at the beginning of the 
millenium. Under Charles the Bold  so known for the 
hideous aroma of his morality  the most precious 
cultural accomishments of humanist Europe were 
**patronized" not as art, but as some mere Rockefeller 
of today patronizes and exhibits an art for whose value 
 apart from market-price  he has neither 
knowledge nor capacity of perception. 

The hideous things done to and by Spain during the 
sixteenth century were not the inventions of Charles V 
or his psychologically unbalanced son, Philip II. They 
were the resulting Fuggery of the Hapsburg inheri- 
tance of the Castilian institutions molded by the wily 
Ferdinand of Aragon  the grandson of a converted 
Jew who launched the Spanish inquisition against the 
Jews. 

Prior to Ferdinand's successful manipulation of his 
own maage to Isabella  and the systematic 
elimination of Isabella's siblings from succession to 
the throne of Castile  Spain's ruling social strata 
were roughly assorted o cultured merchant and 



IFD)F=T®®B[i@x. PEM© EI^^ 




Dionysos, ancient god of wine, and modem symbol of the nominalist and Tory world outlook, shown with female 
worshippers on an Attic vase of the fifth century BC, 



noble families, refleing the sitive influences of 
Moorish and humanist culture and thought, and a 
backward, anachronistic assortment of bestial 
creatures who formed the hard core of the Castilian 
Reconquista. Under Ferdinand, not only were the 
existing agricultural and proto-industrial-capitalist 
achievements of Spain looted, principally to meet the 
debt-service obligations on funding the Reconquista, 
but this disgusting atavistic parody of feudalism 
known as the Reconquista was built o the savage 
force which, comemented by the ensification of 
the bestial Inquisition, destroyed the ernal 
economy and culture of Spain and many other coun- 
tries under Spanish control, to the  that the 
healing of those wounds has not yet been cometed in 
