
For exame: A domestic sales tax is an economic 
abhorrence, principally emoyed by governments 
which variously lack the perception, the litical 
courage, or the authority to attack the revenue 
problem in a competent manner. 

Imrt duties and related apications of excise 
have had a legitimate economic funion of enabling 
the government to **reach" indirely those foreign 
influences affeing our nation's vital erests which 
are beyond our dire means of control. The same 
princie erupts in the gray areas of U.S., state and 
local law, in resnse to discrepancies of law among 
litical sub-units of the nation. The right of local 
government to emoy those and related methods and 
procedures is an area of toleration  within limits 
determined by the national erest  from the stand- 
 of proper sitive federal law. 

What are inadmissible on princie are the 
following enterprises in petty deception and useless 
comexities: 

The demagogic trick of peddling a sales tax to a 
credulous eleorate by creating it fiively as an *'old 
age tax.*' (The hideous imication is that somebody's 
grandmother may suffer if one misses a customary 
Wednesday dinner-out at "Joe's Chinese Southern 
Fried Chicken Palace.") 

Various litical entities variously soning o 
corrate and personal income  where such cate- 
gories of taxation ought to be reserved to the federal 
government, with associated revenue-sharing for- 
mulas apied to order distribution to budgets of local 
government. 

Taxes which significantly, unnecessarily increase 
the administrative costs of both government, quasi- 
governmental, corrate and personal life, thus 
contrary to the nation's erest in developing a high 
social produivity within the labor force as a whole. 

() The clearing of all tax and related revenues and 
disbursements of government through the 
National Bank, to the effe that the ^'multiier" 
effes of reserve balances may be concentrated 
in the credit-issuing were of the National Bank. 
This is essential, both to give the nation efficient 
control in fa over the prenderance of its own 
monetary system, and to provide the means for 
freeing the federal, state and local governments 
from dependency un private financial 
markets. 

The  which will want to be emphasized and 
reemphasized, until the eleorate and its repre- 
sentatives have efficiently assimilated that , is 



 

that the pring of money by the U.S. Treasury (U.S. 
notes) as the instrument of securing credit inclusively 
for the federal government's uses is not in and of 
itself an issuance of **funny money" or otherwise 
inflationary. This **Hamiltonian" method and proce- 
dure is the proper measure emoyed by a capitalist 
republic. 

The problems tentially associated with such 
procedures are all derivative of a failure to regulate 
that praice according to sound national-banking 
princies. The revenues of government (government 
aggregately) are properly attributed to a rtion of 
the lawfully defined national absolute profit. This is 
the balance of total national income, as measured in 
rea/ terms, after the current prime costs of produion 
of that income are dedued. 

The elements of real national income are tentially 
* 'regenerative" forms of tangible output, including the 
produive labor force in the quantity and quality 
affeed with the means of education, associated 
forms of leisure, household consumption, and essen- 
tial social services of the national infrastruure. The 
residue, absolute profit, is represented by tangible 
produs and produive labor, whose usefulness is 
qualitatively determined by their tentially 
* 'economic-regenerative" effes through appropriate 
forms of capital and household consumption. This 
absolute profit, so defined, has four principal, cate- 
gorical apications: administration and services of 
the private seor; governmental consumption; 
foreign ermediate- and long-term credit against 
U.S. exrts; and domestic capital expansion. As long 
as the revenues and expenditures of government are 
defined within an efficient forecast-determination of 
the total absolute profit and the proper government 
prortion of that absolute profit, the mediating, 
short- and ermediate-term circulation of U.S. notes 
within those confines, if accomished through a 
National Bank, is an egral part of a "hard 
currency" licy. 

This prescribes, also, that there are only two cate- 
gorical areas in which the government should go 
outside a notes-only licy to issue bonds representing 
a long-term national (or, other governmental) debt: 

-r 

First, in respe to foreign long-term credit 
balances. 

The principal occasion for this under the new world 
monetary system will be the investment of U.S. 
domestic capital abroad. The investment of U.S. 
domestic capital o areas of the world which have or 
may probably adopt socialist constitutions must be 
balanced against the degree of risk national (and 
ernational) licy deems it necessary and proper to 
perpetuate (as "performance incentives"), and the 
comementary imperative of separating the legi- 







 

timate erests, of domestic capital from the predi- 
caments of ernal licies of foreign nations. In 
general, wherever efficient performance has been 
accomished for economic results consistent with the 
objeives of U.S. foreign licy, the fa of such ef- 
ficient performance warrants the use of the credit of 
the United States as a kind of national insurance 
fund" in behalf of such aggregate U.S. domestic 
capital extended. The methods emoyed for such 
determinations of performance are broadly identical 
to those governing the transformation of construion 
loans o permanent mortgages. 

This will involve not merely the credit of the United 
States, but these obligations will be colleively 
