
developed real property, the rental and equivalent 
income is properly bounded in its outer dimensions by 
the inclusion of an "average rate of profit" in incomes 
otherwise apicable to the produion and main- 
tenance costs of creating and maaining that real 
property. In the resale and related, speculative real 
estate praices, rental and equivalent forms of 
revenues are based on an included fiitious appre- 
ciation of the real property involved. High rental in- 
comes and monstrous capitalizations of decayed ren- 
tal properties are the typification of this problem. This 
is analyzed in some historical detail for New York 
City and related cases in the writer's textbook. () 

In such cases of apying an *' average rate of 
profit" to a combined real and fiitious capitalization 
of an * investment." the discrepancy between the net 
of total rental (and equivalent) income and the 
"average rate of profit" on the real rtion of the 
capitalization is pure ground rent. It is the same 
princie, apied to analogous forms of fiitious 
capitalization of the total mass of nominal wealth in a 
capitalist economy, which is the location of the 
problem in general. 

The general form of that same problem enables us 
to locate the  at which the monetarist erests 
loot ground rent massively from the economy as a 
whole. 

That identifies the phenomenon, but not yet the key 
to the way in which this monetarist cancer seizes un 
and operates within a capitalist economy as a whole. 
We now identify that crucial feature of the matter in 
two steps of successive approximation. 

The first  to be understood is the indispensable 
role of the state in providing a monetary system for 
capitalist development. Without a credit system (and 
associated monetary system) created and maained 
by the government, no capitalist economy did or can 
funion. Corresndingly, a faion which seizes 
control of the government's fiscal and monetary role 
has thus gained the were to determine the economic 
course of capitalist development and, through that 
were, to seize overall litical control to an increas- 
ing degree. 

Capitalist produion (industry and agriculture com- 
bined) has two primary economic comnents. The 
first are the prime costs associated with ant, 
materials, and labor. The second is the profit rtion 
of commodity real output remaining after these costs 
have been dedued. Considering capitalism from the 
stand of the circulation of its produion, and 
viewing this in terms of the capitalist produion and 
circulation process of an economy as a whole, the 



. Marcus, Dialeical Economics ^ pp, -, -, 



following apparent problem of circulation is imme- 
diately presented. 

The purchasing were put o circulation is ap- 
parently limited to the value of the prime costs of 
produion (and administration) advanced for that 
produion. On premise of this presumed fa, sundry 
lunatics have insisted that capitalism has an inherent 
"buy-back problem" concerning the rtion of total 
produced wealth represented as profit. Some of these 
lunatics have prosed, persistently over the past 
century and a half or so, that the solution to this (non- 
existent) "buy-back problem" is to have the state 
pr a supy of money equal to the troublesome 
margin represented by profit, and distribute such 
**funny money" through the pulation. More 
"radical" lunatics have proclaimed: "Eureka! Aha! 
Don't you see! This proves that we must eliminate 
profits!" The problem does not exist in reality; 
moreover, any effort to "solve" such a non-existent 
problem has the same sort of merit as a "remedy" as 
surgically removing healthy organs successively from 
a patient in stubborn treatment of a non-existent 
disease. 

What is wanted to prevent such a kind of problem 
from tending to arise is the extension of credit by some 
agency, an agency with such credit resources, as loan- 
capital to the capitalists against the margin of real 
commodity-wealth corresnding to profit. 

The classical procedure for accomishing this is 
the issuance of government bonds, or, preferably, the 
issuance of government bank notes desited with 
national and, through it, other major banks as the 
basis for loans to industries and agriculture for the 
circulation of the margin of real wealth involved. 
There is nothing equivalent to "funny money" or 
anything of that sort in the latter alternative  
provided appropriate licies govern the distribution 
of such loans. The money has been issued against 
viable security. That security is first of all the 
produively invested real wealth against which the 
loans will be made. Secondly, that security is im- 
icitly endorsed by the fiscal were of the govern- 
ment. 

The propriety of such credit issuance is based on the 
economic princie that the real-commodities margin 
corresnding to the absolute profit in the economy 
represents useful margins of capital goods and 
household-and-related consumption. The consumption 
of capital goods expands the scale and quality of 
household commodities by produive labor's 
households (principally as wages) produces extension 
of the quantity and quality of produive labor. By 
apying extended produive labor to extended 
produive capacities, the amount of wealth 
represented by profit is more than reproduced. The 







repayment of credit advanced out of the expanded 
income thus generated secures the credit issued 
through the mediation of government, including the 
margins of debt service to the credit system returned 
out of the profit margins of expanded produion. 

Of the additional money put o circulation by the 
government's '^ervention/' the rtion of currency 
anually added to general circulation, through 
realization of the profitable margin of commodity 
wealth as investment in the enlargement of produc- 
tion, becomes the margin of expanded monetary base 
required by the expanded margin of prime costs, an 
expansion effeed by enlargement of the scale and 
quality of total produion. 

As long as the margin of waste and non-optimal use 
of real total national income tolerated within the 
process is absorbed within the margin of aual, ab- 
