

and not accidentally. Rather than attacking the 
causal, generative feature of the problem, the symp- 
toms are attacked. Worse, too often, essential built-in 
checks against the real disease are debrided in the 
purrted erest of "efficiency." 

The charaeristic problem of recent decades' ef- 
forts at government reorganization is that they have 
been condued under Tory influences. The subversion 
of the ent of the Constitution and republic according 
to revisionist and allied nominalist dorines has been 
the licy-context in which the prosed reorgani- 
zation was shaped. Hence, the nominalist methods of 
William of Ockham charaerized the reorganization. 
Essential princies were shaved away by "Ockham *s 
Razor" in the ent to make government conform 
more efficiently to the revisionist Tory's nominalist 
princies. 

This is the notable reason that the effort of pro- 
Constitutionalist forces in the Executive and Congress 
have predominantly failed to date. By rearguard  
Fabian?  taics, the conservative-led resistors of 
Toryism have adapted themselves to their enemy's 
"Fabian game. They have seleed specific sympto- 
matic aspes of the problem as target issues, rather 
than seleing a focused  of counterattack which 
direed their efforts to the vital . Consequently, 
conservatives' Fabian guella taics have aimed at 
building in impediments to Tory encroachments 
within the bureaucracy and law: abetting thus the 
very heteronomy un which both bureaucracy and 
nominalist Tory licies feed. 

It is no use pretending that all of us close to govern- 
ment do not know this to be the fa. This writer knows 
it, and knows that every experienced Congressman 
and many others know better than he precisely how 
this process develops: save at least this viable little 
bastion of constitutionalism in the bureaucracy and 
the statutes  and so forth. 

Nelson Rockefeller and his family's associates con- 
sidered (with IBM's Watson and others) the ssi- 
bility of establishing the Central Intelligence Agency 
as a private corration  as was done in transform- 
ing the U.S. Strategic Bombing Survey o the Rand 
Corration. It was better to have the CIA under 
government control  of course  as the case of the 
hideous ernational Interl network warns us. How- 
ever, the CIA was attached to the government in the 
worst ssible fashion, outside the Constitution's 
prescriptions and ent concerning augmentations of 
the Executive. The bogeyman, the fear that this 
agency would be too imately attached to the Presi- 
dential weres, was used to foster the worst arrange- 
ment. 

Nelson Rockefeller promoted the establishment of 
the National Security Council  about as unlawful an 



 

entity as might have been tolerated at that time. What 
right does such a body have to exist without 
congressional advice-and-consent checks of the same 
sort apicable to Cabinet and related high ap- 
ments? 

The National Security Agency is another consti- 
tutional crisis-. 

Nelson Rockefeller created the Department of 
Health, Education and Welfare, which has evolved 
according to the Tory faion's guiding impulses ever 
since, to become one of the most unwholesome entities 
of government. With this, the stwar wave of bureau- 
cratic cancer was launched in full sweep, making 
Franklin D. Roosevelt's administration appear 
relatively almost one of Doric simicity. 

The Department of Housing and Urban Develop- 
ment was added later, according to the same bastard 

logic as that for HEW, and so on to Transrtation. 
The General Accounting Office (GAO) evolved o 

a kind of fourth branch of government, moving away 

from any competent limits of defined original ent, 

and out of the domain of constitutional legitimacy. 

It was, retrospeively, a mistake to ace the 
Federal Bureau of Investigation under the Depart- 
ment of Justice in the first ace. Like any competent 
distri attorney's office, Justice requires its own 
investigatory instruments. However, the FBI evolved 
in fa o a national lice force by imications, not 
an investigative agency with auxiliary law-enforce- 
ment weres, but the foot-in-the-door for a national 
lice force. The same separation of law enforcement 
and prosecuting attorney we prescribe properly for 
municipalities and state governments was mandatory 
if the FBI and Justice were not to develop a mutually 
corrupting relationship. 

This was aggravated by linking the FBI to the 
Rockefeller-created private organization, Interl, an 
organization under fascist direion during its Vienna 
period, under outright Nazi direion well o the war, 
and under direion of "laundered" Nazis at the end of 
the war and thereafter. Admittedly, the links between 
the Nazi Interl and FBI became so painful to the 
public conscience that the Interl conneion was dis- 
creetly transferred from Justice to Treasury, where 
the Treasury-Interl erface within the Treasury 
Department proceeded to corrupt the drug- and arms- 
traffic funions of that department. 

The Omnibus Crime Bill, developed by Rockefeller- 
associated agencies, the Russell Sage Foundation, 
Ford Foundation and others, was credulously passed 
by the Congress and Executive. This ^created a new 
agency within the Justice Department, the Law En- 
forcement Assistance Administration, it created new 
agencies within state and local governments, and 
launched funions  as in the area of drug-main- 







 

tenance programs  which inevitably subverted 
regular law enforcement almost nationwide, and 
fostered conditions within which monstrous horrors 
grew. It is not irrelevant that certain categories of 
crime have zoomed since  and significantly in con- 
sequence of  the passage and imementation of the 
Omnibus (i.e., More) Crime A. The S-, and its 
thinly disguised variants, originates with the same 
authorships and is inherently designed to aggravate 
