and so forth  is litically hegemonic in those insti- 
tutions which the monetarists, with aid of their liberal 
and radical shock-troops have been able to take over 
and corrupt. However, at root, with our organic tra- 
ditions and impulses for technologically-veored 
industrial and agricultural progress, those inner 
qualities which made us the richest nation of the 
world, we are American Whigs. If this were not true, if 
liberal nominalism were not but a disease imsed 
un a national charaer which itself represents a 
contrary organic world outlook, thermonuclear war 
and other horrors would be the incurable Fate written 
o our national charaer. 

We, as a majority of our nation, are predominantly 
Whigs to the core today not simy because we bear 
the habits and impr of our great technological 
achievements of the past. We are American Whigs be- 
cause of the institutions, including our founding 
Constitution and its initial Bill of Rights, which de- 
fined our national charaer in such an ongoing way 
that even the ague of Toryism roduced by the 
reign of loutish Andrew Jackson could not root out 



 

those traditions. Even Tory Franklin Delano Roose- 
velt could not fully root out those Whiggish traditions. 
Even the frenetic Tory subversion launched with the 
inauguration of John F. Kennedy has not yet rooted it 
out of the majority of our people. It was admittedly the 
organic experience of our technological progress 
which immediately nourished and sustained our 
Whiggish impulses, but that form and scope of tech- 
nological progress itself was made ssible by the 
embodiment of the neo-atonic humanist ent of the 
Federalists and their closest collaborators, in giving 
approximate shape to that humanist outlook and 
method through the adopted instruments of our repub- 
lican form of government. 

Although it is praically indispensable to em- 
phasize that the impulse of the majority of our people 
is committed to the Idea of Progress in at least an im- 
icitly-humanist form, monetarism and nominalism 
have been the hegemonic core ideology of the 
English-speaking institutions as a whole for at least 
two centuries, and increasingly so during the past cen- 
tury. There is no aspe of culture which has not been 
significantly corrupted or even wholly taken over by 
this pernicious influence. 

For exame, our universities: 

American sociology  predominantly an outgrowth 
of the coordinate settlement house and Fabian social 
work" charitable aivities originated among the thus 
card-indexed and manipulated, labile or of London, 
New York and so forth  is worse than worthless as an 
academic subje of our universities and secondary 
schools. It is worse than bunk; it is nothing but a 
vicious form of nominalist indorination of pros- 
peive ''social-work" shock-troop recruits to the neo- 
Fabian litical elligence apparatus. 

American psychology has almost entirely sub- 
jugated the thrusts toward a competent psychologidal 
study such as those within psychoanalysis. Under the 
impulse of behaviorism, the Fabian and neo-Fabian 
litical-elligence networks have subverted our 
institutions through such coordinating centers as the 
Rockefeller-fostered London Tavistock Institute, the 
Rothschilds* and Rockefellers' so-called Frankfurt 
School and its attached (Frankfurt, BRD) Sigmund 
Freud Institute, and the Tavistock-spawned, Rocke- 
feller fostered UNO World Federation of Mental 
Health. Excepting hold-out honest praitioners, 
American psychiatry and psychological instruion 
are today becoming the most vicious form of 
quackery, downright Tory ideological subversion wea- 
ns of nominalism. 

American anthrology's degeneration from a 
former level of tolerable competence is typified by the 
unjustifiable prominent status of figures such as Mar- 
garet Mead. Using the yardstick of those several 







 

debatable but nonetheless serious efforts to establish 
anthrological competence which still existed signifi- 
cantly around some universities until the beginning of 
the s, it is instruive to note the way in which such 
decent currents have been extirpated from graduate 
departments of anthrology in universities, in favor 
of the worst features imrted from st)ciology, without 
even an effort to disguise the significance of the 
thuggery (albeit of an academic form) emoyed to 
this purse. 

Imagine the sheer idiocy of the '^cultural relativist" 
dorine forced thus un anthrology. We, an ad- 
vanced culture, whose very existence is historically 
the produ of progress from feudal and ultimately 
primitive social forms, having reached the benefits of 
such culture, in all purrted seriousness consider a 
professed anthrologist a quite sane and author- 
itative person on that topic, when he bases his dorine 
on the axiomatic assertion that the whole course of 
history which brought us up from barbarism might 
have been a mistake. That we authorize universities to 
give advanced professional degrees to such nitwits is 
truly exemary of the corruption of our institutions. 

American and world history  to the extent that 
such frauds as William A. Williams are taken 
seriously, history is in hideous condition for the same 
reasons, as is litical science generally. 

Political Economy  The granting of the Nobel 
Prize to the rabidly-incompetent Milton Friedman 
exemifies both the elleual and moral bank- 
ruptcy of most of the profession of economists. Not 
only does Friedman's scheme demand the overthrow 
of our Constitution to institute a fascist economy  of 
the type presently prevailing in collapsing Chile, 
which is criminal, but a fascist economy doesn't work. 
Moreover the specific "contribution'* for which Fried- 
man was cited in conneion with the Nobel award is 
exemary of both the fascist princies embedded in 
his economic dorine, and represents a purrtedly 
recent discovery" of a form of hyperinflationary- 
austerity which was discredited in fa most em- 
phatically by Nazi occupation licies and slave- 
labor-death-camp program of the - period. 
Even a number of the leading monetarist economists 
had earlier demonstrated that Friedman, except as a 
kind of historical accountant," is incompetent even 
by ordinary monetarist professional standards. Other- 
wise, bang a few stubborn holdouts, what is taught 
in the name of economics in our universities today is 
not economics at all, but pure, anti-economic mone- 
