advances, in the relative universality represented by 
that society's mastery of nature, which is funda- 
mental. What is crucially proven is not that the exist- 
ing mode of produion and correlated praices are 
sound  that may also be proven, but that is not the 
vital . What is proven is that the charaeristic 
way in which the society, overall, orders increases in 
its thermodynamic mastery of nature is effeive, and 
that therefore the way in which new knowledge is 
being ordered is in corresndence with the lawful 
ordering of the material processes the society is 
mastering. 

That is the only proper imication of the truism that 
the fundamental proof of human knowledge is the con- 
tinued existence of man. 

The development of science in the specific form it 
erupted from neo-atonic high Renaissance human- 
ism, during the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries, and 
the fa that it was a produ of neo-atonic 
humanism and its radiations, is a matter of the con- 
ditions under which precisely those humanists located 
the creative process of mind as direly embodying 
the primary ordering-princie in human existence 
and progress. They thus created the conditions under 
which Aristotelians and others contributed to scien- 
tific knowledge, but science is nonetheless entirely a 
creation of neo-atonic humanism. Science is the 
deliberate epistemological mastery of the ordering 
princies charaeristic of the synthesis of those 
hytheses^ notably crucial hytheses, which, ex- 
tended appropriately to experimental form, generate 
an overall accelerating progress in a society's 
knowledgeable, deliberate mastery of the universe 
and its included processes. 



 

It is hythesis, not experiment which is the 
essence of science. The content of science is not that 
experiments succeed in producing useful results. The 
content is the successive ordering of hytheses and 
corresnding experiments  essentially the 
universal-empirical ordering of hytheses  to the 
effe that the progress of scientific knowledge has a 
sitively direed quality toward increasing society's 
produive and related weres over nature. 

The Aristotelian or nominalist, because he is fac- 
tionally and epistemologically anti-humanist on this 
, cannot acknowledge that essential feature of 
science, because to do so would be to overthrow the 
most fundamental, charaeristic axioms of his 
adopted outlook and method. Hence, to the extent an 
Aristotelian or nominalist may be in fa a useful 
scientist, he is epistemologically a bastard  he 
exists, but without acknowledged parentage. 

The historical princie most emphatically to be 
adduced from these considerations is that the only 
authority for empirical knowledge existing in any 
society is delimited to those alternative charaeristic 
forms of the allonian, promethean and dionysian 
outlook specific to the society in whose context the 
empirical investigation is made. 

This restriion is most fundamentally defined in 
terms of the charaeristic ordering of social praice 
within that society (its geometry), and further 
delimited in particular, subsumed respes by the 
kinds of experimental praice accessible to the forms 
of technology existing and coming o existence in 
that society. All human knowledge, just as the special 
case of science refles necessarily the most funda- 
mental and broadly apicable ordering princies of 
all human thought, is historically specific to the 
universalizing circumstances (geometry) under 
which it comes o being. 

One cannot, as a hythetical gifted individual, leap 
out of one's society, and "scientifically" study the 
universe deus ex machina. 

Although this historical restriion delimits the 
quality of human knowledge in any society relative to 
other societies, the charaeristic world outlook of any 
successfully developing form of society is an adequate 
basis for real, universal knowledge in terms of the 
kinds of knowledge appropriate to that society. 

If we, today, can appear to leap above that 
restriion relative to preceding societies, that is be- 
cause of those circumstances of modern development 
which enable us to make the kind of approach to prob- 
lems of knowledge and society we represent here. 
Because of the development of industrial capitalism, 
with the included, egral lawful feature of a con- 
scious ordering of advancing technology, and because 
of the breakthroughs which biology and physical 
science have made toward achieving a coherent body 







 

of hylozoic scientific knowledge, we today can adduce 
the causal princie we set forth earlier in this seion, 
that is, the notion of a permanent princie of negen- 
tropic causality generating both the events within two 
successive geometries and the development of a 
successor geometry out of aions originating in the 
former. 

The paradox of the Bardi and Peruzzi  the Italian 
bankers who, as the Rockefellers and Fuggers of yore, 
most direly caused the genocidal Black Death of the 
mid-fourteenth century  is exemary of the imi- 
cations of the particle-field paradox within social 
processes as such. It is the same particle-field para- 
dox we confront in physics: the two analogous pat- 
terns have a common origin in the geometry of the 
societies which create both such paradoxes. 

The lewd irony of the Bardi and Peruzzi is that their 
emergence was a refleion of the development of 
proto-capitalist conditions within feudal Europe, 
during the great feudal breakdown-crisis pularly 
known as the Crusades. Those Italian bankers, ex- 
pressing the proto-capitalist shift toward alienable 
property forms linked to embryonic growth of tech- 
nological progress in urban centers, were the most 
wereful accomices of the anti-capitalist faion. 
The subsequent cases of the Fuggers, of the Amster- 
dam bankers from the middle of the seventeenth 
century, of the British East India Company, the 
Barings, the Rothschilds, and the Rockefellers, all 
express the persistence of the same princie of 
degeneracy expressed by the Bardi-Peruzzi case. 

The classical name for this specific degeneracy is 
heteronomy. The same heteronomy, which is 
systematically defined as the essential feature of evil 
in rigorous Aristotelian argument, and defined to the 
