. Mos Levitt, "Linearity and Entropy: Ludwig Boltzmann and 
the Second Law of Thermodynamics," Fusion Energy Foundation 
Newsletter, Vol. II, No,  (Sept. ), pp. -. 







The negentropic quality of living processes, and 
most notably the crucially-demonstrated relationship 
of human creative (negentropic) synthesis of new 
knowledge to man's historical mastery of material 
processes, demonstrates that there must be an ad- 
ditional magnitude of energy of some kind in material 
processes above and beyond the magnitude imied by 
notions such as the ^'conservation of energy." The 
Aristotelian or allonian outlook denies this in 
respe to physical processes, and exains away the 
crucial evidence contrary to such asserted denials by 
relegating the unexained aspe of reality to the 
metaphysical realm. The best comprehension of 
universal reality, of a universal lawful ordering of 
physical processes ssible to the Aristotelian or 
allonian view, is that of pre-ordained (epistemo- 
logically) fixed universal fields and also fixed, self- 
evident particles existing within such fields. 

The Planck discovery situated the empirical loca- 
tion (at least, the empirical location properly next-to- 
be-exored) of the field-particle absurdities of 
Maxwellian physics in respe to these ernal field 
aspes of particles themselves, which supied an 
additional source of energy beyond that ostensibly 
existent in the thermodynamic assembly-relation- 
ships of what may be regarded as more or less 
"classical" Lagrangian and also Maxwellian physics. 

This is the same problem which determined the 
inevitable bankruptcy of the Einstein-Weyl program 
for developing a solution to the unified-field problem. 
On the astronomical scale, as Parpart has developed 
the , () the **big bang" dorine flowing 
rigorously from presently most-accredited methods of 
erpreting the crucial evidence leads to a related 
demonstration of the relevant absurdity within the 
axiomatic features of the Aristotelian method itself. 

By taking only the simest (and crudest) included 
variant-case within the broader whole of Riemannian 
physics, the Gaussian affine or tiling" approxima- 
tion in the microphysical domain of, ostensibly, an 
otherwise relativistic macro- and astronomical or- 
dering, Einstein-Weyl ignorantly represented them- 
selves as having developed a relativistic conception of 
physics, being equally wrong in their conceit that 
Einstein's relativistic physics was in fa Rieman- 
nian, as Parpart outlines that . The micro- 
physical struure of the Einstein-Weyl program is 
epistemologically a degenerate, hythesized condi- 
tion, which condition is exicitly Aristotelian (anti- 
relativistic), and which imicitly determines that the 
Einstein-Weyl macro and astronomical programs are 
also permeated with the same, most devastating, 
'^hereditary" fallacy. 



. Uwe Parpart, "The Concept of the Transfinite," The Cam- 
paJgner, Vol. IX, Nos. - (Jan.-Feb. ), pp. -. 



 

Unless we experimentally and theoretically com- 
prehend the microphysical erpenetration of field 
and particle as both coherent and negentropic, physics 
falls apart epistemologically whenever a cor- 
resnding experimental or related praical 
condition is encountered. Hence, Schrodinger's and 
related work, focusing on topics centering around the 
psi-funion, represented the crucial, ermediate 
experimental-theoretical nexus at which the further 
progress of science respeing physics fundamentals 
was inescapably determined. 

It is agreed that neither the pre-Descartes scientific 
investigators nor the founders of our republic based 
their litical and philosophical conceptions on such 
exicit forms of contemation of physical science as 
such (although Benjamin Franklin himself verges 
un being an exception to this). However, as we are 
emphasizing here, just as crucial evidence concerning 
living processes and the historical crucial-experi- 
mental evidence of man's secularly-increasing 
dominion over nature is the mandatory praical and 
theoretical basis for guiding the investigations of 
physics, our forefathers were essentially neo-atonic 
humanists who approached litics in terms of a 
method which is today most relevantly illustrated by 
resort to the same method of approach to the 
epistemological side of physical science funda- 
mentals. The issue is the nature of man and of the 
physical universe, and the erconneion of these 
two erpenetrating aspes in a truly coherent way, 
thus uniquely providing the rigorous basis for cer- 
tay in the determination for knowledge of what is 
natural law. 

The epistemological argument concerning physics 
has recently been demonstrated experimentally most 
clearly in conneion with negentropic categories of 
'*non-linear effes" in asma physics and related 
work. Apying these newly developed asma- 
physics methods to the recent shift in global weather 
patterns, we and our collaborators have been driven, 
as a by-produ of that concern, to effe the begin- 
nings of an overturning of the prevailing dorines of 
meteorology, showing how the overlooked element of 
the determination of stable vortex-systems in the 
atmosphere makes the existence of weather patterns 
dependent un the negentropic **added energy" 
supied by living ecologies, ecologies which man 
can regulate to produce the desired weather- 
patterns. () 

As various, recently-accumulated evidence con- 
cerning asma vortices, **solitons," and coherent- 
particle beams at higher energy concentrations 
shows, under these conditions the energy-field within 



. (Eric Lerner), "The Real Causes of the Wer's Weather,' 
Executive Intelligence Review, Vol. IV, No.  (Feb. , ), pp. -. 







 

the particle erreas on an enlarged scale with the 
concentrated ''externar* field, such that this **ad- 
ditional supy of energy*' in respe to the experi- 
mental field itself makes the system negentropic and 
