




well-deserved obscurity, is regrettably notable as one 
of the many **angle-triseors'' who sought to 
"comete" the Kantian system by shysters* tricks, 
purrting to show that within the stretched- 
Aristotelian Kantian system they had found a clever 
way to reify the gap between the phenomenon and 
thing-in-itself o a causal princie. In this way, they 
claimed to themselves the miracle of having known 
the unknowable. 

This shyster's trick is epistemologically identical 
with the content of the Heisenberg ''indeterminacy 
princie/* A mere praical difficulty (albeit a large 
one) of then-existing approaches to experimental 
physics, was reified o a permanently sitive 
existence. Rather than leaving the matter to the 
discovery of a cometely fresh approach to ex- 
perimental access  as high-energy-domain coherent 
ion-beams suggest today  Heisenberg's ^'princie" 
professed to reduce to ridicule (and an aborting of 
funding and other means to praice science) anyone 
who dared to prose to cross that borderline. 

That is a classic case of the way in which radical 
nominalism (e.g., sitivism) is roduced within the 
house of physical science. Close off an avenue of vital 
experimental work, and arbitrarily roduce an 
ideology to defend that baer, imsing nominalist 
ideology direly on the corpus of science for this 
purse. 

The further provocative feature of pseudo-Kantian 
Heisenberg's trick is that already Immanuel Kant had 
defined the problem in a way which proved, at least, 
the idiocy of Heisenberg's methodological argument. 

The classical problem of micro-physics, in par- 
ticular, is a dire and obvious carry-over of the 
Aristotelian method o these investigations. Seen, 
and properly so, in that aspe, the conneion be- 
tween this feature of physics and the problem key to 
the rise of nominalism in ruling institutions is most 

usefully situated. 

The continuing central crisis of physics  and liti- 
cal theory has been the paradoxical notion of the 
particle-field relationship. First, the case for physics. 

This is not a difficulty which cropped up for physics 
only in conneion with the work of Maxwell during the 
nineteenth century. Isaac Newton was exicit in 
emphasizing the epistemological-physical absurdity 
of the problem he roduced as the heuristic ruse of 
"aion-at-a-distance." At the time Newton resorted 
to that ruse, in the effort to articulate the evidence in 
terms of the Aristotelian-Euclidean system y the 
physical reality of the field-particle problem had been 
firmly established by the work of William Gilbert, 
Johannes Keer and others. Later, Maxwell himself 
exicitly referred to the prevailing conceptions of 
physical science as so-called physical science, em- 
phasizing the epistemological problem of the method 



 

of abstraing the "ernal relations" of an isolated 
aspe of the overall process for analysis. 

This is emphatically not to suggest that the crisis in 
science might have been avoided if, perhaps, two 
apes had dropped on Isaac Newton's head at a 
certain moment. Newton himself did the right thing 
under the circumstances. It was those damnable 
Newtonians, Newton's empiricist epigonoi, who more 
or less suppressed Newton's own warning concerning 
the inherent flaws of his system, who are chiefly to be 
blamed for the problems allegedly contributed by the 
persisting authority of Newtonian-Lagrangian 
physics. 

There are two immediately relevant aspes to 
Newton's epistemological problem. First, the 
Aristotelian-Euclidean system of representation 
(linear determinism) was the only formal approach 
culturally available at that time. Secondly, the at- 
tempt to supersede this linearized formalism through 
experimental physics approaches is categorically 
delimited by princie to experimental work mediated 
through breakthroughs respeing the ("in- 
finitesimal") microphysical and ("infinite") 
astronomical scale of physical phenomena. Granted, 
the epistemological solution to that class of conceptual 
problem existed empirically at that time, but only 
with respe to the measurable consequences of 
human creative syntheses on the thermodynamical 
transformations of entire economies, not for biology 
otherwise, and not for the praice or theory of physics 
qua physics. 

Now that we have taken Isaac Newton himself off 
the hook in this matter, we can, in good conscience, 
develop the approach we require to the problem of 
nominalism, by turning the observation just made in 
defense of Newton about one-hundred-eighty degrees. 

In physical science, it is man who condus experi- 
mental investigations. Not abstra man, but men and 
women who, as experimenters, are also culturally 
representative of particular societies. This is to em- 
phasize that a "purely objeive knowledge" of 
physical processes, a knowledge independent of the 
subjeivity of human knoweres and experimenters, is 
an absurdity. This does not mean, as shallow elles 
might obje, that science is therefore capable only of 
subjeive guesses concerning universal laws. The 
empiricists and other varieties of nominalists who 
insist on holding to such objeions merely demon- 
strate that they have missed the whole  con- 
cerning science itself. 

The human race was engaged in technological pro- 
gress long, long before Thales. Under those relatively 
primitive, lowere forms of social life which represent 
the course of human progress prior to the Ionian 
period, technological progress happened because 
people are human, and thus create new knowledge 







 

which is extended to praice. The fa that such in- 
novations represent new knowledge was undoubtedly 
known in that sense to more primitive cultures  not 
to confuse genuinely primitive cultures in the line of 
social evolution with those nooks and crannies of 
nineteenth and twentieth century anthrology which 
mistook degenerated forms of societies for modern 
