done in - Nazi Germany, the fires of Hell are 
about to descend un us  relatively sooner or some- 
what later. 

It must be emphasized again  although we have al- 
ready stipulated the  in this conneion just above 
 that such a domestic "Hamiltonian'* approach to 
recovery could not have succeeded unless it was ac- 
companied by a corresnding foreign licy, a licy 
of wrecking and reacing the sterling-centered mone- 
tary system. 

The overall monetary and economic history of the 
Roosevelt administration shows where we must dis- 
tinguish between conscious wickedness and mere 
ignorance and incompetence. From the administrat- 
ion's praice and from study of the writings of key 
New Deal brarusters, both their work of the s 



PEF=T(o)® i()X. E)EM© E^S 



and later, it is clear that on economic matters they 
were worse than incompetent. As we noted in assess- 
ing the Atlanticists' present repetition of the same 
strategic follies they committed during two preceding 
world wars, their behavior is not only regulated by the 
pressures of expediency-driven hysteria, but by their 
traditional, organic organization of their sense of 
elleual identity around the nominalist world out- 
look and methodologies. With them, Keynesian, 
Schachtian, Friedmanite monetarist (nominalist) 
dorines are not merely expediencies; the Atlan- 

ticists broadly^ seriously believe that such quackery 
represents a competent economic theory and doc- 
trine! 

Roosevelt's fascist-flavored monetarist approach to 
the *'bank holiday," and other features of his admini- 
stration are clear instances of evil motivations serv- 
ing special erests at the expense of the vital in- 
terests of the United States. Otherwise, especially in 
respe of Roosevelt's persistence with an economic 
recovery program whose preordained failure would 
be ABC to any competent economist, the Roosevelt 
administration was predominantly, sincerely stupid. 

This is underlined by the prediable conditional 
success of the war economy, and Roosevelt's inability 
even to conceive of a war economy's **civilian" equi- 
valent earlier. 

The U.S. drive to a war economy as the anticipated 

solution to the depression was based most broadly 

un s and s study of the war economy of the 

wartime Kaiser Germany. The theory of a war eco- 
nomy was first outlined by Rosa Luxemburg in the 

conclusion of her  draft of The Accumulation of 
Capital and the outline expanded in terms of the 
empirical features of wartime Germany's aual war 
economy in her later Introduion to National Eco- 
nomy, It was the - German war economy ex- 
perience which served immediately as the model used 
by other analysts for the Nazi Germany ''recovery'* of 
-, and which, together with study of the - 
 Nazi Germany experience, provided the back- 
ground against which the Roosevelt administration's 
conception of a war-economy licy was sed. This 
appreciation was glued onto, so to speak, the U.S. war- 
mobilization experience during World War L 

Although the U.S. has lived under a war economy 
and semi-war economy since , to date no notable 
Atlanticist economist has been able competently to 
conne the notion of war economy to a **peace eco- 
nomy" recovery using somewhat analogous mech- 
anisms, or to account for the way in which the U.S. de- 
fense budget anually operates in respe to the U.S. 
stwar economy. On this count, they are sincerely 
incompetent. 

On World War II itself, earlier here we have covered 



 

all but two of the essential s to be reviewed. 
Immediately above, we identified U.S. vital erests 
defining Nazi Germany as an adversary from the in- 
ception; earlier we summarized the Atlanticist licy 
toward Nazi Germany and how it misfired. The princi- 
pal overlapping issues of the emerging, st- re- 
lations with the Soviet Union must be treated. Here, 
we must also clear away the illusion imied by Lipp- 
mann's argument, that the U.S. would not have gone 
to war against Nazi Germany if Germany had not 

broken the western baer." 

As Lippmann thus far correly states. Chamber- 
lain's  Munich agreement, coming after Anglo- 
French rejeion of the 'Tukachevsky Plan," left Stal- 
in with no strategic option but to attempt to secure a 
treaty with Nazi Germany, This treaty was feasible 
and adopted because it coincided with Germany^s 
most vital strategic problem. At the  that Ger- 
many became deey enmired, suffering heavy mili- 
tary attrition in a war inside the Soviet Union, the 

allied Anglo-French-Belgian forces could and would 
move o the Ruhr, forcing Germany to make peace 
essentially on allied terms. Thus, the Atlanticists 
would have both Germany and Russia. This required 
Hitler, if at all ssible, to crush the Belgians, British 
and French before launching war to the east. Stalin's 
treaty-improvisation fitted o that strategic problem 
like a hand o a glove. 

The problems of the Stalin leadership we have ade- 
quately covered in an edition of the Campaigner de- 
voted to that subje. () It is clear apart from other 
unsettled matters, that Stalin refused to believe that 
'*Barbarossa" was in progress until it was already 
substantially under way. This was a failure of Soviet 
litical elligence more than military elligence, 
a failure to comprehend the crucial ernal dynamics 
of the Nazi economy and regime. Otherwise, Stalin's 
pre-Barbarossa offers of concessions to Nazi eco- 
nomic needs were generous, and Britain was still left 
in Hitler's rear for an eastward thrust  such con- 
siderations, us Soviet wishful conviion that more 
time for Soviet military preparations was available, 
left the Red Army badly deoyed for the attack  
with well-known consequences. 

By   and until the successful test of "The 
Bomb" at Los Alamos  Soviet stwar were was so 
foreseeably tent that  other considerations ac- 
knowledged  Churchill and Roosevelt were com- 
mitted to affording Stalin significant concessions in 
order to contain the "Soviet problem." The consider- 
