of ground rent. 

This  of view was systematically articulated by 
the rabidly pro-feudalist current among the eigh- 
teenthcenturyFrenchPhysiocrats,whoerpretedai>- 

solute profit as ground rent and attributed it to meta- 
physical qualities in nature taken as a fixed domain of 







fixed categories of primary resources. This is also the 
same rabidly pro-feudalist outline expressed by the 
Club of Rome's **Limits of Growth" quackery, and the 
axiomatic thesis un which the ill-conceived National 
Environmental Policy A has been transformed by 
comicit courts o a systematic destruion of the 
United States' most vital ernal erests. 

The concept of ground rent is charaerized by a 
corresndingly feudal-throwback definition of pri- 
mary resources. The economic approach of mone- 
tarists to industry and agriculture, as well as to the 
development of the labor force, is also brought under 
the same consistent ground-rent erpretations. The 
economic quality and material erests of nations 
are, consistently, defined according to the ^'economic 
geography" of a ground-rent erpretation of pri- 
mary and analogously defined resources. 

British colonialism thus produced and required the 
following notable ideological charaeristics; () a 
broad, categorical denial that the Idea of Progress 
refleed any necessary or proper sitive princie; 
() the dorine of cultural relativism; () the 
projeion of the dorine of ground rent to the con- 
ceptions of the determining erests represented by 
''economic geography." This was comementary to 
the little girls' doll-aying approach to the princies 
of foreign licy, the notion of a ''concert of weres." 
The weres were defined as embodying a heteronomic 
combination of litical (national cultural peculiar- 
ities) and material (economic geographical) essential 
s of self-erest, and an induively-defined 
common erest in the perpetuation of the **game" 
defined in the doll-aying scenario termed the ''con- 
cert of forces." 

This same hideous, infantile geolitical-concert 
dorine, which is the essence of Roosevelt's (Lipp- 
mann's) Atlantic Dorine, was otherwise the ernal 
dorine of the Hapsburg Austro-Hungarian Empire. 
The Hapsburg ononarchy, and its immediate bureau- 
cracy, was the reified instrument, the litical "con- 
cert" made flesh. Vienna, otherwise part of the 
Austrian nation, was at the same time predominantly 
something superimsed un Austria, the nesting 
ace of the supra-Austrian Hapsburg imbecility. 
Otherwise, the Empire was not a nation, but was 
predominantly anti-assimilationist in its litical, cul- 
tural, and economic licies. The only commonality of 
this Hapsburg Imperial bestiary of nationalities on 
exhibit was the Hapsburg "concert of were" itself: 
the concert of ground rent, the concert of the Imperial 
Army, the concert of the superimsed Imperial 

bureaucracy. 
A lapsed-time movement of consciousness from the 

fifteenth century stench of the gustatory revels of 

Burgundian Charles the Bold's court, to end of the 



 

eighteenth century Vienna must evoke a cry of "Deja 
vu!" On the walls of the Burgundian palace hung 
many of the greatest humanist paings of that time; 
the great Orlando di Lasso and his peers were obliged 
to perform for this miserably boorish audience. In 

Vienna, around the Hapsburg imbecility, one hears 
Mozart  whom the city fathers of Vienna consciously 
and systematically murdered by economic measures 
 Beethoven from Bonn, the looted artistic treasures 
of Italy, and so forth and so on. The Hapsburg bestial- 
ity colleed living art the way a pathetic Nelson 
Rockefeller colles pre-Columbian relics, a John D. 
Rockefeller III oriental art, and a David Rockefeller 
beetles. 

Stupid Naleon Bonaparte, who had the were to 
do better, omitted eradication of the Hapsburg obscen- 
ity during his conquest of Vienna. Naleon urinated 
un the imperatives of history; he established thus a 
licy which led fatefully to the crushing of not only 
Naleonic France, but the tentialities of both the 
French nation and of all of continental Europe. Nal- 
eon had learned nothing essential from Gresham, 
Bodin, Richelieu, Mazarin, and Colbert, nothing from 
the rich, crucial-experimental experience of the 
American Revolution. Naleon's stupidity, and 
London's were and guile, enabled the propped-up 
Hapsburg corpse to lurch on throughout the nineteenth 
century. 

The end of this Hapsburg cancer of European liti- 
cal life became visible in the wake of . By then, the 
House of Rothschild was fully in charge of the history 
of continental Europe, a  of no minor imrtance 
in the subsequent course of ernal Austrian and Vien- 
nese history. 

Baron James Rothschild, to whose despicable 
person we have had occasion to allude earlier, cannot 
be said to have overlooked the pseudo-feudal cultural 
tradition acquired with his branch's acquisition of an 

aristocratic title. It may be emphasized without exag- 
geration that the entire Rothschild crew were obses- 
sive freaks on the subje of acquiring aristocratic 

titles. Nathan's branch in Great Britain aced the 
gaining of a title (through Lord John Russell, the 
wicked grandfather of the evil Bertrand) only second 
to looting the British economy of ground rent. Having 
bought and paid for Austria's Metternich (and a 
Metternich mistress provided by the Rothschilds), 
they had no difficulty in satisfying such desires for the 
Austrian branch. The German (Frankfurt am Main) 
branch gained a sort of aristocratic dignity through 
Rothschild protege Bismarck  although some griind- 
lich Prussian bureaucrat "taed" the honor by omit- 
ting the standard cross, creating a special Hofjuden 
branch of the order in question. 
The condu of Baron James in the case of Heinrich 







 
