Russia's relationship to the "outside world," and 
what are foolishly defined as the relatively autarkical 
ernal relations of Great Mother Russia's family 
household. When it is made sensuously apparent to 
him that the "outsider" is direly engaged in at- 
tempting to rape Mother Russia, the same, ordinarily 
withdrawn Oblomov flies o an uncontrollable nat- 
ionalist rage. 

It is the dependency of the industrialist sociological 
current on litical blocs with the Oblomovist-cen- 
tered, more backward strata within the Soviet party 
and state apparatus which brings a duality o the de- 
termination of Soviet foreign and domestic stures. 







 

and o the propaganda sture which the leadership 
presents as the **line'* to both the foreign and domestic 
pulations. 

Neither Stalin nor Trotsky are clear-cut exames of 
either social current  hence the absurdity of those 
influential strands of U.S. Soviet foreign licy analy- 
sis which attempt to shape the fas to fit the Stalin- 
Trotsky fiion. 

L.D, Trotsky was the son of a relatively well-to-do 
Russian Jewish peasant family. This was a personal 
basis in experience which aided Trotsky in shaping 
strategic licy for the Civil War period of the Red 
Army's development, and which aided him in adding a 
valuable element to the **scissors" theses otherwise 
developed by E. Preobrazhensky. () That contribu- 
tion was Trotsky's valid litical insight o the dual- 
ity of the litical comsition of tendencies of the 
Russian peasantry, and the necessity of winning the 
peasantry to a performance-credible licy of '*sav- 
ing." 

The broader significance of this same  is that 
although Trotsky was a brilliant litical thinker, 
these were the accomishments of his persona  to 
the extent that he could never overcome the persisting 
nightmare of his confliing heteronomic peasant out- 
look. For similar reasons, he could never independent- 
ly master the essential features of theoretical eco- 
nomics or science generally  although his brilliant 
persona-side enabled him to rationally acknowledge 
and assimilate such contributions by others. 

For psychologically lawful reasons, Trotsky's psy- 
chological weaknesses reduced his tentialities to 
that of at best a "number two man/' Although his crit- 
ical stand, insofar as he was not thinking from 
the stand of assuming primary resnsibility for 
imementing a licy, appears  because of its fre- 
quent brilliance  to be the competence of a tential 
successor to Lenin, Trotsky could no more be a leader 
of that sort than a goldfish can prevent itself from con- 
tinuing to swim in tight circles when dumped from its 
customary bowl o a bathtub. Trotsky fought heroic- 
ally and stubbornly against the heteronomic impulses 
of his peasant soul, but he only contained it; he never 
freed himself fully from its Oblomovist control. Trot- 
sky was thus one of those brilliant individuals who can- 
not funion without a patron. ( ) 

Stalin, with all his comexities, was a Bolshevik 
version of Machiavelli's Prince, the master of were 
from the stand of combinatorial litics and the 



. Evgeny Preobrazhensky, The New Economics, trans, by Brian 
Pearce (New York: Oxford University Press, Inc., ),  pp. 

. L. Marcus (Lyndon LaRouche) and K. Ghandhi, "The Passion 
and Second Coming of L.D. Trotsky/' The Campaigner, Vol. VII, No.  
(Summer, ), pp. -. 



otting rinsic to such arts. In embracing the com- 
bination as a whole, his identity and self-image be- 
came that of a pular diator embodying in himself 
the primary self-erest as represented by the com- 
bination itself. That institutionalization of himself be- 
came his controlling self-image  a Soviet Oliver 
Cromwell. () 

What today's professed Stalinist sees predominantly 
is not the contradiions embodied in Stalin, but Stalin 
belatedly seizing Preobrazhensky* s analysis, and con- 
tinuing that as the guiding perception of the charaer- 
istic self-erest of the combination thereafter. The 
Soviet Stalinist abstras that moment from Stalin's 
leadership, that moment in its resultant form, and re- 
flexively attributes that adduced aspe as the homo- 
geneously-charaeristic Stalin impulse. 

The Stalin constitution of the Soviet republic has the 
ent of transfeng the personalized role of Stalin 
the diator to the lawful organic democratic-republi- 
can institutions of a republic after him. That constitu- 
tion and associated constitutional tradition is viable as 
it embodies the *Treobrazhenskian*' moment\ it is 
corrupted by its imicit denial of the problems associ- 
ated with the princie of combination. 

Both the sitive and flawed features of that consti- 
tutional tradition  as an organic, embedded tradi- 
tion of willful praice  carry forward direly o 
the problems presently focused ernally around the 
projeed agricultural comnent of the five-year 
an. It is also in this specific respe that the curtail- 
ments of litical freedom within the Soviet repub- 
lic  as we have defined freedom  are causally 
mediated. The abuses of law within the Soviet republic 
are generated by the constras aced un those 
proper expressions of freedom which are checked 
and oppressed to the extent that they are viewed as 
leading, in turn, toward provoking a decisive open re- 
solution of the essentially irrepressible conflis be- 
tween the two principal social tendencies embodied 
within the combination. 

This is generatively causal of the persisting stupid- 
ity which charaerizes most of ''official Marxism- 
Leninism." Just as the ignorant, tradition-oriented per 

ception of capitalist litical forms of ownership with- 
in the United States contributes to stupidities within 
the U.S. Soviet foreign licy, so the stupidities we 
have just located within Soviet thinking are the princi- 
pal, ernal-Soviet obstacle to establishing a com- 
munity of princie in fa. 

To resume, now, our comementary focus, on the 
significance of industrial-capitalist litical forms of 



. Lyndon LaRouche, "The Question of Stalinism Today," The 
