
 

 by itself a commendable aspiration  has been per- 
verted by the Tories o threatening their opnents 
with charges of at least obstruionist and even ten- 
tially treasonous condu, should they refuse to sup- 
rt those licies which have been often in fa 
direly contrary to genuine U.S. national erests. 
One is reminded of the commonly heard, fraudulent 
argument: an individual, unable to maain rational 
defense for the licy he is demanding, accuses his 
critic: **If you would only stop disagreeing with me, 
we could both get something done.*' 

The content of this wretched "bi-partisan foreign 
licy*' dorine has been that the conservative Con- 
gressional opsition is thus deemed obliged to rally 
behind a Tory White House, or a Republican Presi- 
dency is deemed obliged to stay within the constras 
of the liberal, Tory faion of the Congress. It also has 
come to mean that a Republican President may re- 
fle conservative erests on condition that Rocke- 
feller creatures not only occupy such crucial Cabinet 
offices as Justice, State, and Treasury, maain a 
Rockefeller-controlled National Security Council nest 
within the White House itself, but also consent to the 
flagrantly unconstitutional praice of according 
Rockefeller-controlled Executive agencies de fao 
**Fourth Branch of Government*' autonomy with res- 
pe to the Presidency itself. 

Accordingly, since the Republican and Democratic 
parties* pro-development, anti-Tory base comes more 
immediately o confli with the atrocities of mone- 
tarist licies at home, it has been in domestic licy, 
through predominantly rearguard opsition to 
liberal swindles, that the aual erests of the nation 
have been relatively best defended. Otherwise, 
although these conservatives opse the most obvious 
sorts of liberal swindles in such matters of foreign 
licy as agricultural exrts and obvious efforts to 
loot the U.S. Treasury to lowere Manhattan's ad- 
vantage, the conservatives tend otherwise to submit to 
the most basic aspes of established monetarists* 
licies in foreign affairs. 

Because of the pro-development thrust of 
Republican and Democratic conservatives centered 
within the Republican Party, that party does not 
funion as an efficient initiator of the wildest of the 
monetarists' innovations and adventures either at 
home or abroad. Consequently, when the Rockefeller 
and allied forces, or their predecessors, wished to 
launch a new sort of major swindle in foreign licy, 
or launch a series of wild adventures to that effe, the 
corresnding Wall Street forces concentrated their 
financial, litical, press and related muscle to bring 
a liberal Democrat o the White House, and attempt- 
ed to push through correlated adjustments of the 



correlations of faional forces in the Congress and 
federal courts. 

Hence, the lawful correlation between a liberal 
Democrat in the White House and U,S. tendencies for 
involvement in wars. 

The broadest irony of this pattern over, especially, 
the present century, is that not only does the Tory 
foreign licy represent a dire violation of the ent 
of the Constitution and the nation's most vital in- 
terests, but the combination of industrialists, trade- 
union, farmer and other pro-development currents 
represents a combination which has always represent- 
ed the overwhelming majority of the eleorate and of 
mobilizable litical forces. This properly dires 
attention to the historical fa that the Tory faion's 
were has been based un breaking-up aual and 
tential alliances between pro-development in- 
dustrialist and labor-movement forces. 

The central feature of that dividing of pro-develop- 
ment litical forces is the role of primitive accu- 
mulation in driving the industrialists and the labor 
movement o embittered opsition to one another. 

Insofar as this problem is located in inadequate 
general consciousness of its nature, Karl Marx 
himself has been partially to blame. Not because 
Marx prosed the mistaken perceptions which have 
governed the wereful ideological influence exerted 
cumulatively by the (admittedly, usually tiny) social- 
ist forces within the labor movement, but because 
Marx's notable errors gave tacit consent to licies 
and influences otherwise direly contrary to his most 
fundamental strategic-litical conceptions. 

Out of respe for the usefulness of the concept at 
issue, we are obliged to corre Marx himself 
unequivocally on the  at issue. 

Although Marx did not go so far as his self-designat- 
ed epigones usually allege him to have done on this 
, Marx did commit the historical blunder of fa 
in viewing the early nineteenth century English 
economy as an approximate, clinical model of critical 
reference for adducing lawful princies of capitalist 
development. This error refles the fa, pervasively 
demonstrated throughout Marx's writings, that he 
was largely ignorant of the twelfth through seven- 
teenth centuries* history of the process by which 
capitalism in fa emerged from the development of 
Renaissance humanism. For those reasons of 
ignorance, he credulously accepted the absolutely 
wrong and misleading view that, at least for purses 
of acceptable approximation, the emergence of 
capitalist development could be traced empirically in 
terms of beginnings in Holland and England during 
the last half of the seventeenth century. 

Marx would have been compelled to discard such 







isonous misassumptions had he been informed of 
the principal features and issues of the American 
Revolution. Although he was appreciative of the early- 
nineteenth century Whig economist Carey, his general 
view of the U.S. was limited to both the Civil War 
period, and the preceding decades during which U.S. 
foreign and domestic licies were usually and 
predominantly controlled by British agents con- 
trolling the Democratic Party. 

For such reasons, Marx*s rtrait of the thrust of 
industrial-capitalist impulses is entirely mistaken. He 
reicates the tendency for st hoc ergo propter hoc 
rationalization of the succession of apparent develop- 
ment which Hegel earlier committed in respe to 
regarding slave-based economy as a necessary phase 
in the succession of human social evolution. Although 
Marx rightly deprecated Hegel for that method- 
ological blunder, he in fa committed an analogous 
