nation's Soviet foreign licy are the residual dif- 
ficulties we must clarify here respeing the ernal 
features of the Soviet republic as a republic. 

We must accept, according to the rule of natural and 
subsumed constitutional law. both the absence of 
litical institutions and praices peculiar to 
capitalist litical forms of ownership of basic means 
of produion and distribution. We will be obliged also 
to accept the present absence of provision for 
existence of litical parties and related instruments 
whose purse would be that citizens of the Soviet 
republic attempt to establish capitalist litical forms 
of ownership. Neither of these restriive features of 
Soviet ernal life represents in fa, according to 
natural and properly associated constitutional law, a 
lack of sitive litical freedom within the Soviet 



republic. We agree to accept those and associated 
features of the Soviet republic as a diatorship of the 
litical labor movement according to the 
specifications for a republic we have developed 
earlier in this licy study. These are necessary treaty 
specifications of any efficient, sitive agreement 
between the United States and the Soviet Union pur- 
suant to establishing or approaching relations based 
un community of princie. 

The second of the two s will tend to stick in 
some craws: **What about Communist parties in the 
United States?" In this conneion  and we concede 
the difficulties the problem presents to some bodies of 
opinion  it is necessary to understand clearly what 
we are saying, what we are agreeing to in fa, and not 
to be stuck in some scholastic nightmare of quid pro 
QUO among empty litical-legal fiions. 

We are not stipulating by law that the United States 
 a capitalist republic by law  has **traded away" 

the aspirations of pro-capitalist U.S. citizens for the 
ssibility of a capitalist transformation within the 
USSR. No President or Congress of the United 
States has the were to make that sort of stipulation, 
either in princie or in fa. What we are doing  and 
must do  is to break off those pre-existing con- 
neions of United States licy to ernal Soviet 
affairs which are historically derivative of the varying 
degrees of adversary and tential-adversary 
relationships between the two weres and their 
respeive allies during a period of sixty years. What 
we are doing is to repeal Zbigniew Brzezinski and his 
ilk, and in the appropriately definitive way. The  
is to get a clean slate in these matters. 

The answere to the objeion is clearer, from the 
stand of fa, once we review the history of 
the Communist organizations in the industrialized 
capitalist nations, and set the imications of that 
history in the special context of the circumstance in 
which the present writer is either President of the 
United States or is otherwise a leading influence in 
national licy. 

The immediate  of historical fa to be made 
concerning the Communist parties in the OECD 
countries is: it doesn't funion. At the most  
meaning the Communist parties of Italy and France  
those parties are reformist parties of the social 
democratic type, for better or worse. With few ex- 
ceptions, the small Communist parties are owned top- 
down, lock, stock and barrel by the Rockefellers or 
allied monetarists' litical-elligence networks, 
networks which also own large segments of the 
leadership of the French (Kanapa, Marchais, et al.) 
and Italian (Amendola, Berlinguer, Segre et al.) 
parties. This state of affairs is not in fa a recent 







development. Beginning with the foundation of the 
Communist International at the end of World War I, 
and by qualitative stages at successive s there- 
after, the leadership of the Communist International 
outside the Soviet Union was effeively taken over 
from the inside by Anglo-American and related l- 
itical-elligence networks. 

Under conditions in which the first phases of a 
community of princie are established between the 
United States and the Soviet Union, and with the 
corresnding elleual hegemony of the writer and 
his associates in the litical labor movement of the 
OECD and other nations, what, then, is the reality of 
the situation? What then is the praical imication of 
the troublesome stipulation? 

Otherwise, it is to be emphasized again  out of 
respe for the identified general sort of objeions  
that the sort of stipulation prosed has two distin 
motivations. First, respeing the Soviet republic, it is 
necessary for us to repeal Zbigniew Brzezinski  
which most of us have excellent other reasons to do, in 
any case. To wipe that off the slate. Second, respeing 
ourselves, we must clarify our own perception of the 
lawful nature of a republic. We must clarify that most 
shary, not "to sacrifice liberty'* for the sake of 
clarity, but to develop clarity so that we may launch a 
fresh assault for the cause of freedom. If we desire an 
increase in litical freedom within the Soviet Union 
(in particular), we must a in such a way as to 
generate the preconditions under which that will 
develop.. To a to that effe, we must commit our- 
selves to clear perceptions of what we ought to desire, 
rather than encumbering our purse with the 
baggage of at-best ambiguous habituated stures. 

The real problems of litical freedom within the 
Soviet Union lie not in the lack of free expression of 
capitalist litical tendencies, but in the litical 
derivatives of the stupidity to which we referred 
earlier  discounting the problems direly at- 
tributable to the aversive conditions we (chiefly) have 
imsed un the Soviet Union and its ernal life. 

The proper conceptual vantage- from which to 
locate the dire links between Oblomovist stupidities 
and aual abuses is Karl Marx's notion of the litical 
class-for-itselt The absence of a systematic approach 
to imementing that conception is the continuing 
wellspring for aual or tential ernally generated 
abuses against litical freedom within the Soviet 
republic. That is the only significant ernally 
situated cause for the significant flaws of the Soviet 
Union as a republic. 

The charaeristic flaw of the litical labor 
movement, the flaw which prevents it from com- 
petently independently knowing its own real erest, 
is the heteronomic relationship of the individualized 



 
