human communication, and have an imied 
(negentropic) thermodynamical significance. 

However, and this is crucial, the effe of progress 
in technological development is to shift the charaer- 
istic features of the economy  and social correlatives 
 in such a way that successive echs of tech- 
nological progress corresnd analytically to suc- 
cessive, different ^'geometries." This means that the 
system of linear equations which could imicitly map 
the events within the **geometry" of the society at a 
preceding ech does not determine the consequent 
events in the society for such a succeeding ech. 
However, the two societies are causally er- 
conneed by the process of extending new inventions 
o the form of extended willful praice. Moreover, 
although general scientific-technological break- 
throughs most prominently charaerize the process 
of transition, the processes include a cumulative 
constant, endemic ferment of less-influential scien- 
tific-technological and analogous discoveries, com- 
munications and praices to the same effe. 

It is the aspe of human communication relevant to 



, Lyndon H. LaRouche, "Linguistics: A Tool of the CIA's Global 
Terrorism,'* New Solidarity, Vol. VII, No.  (May , ). p. 

. This fa was first recognized by the present writer during the 
s, in conneion, predominantly, with the apication of concepts 
adduced in respe of the leading work of Riemann and Cantor to 
corre the principal included fallacies and inapicabilities in Karl 
Marx's Capital, and thus achieve a method of analysis which has been 
subsequently overwhelmingly validated empirically by the - 
detailed course of developments under the collapsing Bretton Woods 
monetary system, Reciprocally, that conceptual overview of both 
economic and physical processes was the germ for the U.S. Labor 
Party's work in developing an * 'energy dorine** and establishing a 
new approach to problems of controlled asmas. 



that process of development which is charaeristic of 
human behavior, as distin from animal behavior. 
This is the distinion of human behavior, and the 
distinion of human communication. 

Apying this to the model provided by the informa- 
tion theorist, the unit of information as he misdefines 
it contains in all forms of charaeristically human 
communication more energy and in a different way 
than the information theorists' dorine permits to be 
attributed to it. 

Analogously, in meteorology, the same error of 
fallacy of comsition is committed by most meteor- 
ologists: they see the energy in the atmospheric 
system, but do not see the existence of the organ- 
ization of the system beyond that. They have ignored 
the crucial fa of stable weather patterns (vortices), 
that the added energy which controls the determina- 
tion of the stable vortex system and its development is 
supied by the biological systems, themselves 
charaeristically negentropic, which contribute a 
small, but crucial margin of negentropy to the vortex- 
system over and above its apparent content. In or- 
dinary microphysical space, the system contains, 
similarly, more tentially-available energy than the 
field-particle ordering defines. Similarly, the paradox 
of the **big bang'* hythesis crucially demonstrates 
that a quantum of energy in the universe represents 
more energy than is attributed to it according to 
conservation of energy dorines. 

It is not simy a matter of **more energy,** but the 
fa that the concept of energy as we associate it with 
systems of linear equations is only a distorted aspe 
of aual energy, which crucial empirical evidence 
has shown to exist in a qualitatively different, negen- 
tropic form. 

What is otherwise principally involved is a different 
notion of rigorous causality than is acknowledged by 
either scholastic or nominalist dorines. 

Using, first, the exame of the different kinds of 
physical space involved in ''ordinary** and negen- 
tropic asma regimes: the particles  - elerons, 
neutrons, protons, and so forth  which exist within a 
negentropic regime also exist as particles in a lowere 
order of physical space (''ordinary" physical space). 
However, in the former, these particles behave dif- 
ferently than they do in the latter, and are included 
as determinate entities together with other kinds of 
determinate entities which do not exist to the same 
effe in the conceptions of ordinary space. 

Hence, between the two regimes, each regime is 
governed by a respeively different set of laws deter- 
mining behavior within the regime. Yet, the two 
regimes are conneed causally, since we have experi- 
mentally produced the former by aions taken in the 
latter. 



PEF=T(o)® i()X. E)EM© E^S 



Hence, the ordinary notion of causality is unac- 
ceptable. We can no longer think of cause as subsumed 
within a specific aprioristic or physical space, but 
must think of cause bridging two different kinds of 
physical space. Yet, we cannot discard the fa that 
the same cause which bridges two different forms of 
physical space experimentally, also operates as cause 
within the specific terms of reference of each of the 
included spaces. The primary nature of cause is there- 
fore adduced from its efficient role as the trans- 
forming of one, lowere, order of physical space to a 
higher, and at the same time that the primary quality 
of cause is defined as the negentropic ordering of 
physical space, its efficiency within each subsumed 
space of the ordering-sequence is retained as a sub- 
sumed aspe of its primary quality. 

That is precisely what occurs in the social effes of 
technological progress. Hence, although the princies 
involved have a necessary refleion in the funda- 
mentals of physics, we need not wait un their 
discovery within the realm of physics to already 
ascertain their lawfulness. The ^'thermodynamic" 
description of the histories of both human society and 
of the biosphere itself demonstrate in the most conclu- 
sive, unique way, that these are the fundamental laws 
of our universe  because we exist in that universe. 

It is that latter rigor which was the formal basis for 
the articulation of the "neo-atonic" humanist or 
Promethean outlook by Ibn Sina (Avicenna), and 
which was exicitly emoyed on a more modest level 
by the great Ionian thinkers of the pre-Athenian 
period. The recurrence of the neo-atonic or 
Promethean humanist view correlates, not by ac- 
cident, with those periods of human development and 
with individuals and groups of collaborators which 
represent the relatively greatest ferment in human 
