different prosition to say that the Soviet Union is 
qualitatively a socialist society. When Soviet officials 
use such demagogic sleight-of-hand as a lever of at- 
tempted inspiration of the Soviet worker, the lawfully 
cumulative result is incredulousness, and, if the utter- 
ance is believed, developing contempt for the idea of 
socialism itself. **If this deprivation and sacrifice is 
socialism, what in hell do I care about the CPSU 
leadership!" Whereas, if the truth were told ainly, 
and if the description of accomishments represented 
those accomishments for what they represent in 



 

fa, the reaion is, **We're making impressive pro- 
gress, but it's turning out to be a long way to get 
there." Whipping up the troops by suting the dumb 
official line, ultimately  or sooner  estranges the 
troops, and makes a rotten, muddle-headed hack out 
of the litical organizer. 

The colleivization case is notoriously exemary. 

Any self-respeing farmer can be induced to 
**save." Build a livestock, secure improved fertilizers, 
machinery, develop improved grains, and so forth. 
Farmers will tend to ant higher-yield -day corn in 
regions with a safe -day growing season, and such 
understandable stubbornnesses, but the princie of 
*'saving" every competent farmer understands, and 
will resnd to, given the proper approach and proper 
performance by those resnsible for the campaign. If 
the farmer remains somewhat stubbornly slow in 
coming around to a proper licy  it is such prob- 
lems that define the profession of competent leaders. 

Granted the circumstances of - Russia, the 
head-on collision with the peasantry was broadly 
understandable. The Bukharin licy (not-acci- 
dentally coinciding with the grain and petroleum 
erests of Anglo-Dutch financier erests in par- 
ticular), by frittering away the precious time needed 
to effe a competent agricultural reform aimed at 
qualitative technological progress, was most signi- 
ficant in causing the subsequent colleivization to 
proceed as it did. However, on the basis of Soviet of- 
ficial rerts, one adduces that to this day the agri- 
cultural seions of the CPSU and state have still not 
learned the litical ABCs of an agricultural program. 

Those who have knowledge of the way in which 
Anglo-American litical elligence operations have 
targeted **tential dissidents" within the CMEA 
countries know empirically, without really under- 
standing why, how these litical blunders of the 
Soviet leadership (in particular) foster the litical 
conditions in which such an incidence of tential 
litical-elligence targets occurs. But for the 
litical incompetences to which we have referred, 
those litical-elligence operations would have 
found the CMEA countries an unprofitable target for 
building Mr. Brzezinski's networks. The litical 
class-for-itself princie is the ABC of Karl Marx's 
method, but from the visible aspes of predominant 

Soviet praice and the awful nonsense officially 
issued in the name of *'Marxism-Leninism," the Polit- 
buro as a whole hasn't the barest sense of the term's 
imications for praice. 

The higher incidence of heteronomic ferment 
produced by this combination of circumstances 
naturally attras the attentions of Soviet ernal 
litical security forces. Part of the problem, the most 
significant part overall, is the produ of the gason- 







 

economy circumstances under which the Soviet 
republic and other CMEA nations have existed since 
their establishment. The rest is the significant aggra- 
vation of the "objeive*' roots of the problem by 
Communist leaderships* litical blundering. All 
things taken o account, the Soviet republic is 
qualitatively a gason economy with, to this writer's 
knowledge, an unknown degree of corresnding in- 
ternal litical security praices to match the gar- 
rison economy. 

To the extent that a greater or lesser want of 
republican liberties exists within the Soviet republic 
for these reasons, the wretchedness, like the material 
deprivations incurred, is unquestionably deorable. 
As President, I would be concerned with improving 
these ernal Soviet conditions to the extent improve- 
ment is required. The lesser question, which shall we 
review first, is What should we do about it? The more 
significant question, respeing the basis for United 
States foreign licy toward the Soviet Union, is how 
this affes the charaer of the Soviet Union as a 
republic. 

Even acknowledging the genuine atrocities the 
United States has to its credit  notably including 
Chile  it is proper and obligatory of a U.S. President 
to truthfully rert on such matters to the Soviet 
leadership and to the people of the United States. At 
present, the only non-hycritical way of stating such 
opinions is to emphasize the Soviets, too, have a few 
nasty features of their ernal life. It is obscene to 
compare an Eastern European government to the 
horror of Chile. It is a matter of stating relevant li- 
tical fas, not running a bogeyman competition. 

By stating such things  which we are obliged to do, 
whatever we may have waiting to be exsed in our 
own closets  the matter is aced on the table. Fas 
are fas. Beyond that, the question is what do we do 
about it? 

The Soviet Politburo will immediately resnd with 
a few suggestions concerning Mr. Brzezinski and 
similar creatures, whose aivities are by no means 
irrelevant to any ensifying of the aivities of the 
ernal litical security institutions of the CMEA 
countries. The Soviets might, in the same vein, offer a 
few pertinent suggestions to the same effe con- 
cerning blacker aspes of the editorial licies of 
Radio Free Europe. () 



. We must, in that conneion, appreciate that the technological 
stagnation and the degeneration of the military establishments of the 
OECD countries under "utopian" strategic licies has reduced the 
imrtance of Soviet spies in the "West," while increasing the 
premium on NATO spying and related aivities in the CMEA nations. 
We have diminishing little worth the effort of a spy to attempt to steal. 
The Atlanticist bunch hasn't had a genuinely original strategic idea  
good or bad  since Henry Kissinger's  articulation of the doc- 
trine of "brinkmanship." 

