occur as a subsumed feature of the **taed connec- 
tion." However, the most significant a the **CIA 
agent" in the media does as such an *'agent," is 
nothing more than what Walter Cronkite, MCA, and 
Katharine Graham do to you publicly every day of the 
week. They shape entertainment and news rerting, 
to the effe of cumulatively building a total en- 
vironment of fantasy, through which the direed 
evolution of the pulation's private fantasy-building 
molds the **sub-struure" of a majority of **public 
opinion." 

Within such a broader background-context in 
general patterns of mass entertainment and news 
licies' effes, exicitly '^litical scenarios" of the 
same **formula"-quality are roduced to targeted 
rtions of the broadly conditioned pulation. The 
result is converging sets of shared fantasy models, 
models converging un the genre typified by Orwell's 
Animal Farm, , or the Orwellian Clockwork 
Orange. The groups of persons gathered around 
convergence un such a specific litical fantasy 
come to represent an organized litical tendency, 
which operates according to debated scenarios 
variously recommended as the means to bring the 
dream-condition o effe in reality. 

The Atlanticist Dorine is the form of the fantasy 
adopted among the leading litical and associated 
strata of the monetarist faion. Although these cir- 
cles coordinate the indorination of '*public opinion" 
with malignant deliberateness, they extend to the 
broader public nothing but the same kind of viimiza- 
tion which operates un themselves. The **dream 
merchants'' are themselves living in a nightmare. 

We can now identify one of the most crucial aspes 
of the Atlanticist Dorine. The proto-Tory impulse is 
a flight from reality. It flees in search of a dream, to 
superimse un and thus drive away the hated 
reality. The transformation of such private tendencies 
o a shared litical fantasy, o the socialized 
institution of the commitment to such common efforts, 
is in the striest sense of the psychological disciine 
a reaion formation. Toryism  from the Atlanticist 
Dorine at the top to the liberalism and radicalism of 
the suprting core ideology  is essentially a 
reaion formation against reality. 

As we have summarized the conneions involved so 
far, we have the following. 

Through catastrophes and related acute crises, the 
human race's viable strains of culture have formed 
governments (or the equivalent) governed by the si- 
tive perceptions contributed by an initiating few, of 
the imications of natural law which account for such 
monstrous cumulative failures of general human 
praice. Through catastrophe, through related grave 
crises, the broader mass of the pulation establishing 



such viable forms of government have (in fortunate 
outcomes) recognized both the follies of their hetero- 
nomic condu, and the propriety of the sitive 
perceptions of natural law advanced by the initiating 
elleual-litical forces. 

The most broad and conspicuous evidence of this 
process is provided by the history of Christendom as 
Christendom. It is the anguished recognition in the 
general pulation of the hideous consequences of 

colleive sin (heteronomic behavior), which has 
caused (among other variants) those sitive ex- 
osions of religious revolutions through which the 
pulation brings itself willfully under the constras 
of moral la w in its religious expression. 

The produs of great religious upsurges of the 
history of European Christendom all fall exclusively 
o one of three categories: Allonian, Promethean, 
and Dionysian. They are corresndingly conserva- 
tive, creative, or heteronomic. It is the first two which 
are the law-building currents, and the third which 
represents a society reaing to crisis by going 
morally insane. In modern European Chirstendom's 
history, we know these three respeive currents of 
outlook and method as scholasticism (Aristo- 
telianism), neo-atonic humanism, and nominalism 
(empiricism-pragmatism-monetarism). 

The charaeristic of the first two is the persuasion 
that the heteronomic impulses of the individual will 
must be driven out of efficient social praice 
generally, to within the supervised bounds of 
"molecular" family and private-mental life. 
Heteronomy is thus bounded within ernally ordered 

local areas of human aivity, areas defined as local- 
ized areas of toleration; hence, the scholastic doc- 

r 

trines pertaining to the canonical ordering of ernal 
features of the designated areas of relatively 
**privatized" toleration. 

The instruments by which the governance of recog- 
nized universal natural law are effeed have been the 
church and the state. 

As a consequence of the kinds of corruption of the 
church charaeristic of the period approximately 
 A.D. through the mid-seventeenth century defeat 
of the Hapsburgs, and that period's division of the 
church o faions deoyed against government and 
natural law, the princie of the separation of church 
and state was rightfully established as a spreading 
licy, depriving the church in particular of any 
secular authority, either parallel to government or in 
respe of dire representation in either government 
or the delegation of the funions of government. 
Despite that proper outlawing of the secular authority 
of the church in concrete, the useful princies behind 
the earlier ordering of Christendom w^ere preserved 
through the instrumentality of constitutional republic. 



P^OF-T(o)(Q)llOT. OEM© E^iD©i 



The churches themselves were retained as proteed 
institutions of constitutional republics, to the purse 
of retaining their contributing moral influence on 
behalf of universal law against the sin (heteronomy) 
which was the common enemy of the church and state. 

The cited decisive focus of Franklin and others in 
combating heteronomy (sin) within the colonies and 
nation exemifies the princie we have cited. 

Governments based un conservative or humanist 
litical revolutions in morality and law represent in 
effe an instrument by which people colleively en- 
forces un itself behavior in conformity with reality, 
imsed un the heteronomic impulses of the indivi- 
