natural law. What must be governed against is the 
anarchy and treason of heteronomy. 
We are not in any sense justifying enlightened 

constitutional diatorship  although that would be 
preferable to **social contra" forms of fascist 



 

^'democracy" our neo-Fabians would establish. We are 
engaged, at this  in our building a conception in 
this seion, in looking backward to the European 
roots of the American Revolution. In such an un- 
dertaking, it is not permissible to imse the litical 
notions appropriate to modern (st-Renaissance) 
capitalist (or, socialist) society on earlier forms of 
society with different charaeristic **geometries." To 
establish a valid conception of causal relations con- 
neing our American Revolution and its sequelae to 
its predecessors, we must respe the reality of the 
specific ^'geometry" of each. For this work, a causal 
conception of the sort we have defined earlier is in- 
dispensable. That causal conception must at once 
account for the ernal relationships in successor 
societies of different "geometries/* and also com- 
prehend the generation of the one out of the other. 

The concept of litical freedom appropriate to 
capitalist (and socialist) development uses an old 
word, freedom, but imparts a qualitatively new 
litical meaning to it. Political freedom in the 
modern sense of its proper usage assigns to the in- 
dividual member of capitalist (or, socialist) society a 
hubristic quality of world historical resnsibility and 
influence over the course of events previously peculiar 
at best to ruling strata of society. 

This freedom is not "freedom" in the sense of the 
moral autarky of isolated individuals  not 
heteronomy. It is freedom to change the entire world 
through the specific means of contributing to 
universalizing forms of progress in its technological 
and related forms of charaeristic praice. 

In capitalist and socialist society, that form of 
litical freedom is not something the state reluc- 
tantly surrenders to the individual  freedom is not 
toleration. On the contrary, it is something the state 
demands from the individual in the perceived general 
erest of both the immediate society and humanity 
in general. The were of capitalist (or, socialist) 
society is delimited by the quality and prortion of its 
individual citizens who approach those distinions 
epitomized in the extreme by the idea of the great 
scientific discovery. 

The related litical problem confronting the state 
is that it cannot predi what specific sitive in- 
novations in knowledge for praice are to be fostered 
before the time those innovations are discovered and 
established as valid, a process effeed through the 
initiatives of individuals. The state can only promote 
the conditions of developing and realizing creative 
discoveries, and foster the litical and related con- 
ditions under which such initiatives will flourish. 

Hence, as we have noted earlier, the difficulty of the 
uneducated observer in distinguishing between gen- 
uine litical freedom and mere litical toleration. 

This notion of litical freedom developed by neo- 







 

Platonic humanism is unique to the modern era, 
erupting as the impulse for a form of government 
within the licies of the Tudors, and uniquely con- 
solidated as the entire licy of government with the 
American Revolution and the processes leading to the 
adoption of the republican form under the Constitu- 
tion. We justly prize it today, because it is lawfully 
essential to the ernal "geometry" of modern soc- 
iety. 

Such a modern notion can be projeed randomly 
un the past only in cheap historical novels, not in 
serious inquiry. 

That essential qualification made, a capitalist 
republic is essentially, properly, a class diatorship- 
in-fa of licymaking by the industrialist and labor 
strata, in the respe that the immediate erests of 
these two classes taken as a whole are the primary 
generative basis for evolving licies and praices 
which are consistent with such a Constitution as ours. 
ThiSy as we shall see in the concluding seion, is an 
indispensable view of our own republic as we turn, in 
particular, to defining sound foreign licies 
respeing our relationship to a Soviet republic which 
is constitutionally a class diatorship of its labor 
movement. '^Diatorship'* in this sense does not 
mean **diatorship*' in the commonace un- 
derstanding of "totalitarian regimes," It means a 
determination of which class erests diate the 
evolving licies and praices of the nation in terms 
of the ent and forms specified as the republic's 
constitutional princies. 

An industrial-capitalist republic is the diating of 
those licies by representatives of the conscious 
erest of industrial-capitalist development as a 
whole, in which the erests of the labor movement 
are the partners and immediate broader social base of 
the leading role of industrial capitalists as such. 
However, a capitalist republic, because it depends 
un litical freedom, as we have defined it, as the 
source of the strength of the republic, provides the 
same categorical individual litical freedoms it 
affords to its diating class erest to the members of 
the other social classes. The question of diatorship, 
used in this proper way, is not a matter of individual 
"freedom" (toleration) or non-"freedom" in and of 
itself; it is a matter of the instruments and institutions 
through which the constitutional commitment of the 
republic is upheld in the formulating and im- 
ementing of licies affeing the republic's vital 
erests. 

A reader might obje, "But that is not *dic- 
tatorship' as I understand the word at all. Why con- 
front a pular prejudice concerning a word in this 
unnecessary way?" 

First, looking backwards, it is imssible to trace 



the succession of societies and their included litical 
varieties of representation without locating the 
generative imications of the fa that every society's 
licies are diated, under various governments, by 
specific erests which are predominantly the 
