oceanic world. While the Nazis were generally 
execrated in the United States, only those who 
believed that Hitler would eventually turn 



west called for praical measures against 
him. . . . But when Germany breached the 
western baer, there was an instant and 
virtually unanimous recognition that the 
country was threatened. . . .The new defense 
program was called for because the Western 
European baer had been breached. ... If 
the Nazi regime had not been the vile thing it 
is, would the United States have reaed as it 
did to the conquest of France? The answere to 
that question was given in the first German 
war. 

Although Lippmann*s account skids over a number 
of crucial fas known to him  including the manipul- 
ation of public opinion in this and related matters  he 
imicitly and correly identifies the backers of both 
the Wilson and Roosevelt administrations as informed 
of and tending toward concurrence with the British 
scheme best identified as the Parvus Plan.'* Al- 
though the USA had certain strong reservations con- 
cerning that British licy for an alliance with the 
Kaiser's Germany, these objeions were, in the lesser 
part, the difficulties of peddling such a diomatic 
swindle to the U.S. eleorate, and of more imrt- 
ance, a realization that the success of the British 
venture would put the City of London in a strategic 
sition to resist  perhaps successfully  the lowere 
Manhattan impulse to reduce Britain to junior-partner 
status. Lippmann alludes to that comication of st- 
Versailles Anglo-American relations in the seion of 
his text devoted to U.S. -Russian relations. There, he 
both exaggerates and misrepresents the nature of U.S. 
blocking of British licies concerning breakup of the 
Soviet republic, a distortion which is understandable 
in light of the package the U.S. was attempting to 
peddle to Stalin during the  period. 

The role of Anglo-Dutch agents, including (Alex- 
ander Helphand) Parvus in Balkan affairs prior to 
World War I, and Parvus* peddling of the British 
eastern European strategy to the Kaiser's general 
staff in , expressed the City of London's purse in 



P^OF-T(o)(Q)llOT. OEM© E^^ 




The first Cabinet: President 
[Knox], and, in background, 
century artist Alonzo Chappel 





on with the Secretaries of State \Jejf€rsoh\, Treasury [Hamilton], War 
General [Randolph], an engraving from a paing by nineteenth 



 



 

launching World War I. The Kaiserreich, created by 
Rothschild protege Bismarck with a helping hand (and 

other organs) from the ruling Hanoverian House of 
England, was ordained by City of London and allied 
Fabian licymakers to perform an indispensable role 
in the breakup of the Austro-Hungarian and Russian 
Empires. The proje stipulated the breakup of the 
Balkans and what is today called Eastern Europe o 
a pathetic agglomeration of squabbling separate 
states, each embodying the consolations of "national 
self-determination," which would come under the 
Anglo-Dutch financiers* departments of control of 
global grain and petroleum distribution. The Russian 
republic would contemate the beauties of liberalism, 
while liberally meeting the debt service owing to the 
Rothschilds, et al. from the Czarist regime. 

That same British-concoed Parvus Plan was the 
strategic licy which Hitler's British and New York 
City financier patrons adopted for him in imsing 
him from abroad on bankrupt Germany of . That 
Anglo-American backing of Hitler's assigned eastern 
and Balkan role was the reason that Neville Chamber- 
lain capitulated to Hitler at the  Munich affair, and 
why the opening months of World War II were a 
*'phony war" on the Anglo-French-Belgian western 
front. Rudolf Hess' flight to Scotland was not an in- 
dividual lunatic's caprice, but most probably a result 
of a licy decision by Hitler himself. Hess' predica- 
ments in England (and his prolonged stay in Spandau 
prison) are the result of the fa that the notable defe 
in his adventure was that he had undertaken it months 
too late. 

The broad  to be made for present praical 
purses is that the same Anglo-American, ''Atlantic- 
ist" dorines and methods which misfired in deter- 
mining the unexpeed course of two world wars 
against Germany are the dorine and method being 
emoyed around lowere Manhattan and Washington to 
the effe of blindly stumbling headlong o an early 
World War III. The "concert" method emoyed by 
British monetarism generally, the geolitical reduc- 
tionism charaeristic of all leading Atlanticists, Lipp- 
mann included, exemifies the essential pervasive 
stupidities of the dorine and methods involved. 

Rothschild thinking, the prototype for all modern 
monetarist litical-economic nostrums, does not 
recognize the existence of either economic reality or 
of the lawful litical processes which rigorously  if 
not always simy  refle real economic processes. 
Hence, twice, the Rothschilds and others committed 
the blunder of ending to march Germany eastward, 
then to discover to their astonishment that the kinds of 
German state suited, to that ordained purse were un- 
able to resist overwereing rinsic impulses to 
march both eastward and westward. NATO, under- 



neath all the sentimental babbling peddled to credu- 
lous North American and Western European publics, 
was created for the specific strategic purse of re- 
acing Germany's former role in a projeed third 
effort at imementing the "Parvus Plan." After the 
Soviet development of an operational thermonuclear 
wean before the U.S. itself, and the abortion of the 
Kennedy administration, the projeed dating for such 
use of NATO was apparently, at least, relegated to un- 
certay until the beginning of the Watergating pro- 
cess against the Nixon administration and the - 
 petrodollar-recycling affair. Despite the vacilla- 
