'^geometries" of negentropically advancing orders of 
technological praice, as we describe that above 
and below. The princie of freedom itself does not 
change, even though the successive, immediate condi- 
tions of life under its rule are negentropically altered. 

As is demonstrated sufficiently by the documen- 
tation and accompanying historical accounts in The 
Political Economy of the American Revolution, the 
humanist outlook which we are describing here is the 
same humanist outlook charaeristic of our 
republic's founding fathers, and is the determining 
feature of our nation's Constitution. We have laid out 
the case in more modern terms of reference, but the 
kernel of our approach and theirs is identical. 



Ours was founded as a nation committed to freedom 
in the humanist sense of that term. The founders of 
this nation did, indeed adopt the capitalist form of 
ownership of the means of produion and distribution, 
as the licy then deemed appropriate to the fulfill- 
ment of that licy. However, as Hamilton himself 
emphasizes, the right of property was conditional 
un the fulfillment of the humanist perception of the 
national erest. They also adopted the republican 
form of government, a decision made through a 
process of rigorous refleion on the deadly defes of 
either the monarchical or democratic form. The state 
must be led by men (and women) of exceptional 
enlightenment  rather than accidents of birth, or 
demagogues  who must be seleed for those offices 
with prudence and refleion un the candidates' 
humanist qualities of perception and condu concern- 
ing the combined erest of the present nation and its 
sterity. 

These licies did not spring miraculously from our 
nation's soil, but were the dire heritage of the Tudor 
Renaissance and the English Commonwealth which 
the English settlers brought with them to this con- 
tinent, a humanist tradition enriched by our leading 
figures' informed concern with the fruits of the 
Enlightenment. Moreover, contrary to those dupes of 
Charles A. Beard, Thurman Arnold and William A. 
Williams, who seem to forget that our forefathers 
fought a revolution for five years of most difficult and 
perilous struggle for these licies, fought against 
those very monetarist licies which the late Thur- 
man Arnold and William A, Williams esuse; these 
American licies were not some whim, some passing 
fad  some mythology. 

The erests for which our forefathers fought in 
behalf of these licies were substantial, real, tangible 
erests  as we see most clearly by comparing our 
nation's development with those nations which 
remained colonies and semi-colonies of British 
monetarist were, or for a time under the Holy 
Alliance and its successors, during the nineteenth and 
early twentieth centuries. 

These licies were not merely a preference in 
philosophy, but a philosophy which was demonstrated 
in relatively world-wide experience to be scientifically 
valid against its scholastic and nominalist contraries. 
Whenever our national government has abandoned or 
substantially violated these founding humanist 
licies, our nation's credit has been undermined, our 
national development impeded or even eroded. 
Moreover, we see in the successes, but also the more 
frequent misery and setbacks of those other nations 
ruled either by scholastic conservatism or 
nominalist radicalism (monetarism), that the prin- 
cies embedded in the ent of the founding fathers 
have been universally, praically demonstrated 







empirically in the past two centuries of world history 
 and, in fa, over longer centuries. 

Within the bounds of what the founding fathers of 
this nation adopted as humanist princies, there is 
legitimate range for disagreement on the best im- 
ementation of those princies. Beyond that foun- 
dation, we may progress  but not sidewards or back- 
wards to technological stagnation or nominalism; we 
may have compassion for the or dupes who esuse 
nominalism, but their opinions themselves we must 
hold in juridical contempt as discredited nonsense. 

These humanist princies, insofar as the princie 
of the Idea of Progress in its neo-atonic humanist 
form is a princie taken as the essence of the Consti- 
tution's drafting, were ended as expressions of a 
universal natural law. Our forefathers were not so 
miserably humble in either their elleual weres 
or conceptions, to prose that this form was a local 
peculiarity of our special national charaer. Although 
they themselves were most sensible of the aspe of 
approximation within the institutions adopted as our 
national instruments of government, they viewed such 
approximations as adopted under the governance of 
princies they properly deemed universal. 

Those princies, as they touch un foreign licy, 
do not define our nation as one competing for its 
existence against other nations as such, but as a 
nation embodying humanist princies, which is 
menaced only by wereful nations esusing contrary 
princies. If those other nations adopt humanist 
licies based on the Idea of Progress, both respeing 
their domestic order and the world as a whole, then 
there can be no real confli of fundamental erest 
among such nations sharing neo-atonic humanist 
princies. 

The Federalists* confli with the French Revolution 
did not arise because monetarist England had become 
less our principal adversary, but because the French 
Revolution, by resorting to an anarchical, democratic 
form which must be, as Tom Paine had argued and 
Milton before him, incompetent and diatorial in 
content, and because anarchy rather than progress 
was the charaer of that regime, had, in respe to 
the later words of John Quincy Adams concerning the 
England of , adopted no adequate basis for the 
prosed alliance with France on the basis of a 
community of princie. Worse, failing to base its 
relations to us on a community of princie in fa, 
France irresnsibly attempted to ace our nation in 
jeopardy vis-a-vis our principal adversary, England, 
and failing to offer us the military means to secure us 
from the imperiled strategic sition they demanded, 
instead attempted to force us o alliance by 
destabilizing our ernal order and harassing our 
foreign commerce. 

Although the mere fa of historical precedents in 



 

