the seleion of governing representatives by the in- 
dividual as of the eleorate. 

The corollary topic for this set of fas is the wide- 
spread delusion that a democracy is less diatorial 
than a republic. This was fought out for the cause of 
the republic by John Milton (unsuccessfully), and was 
fought out (successfully) by Federalist Tom Paine on 
behalf of the authors of the Constitution as a whole. 
Milton and Paine were absolutely corre in recog- 
nizing that a democracy's flaws were inherently in- 
jurious to the vital erests of the nation and the in- 
dividual liberties of the citizens. Because of the im- 
maturity of the development of the pulation (as the 
large minority vote for Jimmy Carter attests), and the 
inadequacy of that pulation for the institutions and 
instruments of a dire eleion of government en- 
tirely by local erest, a democratic form of govern- 
ment must degenerate o an unprincied govern- 
ment of demagogues. The ebbs and flows in govern- 
ment de fao ^^constitutional'* licy inherent in such 
a heteronomic arrangement are contrary to the 
service of a persisting self-erest of the nation as a 
whole, and thus develop the basis for the most vicious 
diatorship, by wereful demagogic self-erests 
aying un and cultivating the very heteronomic 
impulses within the eleorate which it is the essential 
funion of government to check. 

It is a fraud to suggest that a democratic republic 
deprives the citizen of any rights or liberties he or she 
would properly enjoy under a democracy. Rather, a 
constitutional republic compels the citizen to go 
through the refleive processes of reason respeing 
the general erest before he is permitted to exert his 
will effeively to alter imrtant institutions and 
instruments of the republic. The proper view of the so- 
called "checks and balances" within our own constitu- 
tional forms is absolutely not that they a to balance 
off confliing heteronomic tendencies; their ent 
and proper emoyment is to force a rational and 
knowledgeable refleion un the general erest in 
terms defined by the essential conneion between 
na tural la w and constitutional la w. 

In all respes, the ent of constitutional law  and 
the subsumed question of the efficiency of institutions 
and instruments with respe to that ent  is the 
only competent basis for comprehension and apica- 
tion of constitutional law. It is on precisely that vital 
 that the Tory subversion of our government and 
law is revealed in its sharpest focus. 

The question of the weighting of influence over in- 
stitutions by various classes and faions of classes 
(and we are continuing to speak of a democratic 
republic) is the location of the expression of diator- 
ship. The commitment of our Constitution and 



P^OF-T(o)(Q)llOT. OEM© E^^ 




John Quincy Adams, who articulated the notion of community of princie' ' to describe the fundamental tenet 
of the foreign licy of the United States ' Federalist Founding Fathers. 



republic from the inception to the princie of tech- 
nologically centered progress is the most essential of 
those aspes of our constitutional law which properly 
give precedence of weight (today) to the influence of 
industrialists and the labor movement. The quality of 
the Constitution and republic in this respe is not 
embedded merely in the Constitution's formalities as 
such, but in the circumstances of the American 
Revolution in which these institutions and instruments 
were established. It is the commitment to the Idea of 



authors of the Constitution 



which had itself been 



Progress by the founding eleorate 



not only the 



shaped in its outlook by the issues and course of the 
American Revolution, which is decisive. 

The litical diatorship of industrialists and labor 
(coinciding with that of the smaller pulation of tech- 
nology-proud farmers), is not effeed by acing 
industrial capitalists and labor leaders in government 
sitions. That may occur, but that is not the  to 
consider. A democratic republic is charaeristically 
(best) led by the predominance of a certain type of 
elleual cast in the tradition of the founding 







 

fathers. These were and should be elleuals who 
have made a profession of organizing the opinions and 
persons of forces of the general eleorate, in behalf of 
a princied demonstration of a sitive conneion in 
consequences between a general national erest and 
the immediate, proper self-erests of the individual 
citizen. In a republic in which technological progress 
in industrial development is the charaeristic realiza- 
tion of the general erest, as in the case of the Ameri- 
can Revolution and the founding of the republic, the 
general erest is most immediately expressed in 
terms of the erests of industry, industrial labor, and 
technologically-progressive farmers. Today, as scien- 
tists and engineers tend toward becoming, and must 
become an increasing prortion of the general 
eleorate, that aspe of the sociology of the elec- 
torate develops a new quality of imrtance. It is the 
concerted expression of the more immediate per- 
ception of self-erest by industrialists and labor 
which as  properly  like a litical battering ram 
in shaping the opinions and determining the pre- 
nderance of forces (under fortunate circumstances) 
throughout the eleorate. The heteronomic ten- 
dencies more charaeristic of the non-technologic- 
ally-oriented petit-bourgeois and lumpenized strata 
are made to become relatively imtent before the 
concerted forces represented by the mobilization of 
the two pro-development classes' forces and their 
allies. That is the way diatorship properly funions 
under the constitutional law of our democratic repub- 
