


. The significance of putting Jimmy Carter in the White House  
i.e., thumb on the well-known '^button"  is underlined by a Rand 
Corration scenario. The "game of chicken"  two lunatic automo- 
bilists approaching one another down the center of a highway at high 
speed, to test which swereves aside, "chickens," first  was suggested 
as adaptable to psychological warfare techniques, even on the level of 
thermonuclear confrontations between the White House and the 
Politburo. The Rand think-tankers sed the query: what if one of the 
drivers knows that his opnent is a raving lunatic? Would that 
knowledge imidate the saner of the two o swereving, and thus 
"losing the game?" Carter is the appropriate lunatic to ace o the 
White House for a game of "thermonuclear chicken" with the Soviet 
Politburo. 



 

their dissal, the leading figures of the Trilateraloid 
orbit are on performance a or lot. 

One of the key personnel problems of the Rocke- 
fellers' neo-Fabian and other **utopian" (e.g., In- 
terl-network) hierarchies is that an effeive mind 
requires a convincing self-image of elleual 
coherence and egrity, a consistent rationality and 
rigorous scope of relevant knowledge in at least the 
Aristotelian sense. This is the general sort of distinc- 
tion to be made between the Atlanticist "patricians" 
of earlier generations, including Lippmann, and the 
picaresque louts and thugs, such as a Cyrus Vance, a 
Lester Brown, a lunatic Brzezinski, who typify the 
Trilateraloid skesmen of today. 

Lippmann is already in his time a degenerate rela- 
tive to the image of the "Concord" patrician he 
parodies, already a refleion of the decay which 
seized Harvard University and similar institutions 
during the period of the accession of President Eliot. 
After , the degeneracy accelerated, along lines 
identified by John Dewey in his Reconstruion in 
Philosophy. The denial of universal praical and 
moral princies, an immorality which Dewey avowed 
in the aftermath of Versailles, is also Lippmann's 
criping affliion, that moral decay of elleual 
culture o babbling, sententious hycrisy which 
Princeton's Woodrow Wilson brought to our national 
institutions through his incumbency in the U.S. Presi- 
dency. 

That considered, Lippmann is a ausible stage- 
parody of a patrician, relative to the amoral mercen- 
aries of Vance's strata. 

The relevant world-historical  is that the 
present degeneration of the st-Versailles and st- 
Bretton Woods monetary orders and associated in- 
stitutions permits no credible appearance of 
corresndence between Rockefeller-centered 
monetary erests and the fundamental self-erests 
of those OECD and developing nations over which that 
decaying order desperately exerts its hegemonies. 

The credibility of the U.S. role respeing aual 
U.S. erests in the wars against the Kaiser's and 
Nazi Germany, gave to the ruling forces of this nation 
the appearance of representing not only Wall Street 
erests, but at least coincidentally the self-erests 
in prosperity and national security of the nation at 
large. Even those other nations which suffered 
degradation to satrapy status under lowere Manhat- 
tan's hegemonies, tended to swallow their anger and 
extend a certain degree of moral credit to the litical 
instruments of monetarist U.S. -based were. This 
persuasion was riddled with illusion  even downright 
delusion  but it was more or less ausible to anyone 
who was not fastidious respeing matters behind the 
coincidences and facades. 



P^OF-T(o)(Q)llOT. OEM© E^iD©i 




John Quincy Adams, who articulated the notion of **community of princie'* to describe the fundamental tenet 
of the foreign licy of the United States* Federalist Founding Fathers. 



 



 

At the time Lippmann*s book was published by 
Little, Brown, few went behind the surface appear- 
ances, the sentimental glosses of the author^s style, to 
assess the aual content of the prosals. The sort of 
licy Lippmann offered was broadly accepted by 
public opinion not because the licies involved were 
understood in any real sense, but chiefly because the 
rhetorical sentiments offered did not offend prevailing 
illusions and public tastes at the time. The U.S. elec- 
torate never understood the Roosevelt administration 
in any anually relevant detail; rather, they blindly 
trusted it, as a child trusts the fa of his particular 
parents, as more or less **the way things are decreed 
to be.'* Nothing yet had developed to disturb the con- 
soling self-delusions of more than a relative handful. 

In such a litical climate, a Lippmann could stand 
before his morning shaving mirror and imagine him- 
self to see a man not only honored in the contemrary 
codors of were, but regard those honors as the 
fruits of some genuine elleual egrity in agree- 
ment with a credible public erest. After the events 
of the Kennedy administration, and the increasingly 
savage assault un those institutions and princies 
which were our nation's heritage and conscience, the 
Rockefeller-linked and other financier elites represen- 
ted in the Kennedy administration proje stripped 
much of our nation's youth  and most of all them- 
selves  of the last shards of a credible self-image of 
elleual egrity. 

A capitalism which deliberately sets out  as early 
exemified by the "Trie Revolution'* Orwellianism 
 to systematically undermine and destroy the expan- 



sion and maenance of that technologically ad- 
vanced industrial and agricultural base which is and 
has been our nation's most vital self-erest, which 
tears the Constitution and other vital legal and moral 
institutions of the republic to shreds, which con- 
sciously and deliberately promotes the proliferation of 
dangerous drugs among our university and high 
school youth  what ssible illusion of egrity 
remains to the pronents of such hideousness? What 
man or woman of elleual egrity could devote 
personal capacities to such an enterprise; what 
person, while being in the ranks of the neo-Fabians, 
the Trilateral Commission, the Brookings Institution, 
