ations included not only Soviet stwar strength, but 
the imssibility of depending un suprt of U.S., 



. Lyndon LaRouche, "The Question of Stalinism Today," The 
Campaigner, Vol. VIII, No.  (Nov. ). 







 

British and other pulations for an abrupt turning 
against the wartime Soviet ally. Although there was a 
strong opsition to the prosed licy from within 
Atlanticist ranks, the notion of rallying the shards of 
the Nazi Waffen SS for a jo Allied-Germany late- 
,  or  assault against the Red Army was 
the Utopian conception of a relative few narrowly 
focused, and hence litically incompetent anti- 
Communist zealots. 

Zealots then  and later  prosed that U.S. 
ssession of "The Bomb*' invalidated the Soviet 
approach embedded in the  Lippmann draft. Such 
commentators overlooked the number of "The 
Bombs" the U.S. had at the end of World War II, and 
also the problem of producing them quickly in num- 
bers which could significantly offset both Soviet mili- 
tary strength and the litical countervailing con- 
siderations operating at that time. 

"The Bomb"  although only an exotic, limited 
operational capability consideration of the - 
period  did shift the dynamics of licy, and became 
the fetish-obje deluding worshippers of the anti- 
Clausewitzian dorine of "air were" and its wild- 
eyed "Utopian" sequelae. This combined effe did 
produce the Rockefeller hard-liners' (unsuccessful) 
"preventive war" campaign of the immediate st- 
war period, contributed to the way in which the "Cold 
War" and Red-hunt psychological conditioning of the 
larger pulation was fostered, and was influential in 
guiding Rockefeller State Department and other 
agents within the Truman administration to set up the 
Korean War. However, with the discovery  among 
other, related s  that the Soviets had gained 
priority in developing an operational thermonuclear 
wean, the "preventive war" and associated liti- 
cal impulses were diverted o new direions. The 
development of "brinkmanship"  leading o the 
Kennedy administration's efforts to carry out Henry 
("Strangelove") Kissinger's licy  became the new 
form of military thrust. The latter "brinkmanship" 
form of Utopian strategic dorine has persisted down 
to the present day, with only subsumed, increasingly 
exotic Utopian improvisations rather than anything 
qualitatively new. 

The military variants for Atlanticist dorine are 
auxiliary elements, such that various military 
alternatives can be substituted from time to time 
without altering the basic features of the dorine 
itself. Vis-a-vis the Soviets, the dorine specified a 
flexible containment licy to reace the old, 
relatively inflexible version and to use this increased 
flexibility as a way of lowereing the threshold for 
Atlanticist economic and litical penetration of the 
war-ravaged Soviet Union. This penetration was to be 
enhanced with the aid of Anglo-American litical 



elligence networks anted in the Eastern 
European countries. By agreements cutting the 
Soviets off from China, and construing a semi- 
penetrable baer on the Soviet west in central 
Europe, the conditions for reducing the Soviets to a 
condition of conquerability would be fostered (- 
) in the due course of preparations to this effe in 
the "Atlanticist world." 

In short, the predominant Atlanticist licy of - 
 toward the Soviet Union was a Fabian licy. 

Even without the  invasion of France, Roosevelt 
would have led the U.S. to war, certainly against a 
Japan manipulated and insulted o the required 
adversary sture, and direly or indirely  as 
required  the U.S. forces would have been deoyed 
in the Anglo-French-Belgian occupation of the Ruhr  
which would have been the "scenario" had Hitler gone 
only eastward. 

Overall, Roosevelt, like Wilson before him, led the 
U.S. o a war  which, this time, the U.S. could have 
prevented by appropriate aions before   and he 
established a licy which brought us out of the war 
with an Atlanticist licy aimed in fa, at World War 
III as its embedded, fateful imication. 

As we have indicated, the Korean War was a set-up 
in the spirit of the bloody escapades the Kennedy and 
Carter administrations were committed to unleashing 
under a modified licy later on. We were building up 
our arsenal of "The Bomb," on the way to developing 
an operational hydrogen bomb, and believed we had 
the correlation of forces to accelerate the Atlanticist 
dorine's Soviet licy substantially ahead of the 
schedule imied by Lippmann's (Roosevelt's) - 
 Fabian perspeive. So, North Korea was 
outrageously provoked by operations condued 
within and based un South Korea, while a 
(Rockefeller) Acheson State Department nominally 
under Truman advertised that the U.S. did not con- 
sider South Korea's defense in strategic U.S. erests. 
Naturally, with this public assurance, and provoked 
still further, the North Korean army moved south. We 
moved in with a counterassault, and we were on the 
way to our test showdown with both China and the 
Soviet Union. Then, we discovered such things as that 
the Soviets had developed an operational hydrogen 
bomb, and the war  by then close to a major war 
with China  no longer had the strategic appeal it had 

been deemed to have at the outset of the bloody affair. 
The pullback from the - licy took the 

form of the Eisenhowere administration, the scuttling 
of the included psychological-warfare tool, the 

astonished Senator Joseph McCarthy, and con- 
centration on a domestic, Japanese and European 
credit expansion. The Eisenhowere administration was 
partially a Rockefeller administration. For excellent 
reasons on former Senator and President Harry 







Truman's side, Truman and Nelson Rockefeller were 
not on the most amiable of terms. A piqued Nelson had 
left government shortly after the end of the war. Along 
