Campaigner, Vol. VIII. No.  (Nov. ). 







ownership under the ent of our Constitution and 
republic: 

The stand of the ent of our Constitutional re- 
public is not that of axiomatically adopting capitalist 
litical forms of ownership as a pre-given element of 
law. Hamilton and Jefferson, among others, are em- 
phatic respeing the conditional right of any specific 
capitalist ownership to exist only to the extent that it 
does not confli in praice with the vital erests of 
the nation as might be defined without respe to capi- 
talist forms. 

For exame. When the demands of the New York 
City debt-holders could be met only at the expense of 
the vital erests of the people of New York City, it 
was unconstitutional and imicitly treasonous for 
New York State Governor Hugh Carey and other judi- 
cial, executive, and legislative bodies to perpetuate 
the erests of debt-ownership at the expense of the 
vital erests of the City and State pulation and na- 
tion as a whole. Such aions represent in themselves 
sufficient grounds in constitutional law for prompt im- 
peachment aions against all the officials resn- 
sible. 

This does not mean that mere summary repudiation 
of debts was the axiomatic constitutional remedy. The 
state is obliged to consider the chain-reaion reper- 
cussions of partially or entirely suspending New York 
City debt service payments. It must prote the vital 
erests of the nation respeing technological pro- 
gress and the maenance of institutions of credit in- 
dispensable to the economy as a whole. This does not 
prescribe saving Chase Manhattan Bank by govern- 
ment ''bailout." It means that if Chase Manhattan 
Bank and other institutions must be pushed o bank- 
ruptcy because of vital erests of the nation, any es- 
sential funion performed by such bankrupt institu- 
tions must be either perpetuated under conditions of 
financial reorganization in bankruptcy, or alternate 
means of serving the affeed vital national erests 
be efficiently, promptly provided. 

Where, otherwise, contraual rights confli with 
the vital national erests as defined by the ent of 
our Constitutional republic, the rights of contra are 
axiomatically to be nullified in behalf of the national 
erest. Every Federal court is obliged to strily ap- 
y that rule in all relevant instances. The court must 
either itself direly nullify the contraual obligations 
as required by national erest, or must suspend that 
right while direing the resolution of the procedures 
of financial reorganization to the aion of executive 
and legislative branches of government. 

Under the content and clear ent of the Constitu- 
tion and republic's founding, there exists no axiom- 
atically '*sacred" right to capitalist litical forms of 



 

ownership  no more than personal incomes are ex- 
empt from taxation, or the persons of our citizens ex- 
empt from military conscription. Rather the rights 
delegated to agencies and persons by constitutional 
law are proteed from all invasions, except those in- 
trusions which fall under appropriate due process 
within the ent of constitutional law. The rights re- 
speing the litical freedoms of citizens represent 
the highest priority of categorical right. Although the 
right to develop capitalist forms of ownership is a 
principal right added to the right of personality under 
a capitalist form of democratic republic  hence, its 
great were under law  it is not a categorically in- 
alienable right, but a right created by constitutional 
law to the advantage of the vital erests of the repub- 
lic. 

It is a corollary of this to emphasize afresh that the 
constitutional government is not established primar- 
ily to enforce a system of exicit and imicit contrac- 
tual agreements among the constituent persons and 
agencies of the society. Rather, constitutional law de- 
limits contraual forms of relationship to those forms 
and methods deemed consistent with the national in- 
terest as a whole. Nor does the legality of a contra 
once-existing exist in perpetuity because it was for- 
merly lawful. Such rights are as much defined in re- 
spe to the circumstances in which their perpetuation 
is attempted as the circumstances under which they 
are initially exercised. 

The constitutional right to capitalist forms of pro- 
perty in the means of produion and distribution was 
adopted because no alternate, efficient means existed 
in praice for the apication of the princie of free* 
dom to the tasks of technologically centered general 
progress. The inability of the society to competently 
predetermine what technological innovations and 
apications would be most fruitful for progress, and 
in what manner of development and use, warranted  
and required  the establishment of the area of 
development of technological innovations as an area 
of sitive toleration. Since the testing of germ forms 
of such innovations could not be efficiently cometed 
apart from basic forms of produion and commerce, 
this and economic considerations required the api- 
cation of the essential fiions of sitive toleration to 
the corresnding areas of produion and commerce. 

For related reasons, the notion of the liberties and 
rights of capitalist ownership is inseparable from the 
notion of the stated or imicit ent of the articles of 
incorration of a capitalist firm. The same princie 
is imicitly apicable to the privately held firm. This 
must not properly delimit the existence of such an 
entity to its initial ent. The ent undergoes proper 
evolutionary shifts. However, the currently adducible 







 

ent associated with capitalist litical forms of own- 
ership for produion and commerce is properly the 
key comementary feature of the ownership itself for 
lawfully defining the rights of ownership. 

It is pure nonsense and reckless mythology to ima- 
gine that government aced itself therefore at a dis- 
tance from produion, commerce and so forth. Our 
government came o being as a federal republic in 
significant part because the Confederation failed, 
among its other incompetencies, to develop canals. 
The railroads were built  in chief  on the initia- 
