We have shown that the outer limits of toleration 
have been far surpassed. The skesmen for the 
Atlanticist faion, who have stolen our nation's 
Executive Branch and subverted our federal courts, 
are committed to keeping our nation on a collision 
course toward early, suicidal catastrophes. The most 
obvious of those catastrophes is the growing immi- 
nence of a general thermonuclear war with the War- 
saw Pa nations, a war in which the first day's extinc- 
tion of between  and  million estimated citizens 
epitomizes a virtual extinion of the United States as 
a funioning nation. That war danger is by no means 
the only principal catastrophe to be considered. The 
erests grouped for the moment around David 
Rockefeller are committed to the effort to attempt to 
secure a relatively short period of stnement of 
their insoluble bankruptcy, by putting both the United 
States and the entirety of the '*non-Communist world" 
through a hideous form of bankruptcy-liquidation pro- 
ceedings  systematically grinding down and scrap- 
ping our produive capabilities, reducing the major- 
ity of the human race to a brutalized rubble, in the 
effort to afford David Rockefeller and his associates 
the proceeds of the sale of scrap. 

The Rockefeller ^'environmentalist" licy  a l- 
icy of slashing energy consumption and general 
closing down of the world's industrial and agricultural 
tential  can only create in a relatively short time 
conditions on a global scale analogous to those which 
produced the genocidal famine and epidemics of 



fourteenth century central Europe  a global biolo- 
gical catastrophe during the course of the s whose 
consequences would be far, far worse than even those 
of a general thermonuclear war. If we unleash the 
destruion of industrial development tentialities, 
and at the same time imse a hyperinflationary 
austerity un the savaged general pulations of the 
OECD and developing nations, the conditions of 
biological deetion of human and livestock pu- 
lations, the low-technology deetion of agriculture, 
will produce successive waves of famines, epidemics 
and sylvatics which, in the absence of massive indus- 
trial produion to corre this, will probably lead to 
the early extinion of most of the human species and 
generate irreversible biospherical conditions ending 
the ssibility of future human life on this anet. 

These fas are so obvious, as fas, to persons and 
circles advantaged to know as the Rockefellers are, 
that we can no longer tolerate either the Rockefeller- 
centered Atlanticists, or the illusion that they repre- 
sent merely another wicked oppressor of the sort our 
race has known and tolerated too often during the 
past. The licies which the Rockefellers and their 
allies are pursuing obsessively are contrary even to 
the most vital human erests of the Rockefellers and 
their immediate allies, not only for the long run, but 
for the immediate future. It is no longer admissible to 
regard the Atlanticists merely as wiclced; they are 

colleively insane. 

That latter fa obliged us to go behind the immed- 
iate fas compelling such a conclusion. In light of the 
decades over which the majority of this nation  in- 
cluding forces adequate to have stopped the Atlan- 
ticists long before this  tolerated Atlanticist rule, we 
must account both for the obsessive irrationality of the 
Atlanticists and the processes which impelled the rest 
of us to tolerate Atlanticist rule for so long. It has been 
indispensable to locate those vicious weaknesses in 
ourselves which account for the perpetuation of Atlan- 
ticist rule; unless we recognize and remove those 
chains un our will, we, our nation, will soon die. 

Since our urgent objeive is to bring an end to 
Atlanticist licy, the rule by the Atlanticists must be 
ended to accomish that. Who, then, shall rule? A new 
licy, a new governing litical force must be 
promptly instituted. 

The same background considerations which ex- 
sed the reasons for the Atlanticists' colleive in- 
sanity and the nature of our self-degrading toleration 
established the firm basis for siting the alternative 
licies and the specifications of the new ruling liti- 
cal forces we urgently require at this immediate junc- 
ture. 

In such an undertaking, it would have been con- 
temptible to presume that the solution to those pro- 







found issues which have perexed so many for so long 
might be solved with the addition of a few pular 
atitudes to an array of superficially erpreted 
fas. Nor could the required analysis be accom- 
ished even by well-meaning, dedicated and elligent 
people on a moment's notice. It could be done only in 
the tradition of Benjamin Franklin, who dedicated 
decades of self-development respeing the vital is- 
sues of that age, decades of constant litical and 
scientific efforts in that committed direion, to bring 
forth the coherent set of princies and collaborators 
through which the American Revolution was under- 
taken and fought, and our Constitution and republic 
established. 

That observation is indispensable to a proper liti- 
cal insight o the propriety of our preceding coherent 
erweaving of science, constitutional law, theology, 
and historical evidence, to exse the roots of the im- 
pulses which divide our pulation between a Whig 
majority centered around industrialists, trade 
unionists and technology-proud farmers on the one 
side, and a wicked and insane Tory minority of mone- 
tarists, liberals and radicals on the other. () 

It is proper to state, in the same conneion, that 
humble Uriah Heeps make successful embezzlers, but 
they could never amount to anything useful in litical 
crises. The unique sition of advantage enjoyed by 
the present writer in this indispensable present under- 
taking is indeed unique and that special competence is 
not accidental. 

This writer has been enabled to supy the vitally 
needed contributions included in this licy study be- 
cause he has consciously prepared himself and his 
immediate associates for this kind of task over a peri- 
od of twenty years, and because he was advantaged 
to make such an undertaking by the special benefits 
contributed to him by both an American family and 
the Whiggish influences imparted to him by the Amer- 
ican refraion of European culture in general. () 

In the tradition of  yes !  Thomas Aquinas, Roger 
Bacon, Marsilio Ficino, Thomas Gresham, Johannes 
Keer, Jean Bodin, Rene Descartes, and Benjamin 
Franklin, this writer  drawing un the massive 

