come, must not be derived from relative surus value 
(primitive accumulation), and that the profit pro- 
duced must be predominantly invested to effe 
enlargement of the scale of produion on a tech- 
nologically more advanced level. 

For such reasons, the Rothschilds, hating Karl 
Marx, created the anarchist movement of wild 
lunatics and terrorist bombers. For such reasons the 
same Rothschilds and their allies created the Fabian 
Society as the principal global litical elligence 
arm of the British Foreign Office. For such reasons, 
Rothschild protege Cecil Rhodes bequeathed his 
estate to found a Rhodes scholarship program, with 
the included testamentary proviso that the purse of 
the program was in part to subvert the United States. 
The Rothschilds may have been evil, but they were not 
therefore lacking in feral qualities of cleverness. They 
understood that their fundamental self-erest was to 
prevent the litical labor movement from entering 
o a conscious, anti-monetarist alliance with in- 
dustrial capitalists. It was not immediately because 
Marx was a socialist that the Rothschilds set out to 
destroy him and his influence; it was because Marx 
had launched an ernational campaign for litical 
labor movement suprt of Abraham Lincoln's 
government. For the same reasons those monetarist 
forces hated Karl Marx, they have funded and other- 
wise aided and fostered lunatic socialist and terrorist 
organizations by the scores in every part of the world. 







 

From the stand we have just developed, the 
nature of the conflis and confusion in U.S. foreign 
licy during the - period  and later can 
be competently appreciated. To regard the - 
period as in some sense merely a state of confusion, as 
Lippmann tends to do, is sweeping incompetence or 
outright historical fraud  or, as in Lippmann's case, 
a varying prortioning of both. 

A brief survey of U.S. wars and related matters 
from  to date pins down this  to the ultimate 
end we have in view in this paper as a whole  of 
defining an alternative foreign licy consistent with 
real U.S. national erests, to reace the bankrupt 
**American Century" or **Atlanticist" dorine. 

The War with Spain expressed two U.S. impulses. 
Although it did embark the United States un an 
imperialist course of development, it also involved an 
element which was consistent with U.S. vital erests. 
Broadly, such contradioriness is historically typical 
of most of st- U.S. foreign and domestic licy, 
that a proper and a deorable impulse are embedded 
in the same aion. 

It has been and is presently in the erest of the 
United States that the development of viable republics 
 whether capitalist or socialist  reace colonial 
and semi-colonial vestiges. To the same effe, the 
erests of the United States require the eradication 
of de fao semi-colonial forms of rule, as represented 
by a foreign nation's submission to determination of 
its domestic and foreign licies by foreign debt- 
holders, whether those debt-holders are the London 
and allied bankers of the Maximilian affair in Mexico, 
or U.S. citizens with aces of business in lowere 
Manhattan. 

U.S. licy was originally and correly based on 
that impulse. To the extent that our nation had the 
means to effe such a licy in praice, our national 
foreign licy was based on the princie of viable and 
truly sovereign republics, and most emphatically so 
respeing our hemispheric neighbors. Hence, John 
Quincy Adams' cited . In former times, that 
meant capitalist republics; today it means either 
socialist or capitalist republics. From the stand 
of U.S. erests as a sovereign nation, our foreign 
licy is properly indifferent to the distinion be- 
tween socialist and capitalist republics. Our national 
foreign licy erest respeing the quality of such 
foreign governments is our concern that such 
republics be economically viabley whether capitalist 
or socialist. Our exrts are, to put the  of self- 
erest most narrowly, delimited by their growth. 
Our need for imrts from such nations is similarly 
constrained. Otherwise, broadly, economically shaky 
governments are generally a menace to their own 
people and their neighbors. 



In the War with Spain, unfortunately we did not 
leave matters at the  of fulfilling our national 
erests. We assimilated Puerto Rico  which was 
consistent with our own erests and that of the 
Puerto Rican people. We assimilated the Philippines, 
which need not have been contrary to our erests or 
that of the Filipinos, but we condued the matter 
badly and not without third-party erference to 
make bad matters worse. What we did that was evil 
and wrong was to bring the Spanish ex-colonies under 
a moneta ris t in teres t 's im p eria lis t licy. 

The best proof of that is our licy toward the 
principal Spanish colony involved which we did not 
formally assimilate, Cuba. 

Let us glance for a moment at the background to 
Cuba's turn to the Soviet Union, after cometing an 
earlier litical revolution (sometimes called **the 
lawyer's revolution") under encouragement of high- 
level forces within the United States. Since this writer 
had an oprtunity to gain a glance o the situation 
behind-the-scenes in Cuba during the - period, 
there are corresnding special advantages to con- 
sidering that exame of the problem under con- 
sideration. 

Prior to Castro, as the current saying goes, U.S. 
licy for Cuba fit within the sperum of standard 
Wilsonian twentieth-century U.S. licy for all 
smaller Caribbean countries. In the erest of some 
particular investment group  one used to speak of 
United Fruit and Grace  a gang of petty swindlers 
was eleed to maain the formalities of the local 
government. The government in fa was essentially 
an extension of the princie of the Pinkertons and 
similar corrate security agencies of the last half of 
the nineteenth century. This arrangement had the 
disturbing correlative that the government bureau- 
cracy so ensconced would acquire the tendency to line 
its own private purse to the extent that this corruption, 
originally licensed on a relatively petty scale, became 
more than a substantial annoyance to the foreign 
investors. Between that rinsic problem and fights 
among various financial erests in the same nation, 
from time to time a representative of the U.S. State 
Department would hold a discreet discussion of the 
problem of **appalling corruption" with the patriotic 
colonel of some regiment barracked proximate to the 
