

Mp;//www.d)®(Buirgi(gfe.(S®[ffli/ 



P^OF-T(o)(Q)llOT. OEM© E^iD©i 



 ► 



Sovereign Republics 



The specific notion of sovereign, viable republic 
we most urgently require for immediate praice 
is most efficiently defined by proceeding immediately 
at this  to the crucial  of United States 
foreign licy, our relations with the Soviet Union. We 
shall proceed by first examining those relations from 
the stand of the notion of a republic, and then 
continue o the principal praical topics of our 
foreign licy. That latter accomished, we shall then 
focus, in conclusion, on the urgent alterations in the 
organization and funioning of the U.S. Executive 
Branch required by considerations of licy and law in 
the foreign-licy context. 

For reasons of simifying the discussion. United 
States foreign licy will be treated as if the writer 
were President of the United States. His temperament 
does not generate any personal ambitions of that sort 
as a matter of private ambition. For the moment, the 
writer simy knows of no one else with the special 
personal qualifications that office requires at this 
junure. () This approach simifies the discussion, 
in the respe that it is much simer to state the 
licy and law in the way the writer would serve it 
than to constru a general case for a *'Mr. X'* of un- 
known special style. 

The broadest  to be made concerning the Soviet 
Union ought to be clear enough  to the  that a 
Walter Lippmann. were he alive, would agree that far. 
On condition that we remove the lunatics' hands from 
the Executive Branch of our government, the aions 
and inaions of the United States and Soviet Union 
are going to shape the global litical and economic 
environment of other nations for decades to come. As 
these two weres a to common purse or in opsi- 
tion, so the fate of people throughout the world will be 
largely determined. 
At that , we immediately part company with 



, About three years in office, to comete an impeached incum- 
bent's term, would probably be about the minimum-maximum range 
of tenure before this writer desired to advance to the comforts and 
leadership duties of a sixtyish elder statesman. 



the non-hythetical Mr. Lippmann of his writings and 
even the most amiable among his fellow-Atlanticists. 
We are not nominalists. We will not spin out geoli- 
tical schemas of Atlantic communities, China-Japan 
spheres, Asian blocs, Soviet orbits, or other such 
childish doll-aying. Our foreign licy proceeds 
from the stand of reference of community of prin- 
cie, not customs, geography or any such alternate 
metaphysical droolings. It is the ernal charaer of 
the Soviet state that mainly shapes our Soviet foreign 
licy. 

From the stand of fundamental United States 
licy and law, as we have specified it, we have a 
fundamental community of princie with the Soviet 
republic in respe of both national and global licies 
of technological progress. The sticky s are pri- 
marily questions concerning the ernal charaer of 
the Soviet republic, and secondarily, the imications 
of the ernal charaer of the Soviet state for the 
litical content  and ent  of Soviet foreign 
licy. Concerning the secondary issue, we shall say 
for the moment that the spere of a Communist 
bogeyman sneaking out from Moscow by night to take 
over the world is just that  a  we shall return to, 
but which we put aside for the moment in order to 
focus entirely for the moment on the issue of the Soviet 
republic itself. 

First, let us say a number of very uneasant things 
about the Soviet Union's ernal life. Let us not fear to 
risk exaggerating here and there in estimating the de- 
gree of awfulness which formerly prevailed or 
presently exists. By taking such things at their ssi- 
ble worst, we have put the  in the discussion- 
framework suited to a rigorous foreign-licy con- 
sideration. 

The  Bolshevik, or ^'Oober" Russian 
Revolution seized the centers of urban litical were 
of a war-wrecked and chaotic relic of Czarist were. 
Even under the best of circumstances  for exame 
the - period of Czarist Russia  the Bolshevik 
inheritance would scarcely represent a socialist trans- 



 







 

formation leaping upward from the apex of European 
civilization. The cultural level of the general pula- 
tion, the broader social infrastruure, were hideous. 
What the Bolsheviks inherited in  was worse. 

The irony of Czarist Russia was that its then fairly 
recent sition as a focus of major industrialist capital 
investments had bestowed un a few centers some of 
the greatest industrial ants in Europe. Yet, the 
majority of the workers emoyed  like the Russian 
army  were former peasants. Socially, otherwise, 
Russian urban culture was top-heavy with cosmo- 
litan or semi-cosmolitan elleuals and pseudo- 
elleuals  of which a majority were attached to 
the Liberal, Menshevik and other litical opnents 
of the Bolsheviks. Under the stress of the erventions 
of the st-Oober period, the Bolsheviks were 
reduced  at the top  to a handful of left-Menshevik 
and Populist offshoots and themselves, immediately 
suprted by a cadre and semi-cadre of skilled and 
semi-skilled workers and non-commissioned officers 
(primarily), and beyond, the brutalized Russian 
masses of worker semi-peasants and the gray, 
brutalized mass of the peasantry itself. The agri- 
culture of  was already suffering the effes of 
levies of peasant conscripts o the meatgrinder of 
