perately need to believe that the developing seor 
governments will indefinitely be the International 
Monetary Fund's instruments for calculated austerity 
genocide against their own pulations, that Japan 
and West Germany will willingly preside over the 
destruion of their industrial economies, and that the 
Soviets will foolishly trade away the very def ensibility 
of the Warsaw Pa nations for fear of what lunatic 
Carter might otherwise do  in one of his imbecilic 
rages  in proximity of the well-known "button." The 
mere fa that the method by which Atlanticists 
defend such rationalizations has been massively dis- 
credited by two preceding world wars does not dis- 
suade them from repeating the folly. 

In such behavior, the Atlanticist cabal is not 
merely resnding with reaion formation to an im- 
mediate set of expedients. Since David Hume  and 
anually earlier  Anglo-Dutch monetarism, its fore- 
bears and its lowere Manhattan by-produs have 







 

denied the efficient existence of uni versa Is. To the un- 
educated layman  which is to include most univer- 
sity philosophy professors  such phrases are a pure- 
ly academic matter. On the contrary, modern nomin- 
alism is the organic philosophical outlook of the stra- 
tum, dating as a correlative from the Guelph and 
Dominican alliances against humanism and the 
Hohenstaufens, which has attained world-domination 
over finance and much litics throughout the OECD 
and developing nations. Nominalism  the denial that 
individual as are causally conneed in a lawful and 
imicitly knowable way to universal consequences  
is the ingrained method and charaer of those mone- 
tarist forces and their elleual hangers-on. 

Whenever someone proses the existence of ef- 
ficient universal princies underlying social 
processes (in particular), on condition that such 
statements are made in a purely literary or academic 
setting, the Rockefellers' tame pundits emit animal- 
like groans, registering their shock at such olerable 
egregiousness, and if they can muster more than such 
barnyard forms of expression, profess sneering facial 
expressions and a few deprecatory slanders against 
the mental condition of the offender. If the expression 
of such scientific views goes beyond opinion o some 
form of praice, the same flock turns downright 
nasty, looking for guidance to the fourteenth century 
Dominicans and the immolation of Giordano Bruno. 

Hence, when the appropriate Trilateraloids are 
called to account for high treason, puppet-accomice 
Jimmy Carter will be released on the basis of a suc- 
cessful ea of lunacy, while most of the rest will ead 
stupidity in hope of clemency. Only the "thorough" 
Utopians, like the "technotronic'' Zbigniew Brzezin- 
ski, and the purrted liberals and leftists spinning out 

h 

fascist Orwellian "egalitarian" orders in the neo- 
Fabian and other think-tanks, think through the imi- 
cations of Rockefelleroid hyperinflationary austerity 
licies to the full extent of their hideous social, 
litical, and material consequences. It is geno-. 
cidalists such as Lester Brown who dispassionately 
prose means for wiping out the billions of the earth's 
"excess pulation." Otherwise, the average rank- 
and-file Atlanticist  the ordinary banker, litician, 
and so forth  simy refuses to make a conneion 
between his praice and such consequences: "Isn't 
that a bit highly theoretical?" 

Granted, in this culture  and in a large prortion 
of Soviet leading circles  there is abundant evidence 
to suprt the judgment that the overwhelming 
majority of people refuse ordinarily to make con- 
neions between causes and their lawful effes 



further down the line. This involves the fruits of mis- 
education and non-education. It also involves an 
essential princie of psychology. The ability to 
resnd to an idea  as Dante Alighieri, among 
others, emphasized as far back as the early fourteenth 
century  is delimited by the capacity to transfer 
conceptions of knowledge o the sensuous state of an 
informing of the will for praice. The ability to think 
through to consequences depends un the mental 
weres to make the consequence sensuous reality for 
thought  to feel oneself doing the anticipated willful 
a involved, to feel oneself experiencing the anti- 
cipated consequence involved. 

Hence, given the fa that layers of the Soviet 
leadership presently suprting or tolerating the 
operational Arbatov Dorine are capable of making 
the relevant conneions between Carter licies and 
their consequences, the pragmatic, irrational 
behavior of the moment does not mean that they will 
not abandon Arbatov for the diate of their weres of 
reason. It rather means that they will make such an 
abrupt transition instantly the moment the fuller 
imications of Carter's licy are made sensuous to 
them. It is for related reasons that great turns in 
history occur under conditions of crisis. The relevant 
feature of crisis is that it renders sensuous to a broad 
stratum of the pulation those rational perceptions 
which are otherwise sensuously real to only a relative 
few. 

Whatever Carter's advisors think Brezhnev thinks, 
or even what Brezhnev himself thinks he thinks are 
matters of clinical relevance, but they are not com- 
petent "statistical" evidence of what Brezhnev will 
abruptly find himself thinking under the effes of 
those confrontations which make Atlanticist licy 
imications sensuous to him. The principal undecided 
feature of those changes in Brezhnev's licies is 
whether Brezhnev et al. will rea simy by going to 
thermonuclear war  ignoring all Rockefeller's 
prosed deals about "zones," or whether, one hopes, 
he will rather opt in time to bring down the Rocke- 
feller monetary system before the  of war has 
been reached. 

Has the world ever seen such obsessed lunatics as 
our Atlanticist monetarists? In the  days of Walter 
Lippmann  before the successful Los Alamos test of 
the first nuclear bomb  even the Atlanticists thought 
somewhat in terms of real litical processes. Now- 
adays, ask Cyrus Vance if he knows litics. The 
wretch will probably rey, "Sure. Hit the opsition 
with a club," In the net, they have a orer litical 
sense than a charging rhinoceros. 



P^OF-T(o)(Q)llOT. OEM© E^iD©i 

