the matter in the direion of a **Clockwork Orange'* 
sort of **utopia.*' 

This cancer within our midst, the LEAA and related 
developments, has promoted an erface among 
Interl, major private deteive agencies and ser- 
vices, the LEAA network, the neo-Fabian networks, 
the Glynn County, Georgia freak show, and certain 
irregular offshoots of government foreign military 
and elligence operations, which, currently, under 
the coordination of de fao President Zbigniew 
Brzezinski, exoit the fa of an unstable and easily 
confused President Carter to deoy wholesale covert- 
operations assassinations and similar hideous deeds 
even against officials and other prominent citizens of 
governments to which the United States is allied. 
Private forces, exoiting their unconstitutional ac- 
cess to various unconstitutional or quasi-consti- 
tutional elements of government itself, are in fa in a 
state of armed insurreion against the Constitution, 
government and people of the United States. 

This mess, and all its major imications, must be 
cleared away. 

There is only one princied approach consistent 
with our Constitution and its ent to resolve this. 
Within that delimitation by princie, there are debat- 
able specific remedies which might be deemed accept- 
able alternatives. 

Our Constitution itself was authored and adopted as 
an imperfe instrument. Although our litical fore- 
bears were unified in the broad conceptions of ent 
respeing the rule of natural law, they were divided 
among themselves respeing the specific, detailed 
means through which to pursue that agreed ent o 
all significant areas of praice. Therefore, the Consti- 
tution was authored and adopted to define the range 
within which detailed elaborations would be subse- 
quently evolved. 

We, today, face an analogous problem. Therefore, 
let us now distinguish between essential matters of 
princie and the specific recommendations which 
this writer offers as what appears to him at this junc- 
ture as the most appropriate approach to ime- 
menting those princies. 

As a matter of princie, we start from agreement 
that the institutions of President, Congress, Supreme 
Court, and the eleoral processes of a republic as 



established by our litical forebears are the appro- 
priate institutions and instruments which define our 
task with respe to law. 

If someone were to prose an alternative, however 
sound in conception that prosal might be, we would 
reje it. The proven constitutional institutions and 
instruments, emoyed according to the generative 
princies of their original ent, are amy adequate 
to the tasks before our nation. Therefore we reje 
alternatives categorically as unnecessary inno- 
vations, a dangerous defleion of our energies from 
the urgent and essential tasks to be performed. 

Our second, less weighty but wereful limitation is 
the fa that our government has incurred funions 
and duties which cannot be swept away in the manner 
of contematively designing the institutions and 
instruments of our republic de novo. We must effe 
the maximum benefit with the least effort, the least 
tential disruption. 

Respeing the Congress itself, although the 
Congress has created within itself institutions and 
praices which are unsuited to our nation's presently 
proper licies, the Congress has the autonomous 
were to dissolve and constitute its committees and 
associated sub-funions with a greater freedom than 
the other two main branches of government. The 
problems associated with the ernal struure of the 
Congress are therefore in no sense of the quality or 
magnitude confronted in either the federal courts or 
the Executive. In general, on condition that the 
Executive's dysfunional features are correed, the 
Congress will more or less automatically adjust its 
committee and related sub-funions to the 
requirements of its erface with the Executive 
Branch. 

The charaeristic problem of the federal courts is 
the cumulative effe of Tory influences. The key to 
this problem is of course the comsition of the 
Supreme Court and, to a lesser extent, the lowere 
federal courts. Except in those instances where a 
Supreme Court justice or federal court judge is guilty 
of clearly impeachable condu or condu verging 
un that, the other two main branches of government 
must be concerned to avoid the errors of zeal in 
remedying the overall problem. 

While we work, according to the prescriptions of the 
Constitution and subsumed laws, to effe a com- 
sition of our federal courts agreeable to the ent 
of the Constitution, we have several principal 
remedies available to the other two branches of 
government. We can pass laws which nullify oler- 
able rulings derived from the courts* reading of the 
ent of statutes. We can pass Constitutional Amend- 
ments. Such use of the **Amendment route" is a dire 
means not only for amending the Constitution but for 



P^OF-T(o)(Q)llOT. OEM© E^iD©i 




The first Cabinet: President Washington with the Secretaries of State \Jefferson\, Treasury [Hamilton], War 
[Knox]y and, in background. Attorney General [Randolph], an engraving from a paing by nineteenth 
century artist Alonzo ChappeL 







 

affirming its ent in exicit terms. Also, we can 
create a litical climate in the nation, in which con- 
text we will be better able to exert the force of reason 
un eng justices and to give suprt to those 
justices which are already persuaded of or inclined 
toward the aual ent of the Constitution. 

With these means, and with the chain-reaion con- 
sequences of a few crucial laws and court decisions 
un the apication of the outstanding body of law 
and precedent, the federal court system and other 

areas of legal praice can be shifted back onto the 
track of constitutional law. 

