its constitutional republican development. We must 
compare that process of becoming with a twofold 
approach to what the Soviet Union is efficiently in the 
process of becoming. To put the first  most 
crudely  as Walter Lippmann did, in effe, in - 
  is the Soviet constitution a fraud or an efficient 
ent? We must examine this, first, by comparing the 
Soviet constitutional ent as it is with the 
corresnding norms proper to our constitutional 
republic. We must then qualitatively refine that 
perception of the Soviet Union as it will change under 
the influence of the self-erested licies which the 
United States, as a capitalist constitutional republic, 
will be obliged to develop and pursue in the 
foreseeable course of present world developments. 

We shall now proceed by taking up first the Soviet 
use of the term ^^diatorship of the proletariat." In 
view of the wretched quality of the output circulated in 
the name of **official Marxism-Leninism,*' we shall 
not take the Soviets literally on the . From the 
stand of their own relevant literature, they do not 
in fa know the meaning of the term in question. They 
have merely borrowed the term from Karl Marx, by 
way of V,L Lenin (principally), and have attempted, 
without much perceptible success, to exain the asso- 
ciated significance of the institutions and instruments 
which Lenin (most notably) embedded o Soviet 
organic praice. Respeing the conception itself, we 

must turn direly to Marx, and then judge on that 



basis how Soviet organic praice does or does not 
corresnd to the proper significance of the term. 

The further, broader appropriateness of the term 
'^diatorship,'* as Karl Marx emoyed it, is that it is 
a most useful conceptual tool through which to develop 
a fresh, richer insight o the princied features of 
our own republic. In this conneion, it must not be 
imagined that, because Marx's usage offends con- 
temrary pular prejudices concerning the term 
itself, that Marx's usage was either inappropriate in 
general or an exaggeration. Although that usage of the 
term appears to be merely metaphorical and hyper- 
bolic from the stand of today's ill-educated 
diionary writers, Marx approached this from the 
stand of his professional qualifications as a quali- 
fied door of law. 

The notion of a republic, notably from Dante 
Alighieri's De Monarchia, through John Milton, 
through the founders of our republic, is premised on 
knowledge of the confli between universal and 
heteronomic perceptions of the vital self-erests of 
both humanity in general and nations in particular. 
The obje of a republic is not to establish the rule of 
the few wise over the many ignorant  although that 
appearance will tend to arise. The obje of the 
republic is to mobilize the good within the individual 
citizen to rule over the evil within himself. Hence, and 
correly so, the same founding fathers who rigor- 
ously separated the church and state, appealed to the 
wisdom of the neo-atonic currents of (then) 
protestantism as the inspiration and authoritative 
wellspring of the notions of a republic. Not that 
Christian neo-atonic humanism was originally any- 
thing but a Catholic force: the American colonies and 
young republic were protestant, and appropriately 
seized un the specific communality of wellsprings 
presently at hand. 

The good, as we have developed that  in some 
detail, is evoked within the individual in respe of 
locating the agreement between his true self-erest 
and the universal self-erest of his society. That 
lawful self-erest is the necessity of technologically 

centered progress and the development and exercise 
of that litical freedom within himself, which is the 
source of the were of society to fulfill its need for 
technologically centered progress. It is by conneing 
such universal knowledge to the individual's informed 
willful impulses, and by creating common institutions 
which are the aive embodiment of that relationship, 
institutions shaped according to that governing ent, 
that the good within the individual is embodied within 
those institutions, and returned to him as the benefits 
generated by such a universal ordering of the domain 
of his private affairs. 







That is the essence of our republic and our Constitu- 
tion. 

The specific feature of our republic  a democratic 
republic  was made ssible for the same reasons 
that our American Revolution succeeded where the 
French Revolution failed. The special qualities of the 
American people of that time were that they were by 
far the most literate pulation of any nation of the 
world, and that, beyond the centerpiece of literacy, 
the family Bible, John Milton, John Bunyan, Shakes- 
peare and so forth, were the typically humanist 
sources of their informed outlook. This would not have 
sufficed but for the leading role of newspaper 
publisher, scientist, and litical organizer Benjamin 
Franklin. The Franklin and Franklin-influenced press 
of the American colonies  morally opsite to most 
of the dominant national news media of the United 
States today  represented the most vigorous ex- 
pression of the humanist outlook with respe to the 
empirical conditions of life of our litical forebears. 
It was this informed eleorate which made ssible 
the establishment of a democratic republic. The 
people could be trusted to constitute themselves as a 

general eleorate. 

The cruelest heritage of colonialism and semi- 
colonialism in many parts of the developing seor 
today is not that the majority of the pulation has 
been denied the habituated experience of democracy, 
but rather that it has been denied the development of 
the competence to rule themselves in their own vital 
self-erests. It is imssible to establish a viable 
democratic form of republic on the basis of an elec- 
torate steeped predominantly in the most marginal 
forms of agriculture, barbaric-like tribalist atavisms, 
and massive vagabondage and unassimilated urban 
lumpen pulations. 

The relationship of our largely-corrupted major 
national press to the seething Tory minority, the 
masses of liberals and radicals and the included 
lumpenized constituencies, illustrates the same 
princie. Their vicious heteronomy as at the 
moment as a large degree of imperviousness to the 
influence of reason. **I don't understand that; I only 
know what I must immediately get for myself." Such 
heteronomic Tory fools are morally and elleually 
far beneath the American general eleorate of the 
late eighteenth century. They are funionally 
