College vote for James E. Carter was condued in 
total violation of the ent of the Constitution  and 
we now see in part, at least, what we paid for that vio- 
lation. 

Admittedly, the Eleoral College is not an axio- 
matic feature of a viable form of democratic republic 
in general. It was a choice made by our litical fore- 
bears. However, although this feature of the Consti- 
tution was in particular a praical choice, the ent 
governing that choice represents in no sense an op- 
tional feature of constitutional law. One cannot alter 

the Eleoral College procedure without reacing it 
with means equally efficient to the same purse. To 
do otherwise is not to amend the Constitution, but to 
overthrow it in respe of its most vital, generative 
princie  the princie of the democratic republic. 

The Quality of the person eleed to the Presidency 
is one of the princied cornerstones of a democratic 
republic. The eleorate does not have the inherent 
right to commit national suicide. It does not have the 
right to ace a donkey, a baboon or a James E. Carter 
in the White House. Happily, at this junure, the 
majority of the eleorate has probably refreshed its 
faith in that constitutional princie. 

This nation does not belong to the eleorate of any 
moment. The nation belongs in part to them, but also 
to their forebears and to their sterity. The elec- 
torate is bound by that condition of trusteeship, a trus- 
teeship which obliges it to secure the benefits of 
progress to its sterity, arid to effe that contin- 
uation through the instruments of a democratic repub- 
lic. That is the law, that is the condition of trusteeship 
which binds and delimits the weres of choice of the 
general eleorate. 

A dog does not know tomorrow. A baboon does not 



 

know tomorrow. That is the form of difference be- 
tween lowere beasts and human beings. If a person says, 
**I know only *now,' I know only what I perceive to be 
my immediate needs and preferences,** that person is 
litically a moral imbecile, litically only a little 
more qualified to vote than a dog, a horse, or a baboon. 
Since a certain rtion of the eleorate is, from time 
to time, caught up in the dog-like, heteronomic state in 
which its weres of reason do not reach beyond a very 
small *now' and a very narrow 'here,* our litical 
forebears aced bounds of trusteeship un the 
weres of the general eleorate, binding it to the con- 
sequences of its aions of today in the world of 
tomorrow. 

We are not a Tory '^democracy ; ** we are not a troop 
of baboons. It is the competence of the President to 
ernalize unto himself, in his person, both the whole 
erest of the nation, and the competent judgment of 
the consequences for the whole sterity, which is the 
absolute, indispensable mental and moral qualifi- 
cation for the holder of that office. It is also required 
that a person of such qualities of knowledge and per- 
ception also be efficient in corresnding executive 
aion. The President must, more than any other 
single eleed official, embody in himself the best-in- 
formed willful impulses respeing the general er- 
est of the nation as a whole both for today and tomor- 
row. 

We might, therefore, lawfully amend the Consti- 
tution, to reace the Eleoral College with some oth- 
er instrumentality to the same purse. We may not 
amend that purse itself out of the Constitution with- 
out declaring that we have repudiated the princi- 
pie of a democratic republic and have chosen to re- 
pudiate our trusteeship to sterity, in favor of the 
heteronomic frivolities of a baboon-like **utopia.'* We 
must not abandon the constitutional hurdles to the 
Presidency without providing something equally effi- 
cient to that same ent 

If one is nonetheless still frightened by the fa that 
the Presidency of the United States represents great 
were, there are only two principal remedies: the 
quality of the President, and the were of the Congress 
(principally) to define the laws which circumscribe 
the weres of the Executive Branch as a whole. 

However, the Congress may not decentralize the 
Executive Branch without thereby invalidating the 
letter and ent of the Constitution. 

The relationship of the Congress to the Presidency is 
primarily a relationship of the Congress to the Office 
of the President itself. '*The President shall..." and 
**The President shall not...** are the only princied 
form in which the Congress may properly exert its 
constitutional weres concerning the Executive 
Branch as a whole. 



 

Among the things a President may not do is to dele- 
gate his resnsibilities to a quasi-lawful body such as 
the National Security Council. He is accountable to 
Congress and law to be efficiently resnsible for the 
Executive Branch. He may not pass out pieces of 
Executive were like confetti every time a Rocke- 
feller comes sniffing about the White House. He may 
not evolve the Executive Branch o a bureaucratic 
nightmare, to the effe of thus preventing himself or 
his successor from competently fulfilling his Constitu- 
tional and other lawful resnsibilities. He may not 
infest subordinate executive sitions or other sts of 
high trust with scoundrels. It is the resnsibility of 
the Congress (principally) to emoy its weres of 
advice and consent and lawmaking authority to cir- 
cumscribe the licies of the President and the 
elaboration of the Executive Branch according to the 
standards of constitutional law appropriate to a quali- 
fied President 

If the President is not qualified, he must be im- 
peached. One does not struure the Executive in un- 
constitutional ways to the purse of constraining an 
incompetent President  one impeaches the incom- 
petent President. 

The following are the prosed measures of 

Executive Branch reorganization. 

Create three new Cabinet sts and Departments: 

*A Secretary for Political Intelligence; 

*A Secretary for the National Bank; 

*A Secretary for Domestic Security; 

and: 

