through which their own individual liberties will be 
maained and enriched. 

The technological charaeristic of United States 
foreign licy is the establishment of a division of 
labor in exrt-oriented, high-technology produion 
and development among the combined OECD and 
CMEA nations. It is capital goods that these nations 
are going to exrt in the main, and with increasing 
emphasis. While competition among firms and parti- 
cular specifications of capital-commodity types will 
and must persist in this process, that competition does 
not represent a competition of vital economic erests 
within the ranks of the OECD and CMEA nations. 

The days in which industrialized national semi- 
autarkies condued ernational trade wars are past 
in any sane ordering of global economic affairs. The 
necessary base required by any specific form of rela- 
tively high-technology capital-goods produion has 
become so broad, in terms of subsumed total-economy 
process-sheet analyses, that no one nation  even the 
United States or Soviet Union  could economically 



develop a full sperum of modern high-technology 
capital goods produion. 

The prosal offered by Soviet physicist L. Ruda- 
kov, to the effe that U.S. high-technology firms 
should produce advanced ion-beam devices developed 
by the Soviet Union, s to several erconneed 
s of licy-shaping imrtance. 

First, Soviet basic physics is, overall, presently 
years ahead of that of the United States. This is the 
conclusion advanced by numbers of U.S. high-tech- 
nology firms deey engaged in Soviet projes. This is 
the conclusion to be reached from proceedings at the 
 Berchtesgaden and recent Trieste conferences. 
The reasons for this overall discrepancy have already 
been sufficiently developed for our immediate pur- 
ses above. Although in certain specific features of 
asma physics research, groups of U.S. scientists, 
such as the writer's immediate associates, may be 
theoretically advanced beyond the Soviets in some 
imrtant theoretical or experimental feature of the 
work, Soviet physics at this  is at the  of 
becoming hegemonic world-wide. 

Second, Rudakov delivered the prosal that certain 
relevant very-high-technology creations of Soviet 
physics would be more efficiently produced for world 
needs in the USA. The Rudakov case is not a fluke. It 
typifies the broader conclusion offered by some lead- 
ing U.S. high-technology industrialists over the recent 
wer. 

We are not prosing that this Soviet physics hege- 
mony is a permanent arrangement. Beginning with the 
Kennedy administration and accelerating since ap- 
proximately , the Tory social and litical licies 
shaping our nation's praices and the outlooks of our 
youth have savaged the ranks of science and engineer- 
ing professionals to produce a monstrous discrepancy 
between the modal levels of our high-technology base 
and the basic research and research-and-development 
superstruure that base requires and warrants. This 
miserable state of affairs we shall promptly and pro- 
foundly change. We are not citing Soviet scientific 
physics hegemony as a projeed permanent state of 
affairs, but as a typification of kinds of licy pro- 
blems which must inclusively shape our licies. 

The development of new technologies begins 
properly in an educational process which is simul- 
taneously rinsically epistemological and er- 
meshed with an environment of experimental prac- 
tice. The scientist, engineer, and technician-specialist 
developed by that educational process is emoyed at 
several distinguishable s of the process of initi- 
ating new technologies and transforming them o 
the developed forms appropriate to generalized pro- 
duive praice. 



P^OF-T(o)(Q)llOT. OEM© E^iD©i 



The first stage is basic research  scientific dis- 
covery. 

The second stage is research and development: the 
transformation of new discoveries o tential forms 
of produive apication. 

The third stage is the transformation of the produs 
of the second o experimental forms of devices to be 
produced. 

The fourth stage is the pilot or trial, limited pro- 
duion of a **de-bugged** experimental form o a 
produ which can be transferred from the ownership 
of the maker to another user. 

The fifth stage is the shift of an established produ 
in a slightly altered, mass-produion or analogous 
''final" form. 

At any  among those stages, the further 
development of high technology may involve transfer 
of resnsibility for the continuation to a different 
institution, or a different national economy. 

Admittedly this has been emerging as the charac- 
teristic feature of technological development since the 
sixteenth century. Modern developments have now al- 
tered the imications of that process. Without turning 
yet to the developing seor problem, limiting our- 
selves for yet another moment to the relations among 
OECD and CMEA economies, the following broad 
observations apy. 

First, the negentropy of modern high-technology 
produion is so great, and the required rate of new 
technological progress consequently so ensified, 
that the ordering of the process of technological 
development becomes a major area of national and 
global economic licy. 

Second, the human input o this process, epito- 
mized by the education and emoyment of both 
professional specialists and the labor force generally, 
has imications direly corresnding to the 
process-determinations of produive development it- 
self. The proper ratio of scientists and engineers per 
thousand produive workers emoyed represents a 
qualitative comnent of the total labor force  and 
one whose increase must tend to accelerate. 

In this configuration, we can no longer speak of 
science and engineering in broad generalities. Al- 
though the governing conceptual and related skills of 
scientists and engineers may be approximately 
common in form of apication at all s of the pro- 
cess, the process of development of technology has a 
lawful **struure." We cannot simy prose to put 
