itself and in the context of the process of its author- 
ship, adoption and initial imementations, provides 
avenues for profound alterations in respe of sub- 
sumed institutions and instruments, but it prohibits 
such changes except by refeng the question back to 
rigorous and specified forms of deliberation modeled 
un the processes by which the Constitution and 
republic were themselves established. 

This difference was, in significant part, the reason 
why our republic succeeded whereas the earlier 
Cromwellian Commonwealth collapsed. John Milton 
is the best source of insight o that problem. This is 
the same Milton whose account of the reasons for the 
failure of the Commonwealth profoundly influenced 
the informed strata of our American Revolution, and 
which influence was reicated through them o the 
broader eleorate. The English Commonwealth 
failed through a combination of attributable 
problems, but those problems proved the efficient 
mediation of its destruion because the notion of a 
republican, constitutional form was not accepted by 
Oliver Cromwell et al. when forcefully and correly 
prosed (principally) by Milton. The collapse of the 
English Commonwealth  paralleling in princie the 
Tory subversion of our own law and related institu- 
tions  is a forceful empirical demonstration of the 
horrors which await modern nations when the princi- 
e of constitutional law is ignored or subverted by the 
pragmatic-evolutionary ''constitutionar' erpreta- 
tion of case law. 

By attributing the governing princies of law to the 
merely-sitive law and pragmatic perceptions of 
case law, the chaos which is then regarded as law 
becomes an incomprehensible and disorderly com- 
exity to the general eleorate. Such a state of af- 
fairs is an abomination  and must be rigorously 
terminated. 

It is necessary for the competent funioning of a 
democratic republic, such as the United States was 
established to be, that the princies of universal 
natural law be efficiently, consciously perceived by 
the general eleorate. This is our own view, and the 
emphasized outlook of the founders of our republic, 
both the Federalists and Thomas Jefferson. Beyond 
the indispensable role of education to technological 
progress, those who wrote our Constitution, those who 
won the eleorate to adopt our Constitution and 



 

republic, emphasized that the eleorate cannot be 
competent eleors  and would become a menace to 
the republic and their own vital erests  unless 
they are educated to the condition of competence to 
comprehend the imications of those princies of 
natural law. 

Our republic and the adoption of its Constitution 
were accomished by communicating the notions of 
natural law to the eleorate, effeed in terms of the 
empirical correlatives of natural-lawful princies 
respeing both the imications for the nation as a 
whole and the way in which the vital erests of the 
nation determined the fulfillment of the vital erests 
perceivable as self-erests of the individual and his 
sterity. The Constitution and the founding institu- 
tions and instruments of our republic were adopted by 
the eleorate because their empirical appropriate- 
ness to the apication of natural law had been demon- 
strated by the nation 's leaders. 

In a democratic republic, those same princies and 
methods must be ever-maained. The eleorate 
must know the formal, literary terms to be used in 
common as the princies of natural law and their 
derived institutional forms of apication. However, 
those words would remain merely vague ideas unless 
the meaning of the words were grounded empirically. 

It is not permissible for a present generation to 
revere an institution merely as traditional. Ingenuous 
respe for tradition is merely blind prejudice, not 
comprehension. Obedience to traditional forms is the 
parentis and law's oppression of the evil tentialities 
of infantile behavior in the immature and in the in- 
stance of the eng adult. Each present generation of 
the eleorate must be enabled to prove, from the 
stand of natural law, that the rule of universal 
natural law is necessary today^ and must understand 
both the history of institutions, and their presently 
continued or outlived appropriateness from the stand- 
 of the same outlook and methods emoyed by 
our nation*s founders. To this end, an informed will is 
not represented merely by a person who has learned to 
recite approved formulas in a canonical way. An in- 
formed will  the informed will of the eleorate of a 
democratic republic  requires that knowledge be 
made sensuous for the will. 

As we compare the institutions respeively appro- 
priate to the United States and Soviet republics, our 
included concern is to make the princies of our own 
institutions sensuously comprehensible to the elec- 
torate, and to those leaders, at all levels, who have the 
duty to inform the eleorate respeing the lawful 
determination of its vital erests. 

The second  to be kept prominently in the back 
of the mind is our use of norm . 
We are not using that term in its empiricist's or 







 

pragmatist's sense  not in the behaviorisms sense. A 
constitutional republic  which, as we shall see, both 
the United States and the Soviet Union are  is not a 
fixed state of perfeion, but an embodiment of a 
governing ent, an ent projeed o institutions 
and instruments, which are direed in turn toward 
the ongoing realization of successive resulting im- 
provements in the quality of human existence, human 
perfeion. The ended effe of the adopted institu- 
tions and instruments represents the appropriate 
content of **norm" as we emoy that term here. The 
norm is not properly a fixed state un which to 
converge as the goal of some Utopian perfeion. It 
represents the mode in which the institutions and 
instruments are ended to affe in turn the way in 
which new conditions of the society are deliberately 
evolved. 

At this junure, neither the Soviet republic nor the 
United States conforms entirely in praice to its re- 
speive constitutional norms. Hence, it would be fruit- 
less to attempt to base United States Soviet foreign 
licy un a merely-descriptive comparison of their 
ernal features at this junure or even to date. For 
this purse, we must define the United States in 
terms of what is becoming in the course of resuming 
