dual and parochialized, localized "self-erest** (sin). 

As governments oppress sin (heteronomy), they are 
oppressive to the heteronomic (infantile) sense of 
personal identity. They are properly oppressive in the 
sense that government properly "oppresses" 
burglary, murder, drug-peddling, arson, and "op- 
presses" lunatics by submitting them to custodial 
supervision. The weres of sovereignty properly given 
to the instruments of government unfortunately are 
also abused to oppress non-sinful tendencies, as the 
participation of the feudal conservatives in suprting 
the Inquisition attests. 



 

Radical conservatism, as in the feudal exame, 
ultimately brings about the preconditions for the 
catastrophes and crises which are the consequence of 
the failure to continue the course of technological 
progress. 

In consequence, the term "oppression" acquires 
two meanings with respeively opsite and irrecon- 
cilable imications. When a crisis brings about the 
collapse of an old order, the self-discredit of the old 
law so accomished also brings about  one hopes  
a new sitive thrust in behalf of universal natural 
law. to reestablish the rule of lawful government. 
Unfortunately, the breakdown of the old law also 
weakens, the established checks against the tential- 
ities of rampant heteronomy. Since the excessively 
conservative government oppresses both humanist 
(abuse) and degraded impulses (lawfully) through the 
same instruments, the oppressive charaer of the 
instruments is commonly misattributed as the com- 
mon quality of oppression. 

A dire comparison of the successful American 
Revolution with the failed French Revolution for the 
- period, and again, the - periods of 
American and French crises, ably illustrates the 
princies involved. 



P^OF-T(o)(Q)llOT. OEM© E^iD©i 



The Hapsburg Disease 



The great danger to a society ordered according 
to princies of universal natural law is that the 
checks against heteronomy will erode. Under such 
erosion and breakdown of the aive princies of 
universality embedded in proper constitutional law, 
the **oppressed" forces of heteronomy are aided to 
revolt against reality. The present treason of neo- 
Fabianism, with all its charaeristic *'countercul- 
tural,'* **local control," and anti-technology features, 
is a moral breakdown paralleling that underlying both 
the Wallenstein phenomenon and the processes of 
Germany during the - period. 

The degradation of law itself, typified by the evil 
work of the radical nominalist Carl Schmitt under 
both Weimar and the Nazi regime, isoned the 
German judiciary in a way which made the  
**Hitler Revolution's*' rapid evolution o the Nazi 
regime ssible  a tradition which, unfortunately, 
persists as an unerrupted strong current in the 
BRD judiciary and legal profession presently. The 
same process has been occung in the U.S. law 
through the successive Holmes **force of sovereignty" 
and the Thurman Arnold Fabian-and-neo-Fabian 
phases. The Weimar-Nazi and U.S. degeneration of 
the rule of constitutional princies of law are common 
predicates of the rule of lowere Manhattan-centered 
monetarism. 

The corruption of the constitutional institutions of 
the republic at the top has corrupted the law and 
unleashed the forces of the **Id" in the base of society. 
This degeneration of the U.S. eleorate was ac- 
celerated by the climate of moral anarchy of prohibi- 
tion and the s, and accelerated willfully in the 
extreme with the inauguration of John F. Kennedy. 
The mentally unstable Jimmy Carter, with the related 
bestiality of his Administration generally, expresses 
the "revolt of the Id," the threatened imminence of a 
new, global unleashing of the **Wallenstein syn- 
drome." 

This hideous outcome expresses the essential 
princie of all nominalism. Nominalism is, as we 
have said, epistemologically a degenerate form of the 
Aristotelian outlook and method. The mere forms of 



Aristotelian **geometry"  the field-particle paradox 
 persist, as a decaying human body retains the 
formal distinions of the living person. The life has 
been taken out of the Aristotelian order, the human 
quality of the Aristotelian order, the rule by rational 
governance in terms of universal natural lawy the 
governance by the princie of submission of the 
heteronomic impulses to the universally lawful 
exigencies of reality. 

The degenerate John Dewey, repudiating 
**universals" in his Reconstruion in Philosophy, 
expresses that charaeristic distinion of nominal- 
ism which lawfully leads toward fascism and equiva- 
lent horrors of the **Id rampant." 

Nominalism, by virtue of the way in which the infan- 
tile mind builds successive **scenarios," begins  
epistemologically  by clinging to certain of the 
forms the morally dead have inherited from the living. 
It retains the outward habits of rationality. Eighteenth 
century Humean empiricism self-consciously typifies 
that initial phase of moral degeneration. As long as a 
monetarist-ruled capitalist society is unable to rid 
itself of the imperatives for technological progress, 
that exigency of reality checks the progressive decay 
of nominalism, forcing nominalists to be contained 
within the formalities of rationality to a corresnding 
degree. As monetarism is able to force society to 
break away from technological progress, in 
preference for other things (the primacy of ground 
rent, ^'quality of life"), and to thus take on a boldly 
'*countercultural revolution" aspe, the moral decay 
accelerates in the direion of irrationalist fantasies 

typified by the film Clockwork Orange, 

We did not exaggerate in the least, earlier, in 
classifying the Copenhagen dorine in physics as 
epistemologically fascist. Until approximately the 
middle of the nineteenth century, no elligent body of 
leading scientific opinion would have tolerated the 
presumption that there was an axiomatic distinion, 
or even an approximation of such a distinion, be- 
tween litics and the so-called physical sciences. The 
