tarism. 

English language studies have not been left 
litically untaed by nominalism. 

Up through the nineteenth century, the notion of a 
rigorous approach to English-language disciines 
was in the condition of a confli between a **Latin"- 



Aristotelian method developed in English-language 
culture's educational programs as a st-  process 
of perversion of earlier Erasmian educational reforms. 
The latter, the philological approach, was based on 
a study of the way words change in form and usages 
within a language and language-group. Philology 
attempted to abstra this evolutionary process from 
the succession of given configuration of usages at any 
time. It set out to discover a set of princies by which 
we could both open up new dimensions of historio- 
graphy, and apy these same princies to con- 
sciously ordering our approach more finely to ongoing 
transformations occung within the living language. 

The philological approach reaced the bankrupt 
methods adopted by the radically Aristotelian ap- 
proach corrupting **Latin"-focused classicism. The 
meaning of words and syntaical forms are not pro- 
perly fixed according to some set of preordained rules 
to be dug out. As society develops, language lawfully 
undergoes transformations. The essence of those 
changes in word-meanings and syntaical forms is 
punning. 

One communicates a new idea by resorting to 
ironical use of language. This irony is diated by the 
problematic fa that words and syntaical forms, 
the available medium of communication, have estab- 
lished customary significances (not a precisely- 
determined meaning, despite the efforts of the nomi- 
nalists to legislate through diionaries, but a range of 
associated tential meanings, each* alternative en- 
hanced or repressed according to context and form of 
usage). Hence, to go beyond calling forth one of those 
established tential significances, to express a con- 
ception that is genuinely new to the speaker or 
listenter, a new meaning  however subtle  must be 
added to the existing medium. This effort depends 
principally un the uses of irony (metaphor, simile, 
hyperbole, etc.) both respeing the usage of words 
and syntaical forms. 

This defines the need to have junked the radically- 
Aristotelian '*Latin"-classical approach to language 
studies, to free the mind of the stultification of 
thought-deadening grammatical canons and nomi- 
nalist-tending diionaries. This is seen by philologists 
in the fa that all elligent communication (ex- 
cepting ordinary uses of **Hello," *'How do you like the 
weather?" "Go to the store," and so forth), all elli- 
gent use of language depends un an ultimately law- 
ful approach to breaking established rules and 
customs of speech. 

The proto-philological thrust was in fa a charac- 
teristic of early and high Renaissance humanism. 
The case of Erasmus* work in transforming existing 
language-uses through the wean of Latin and Greek 
literature  and so forth  is merely exemary. All 
the great humanist writers, including Rabelais and 







Arabic-enriched Cervantes, are "notorious" for this 
predominant feature of their great writings. Shakes- 
peare and Milton are magnificent illustrations of the 
indispensable role of word and grammatical punning 
and related forms of irony in elligent commu- 
nication. Poetry is properly the most concentrated 
expression of this princie of elligent use of 
language. 

It is not accidental that English language etry 
died, beginning with romanticist-existentialist gen- 
eral death-agony, from about the middle of the last 
century. 

There are no great ets or musicians, as ets, or 
musicians per se. There are rather great elles 
who express this through their mastery of the media of 
etry and music. 

Philology as such developed in Germany sig- 
nificantly through the influence of the mystic Jakob 
Boehme, and was advanced o a deliberate disci- 
ine by the brothers Grimm, G.W.F. Hegel (perhaps 
history's greatest punner)y and others of the German- 
Scandinavian anthrological-philological school* 
Inevitably, because of its essential evolutionist con- 
tent, its rinsic emphasis un the humanist prin- 
cie of the Idea of Progress, philology attraed the 
adverse attention of the British empiricists, notably 
their Mill-Bentham-Webb '^utilitarianism,** Fabian 
faion. A countermeasure was launched, aimed at 
stamping out the influence of philology. This was 
notably, inclusively centered around the orbit of 
Fabian nests in old Vienna. 

Approximately , Fabian litical-elligence 
operative Karl Korsch abruptly abandoned his exi- 
citly litical aivities in Germany, and began a close 
collaboration with the circles of Rudolf Carnap, Kurt 
Lewin and others of that radical-nominalist per- 
suasion, concentrating on the subje of language. 
Dire collaboration among the Korsch, Lewin and 
other circles with Bertrand Russell in the United 
States effeed a concerted thrust in behalf of 
linguistics here. The Russell-Lewin-Carnap-Korsch 
aspe of this campaign is of exemary significance. 

Russell, otherwise an evil Fabian operative em- 
bracing wickedness of sometimes the most devious 
sort undertaken in several fields, exemified for the 
purses of the linguistics proje the thrust of 
mathematical logic. The wicked Lewin represented a 
leader in the field of sociopsychological reduionist 
methods we today properly term **brainwashing.*' 
Carnap and others were radical (nominalists) 



 

sitivists, who contributed the systematic founda- 
tions for the effort. Korsch was a proven master- 
manipulator of liberal and left strata. In  of fa 
linguistics is the central language aspe of neo- 
Fabian, "Utopian" techniques of social manipulation, 
brainwashing, and allied black arts today, and 
operates chiefly on the basis of an environment 
otherwise formed by Lewinite "small group" 
methods, using "mathematical logic" as the common 
ordering tool for coordinating such "multidis- 
ciinary" operations. 

