generality of the problem of heteronomy is properly 
sed in the terms Kant considered it. The individual, 
governed by a narrow, ''fiitious" misperception of 
immediate self-erest, sets himself o opsition to 
the general (universal) erest. Behaving in such a 
"rugged individualistic" way  as recommended by 
Atlanticists from Theodore Roosevelt onwards  he 
inevitably not only defies but subverts the general 
erest, with ultimately disastrous real consequences 
even in respe to his misperceived "fiitious" self- 
erest. 

From this consideration it ought to be amy clear 
that the problem of heteronomy embodies the crucial 
problem of law in general. 

Leading institutions, seminal elleual in- 
fluences, can perceive and define the licies which, 
in turn, define the vital self-erests of a society. 
Thomas Aquinas attempted to do so, if in fa 
retrospeively, for feudal society. Benjamin Franklin 
sitively nurtured the emergence of the association 
of the men who comsed our nation's Declaration of 
Independence and Constitution. Such perceptions and 
licies, on condition that they are appropriate to 
what natural law prescribes for that form of society, 
represent the basis for the primary funion of law: to 
inform the willful impulses for praice of the society 
and its individual members, concerning those 







 

outlooks, methods and aions which corresnd to the 
erest of the society. 

More must be done, because of heteronomy. Those 
heteronomic impulses of individuals contrary in effe 
to vital erests must be prevented from significantly 
damaging that general erest. These problems must 
be categorically defined, to the effe of informing 
willful impulses against such individual or *'special- 
erest group" aions. Where such informing by 
itself fails to prevent heteronomic violation of 
essential licies, the heteronomic aion itself must 
be efficiently checked. Where heteronomic aion has 
damaged the general erest, society must a to 
prevent consequent damage through the already- 
triggered consequences of such aion (not to 
"repair" the past). 

Once the problem of heteronomy is defined as we 
have outlined it above, such a description of the tasks 
of law is almost a deduive truism. The problem left 
unsolved by the mere description is that the 
description, if taken by itself, tends to leave the door 
open to * 'social contra" perversions of the notion of 
general erest. 

Historically, for the case of the founding of our 
republic, it might be imagined that the tentiality of 
perversion was left open, if only in a formal sense, by 
the ambiguous significance of John Locke*s literary 
influence. Locke, from a different stand than the 
radical Hobbes, represented for eighteenth century, 
English-speaking culture the classic reference on the 
problem of heteronomy. From their reading and 
discussion of Locke, our eighteenth century founding 
fathers had two. opsite ways to proceed in taking 
Locke's perception of heteronomy o account. They 
could proceed as they did; they defined the general 
erest from a neo-atonic humanist stand, and 
treated heteronomy as a subsumed problem within 
law. Alternately, they might have  as they did not  
started from the basis of Locke's treatment of the 
problem of heteronomy toward a '*social contra" 
notion of constitutional government. 

We have demonstrated that the stand of the 
founding fathers, and of the majority of the pulation 
which suprted them, was derived from that of the 
Tudor Renaissance: technological progress in respe 
to both produion and pular education. We have 
shown that this central, generative princie of our 
republic, the princie for which we fought a 
revolution against Great Britain, was rigorously 
related to corresnding conscious conceptions of 
natural law. The generative princie of the Con- 
stitution and our republic was the recognition that the 
neo-atonic humanist perception of man's nature and 
his necessary relationship to the lawful ordering of 



universal natural processes were in lawful agree- 
ment. The fulfillment of that princie by our nation 
as a whole was therefore recognized to be the es- 
sence of our nation's universal self-erest, and the 
basis for determining the proper concepts of and 
fulfillment of the proper erests of the individual 
citizen. 

Our Constitution does not have a social-contra or 
''uralist'' approach to constitutional law. The 
argument that our nation is a constitutionally 
* 'uralist society" is nothing but outright fraud and 
swindle. 

As Justice Holmes observed to his corresndent 
Laski, the eccentricity called '^uralism" was at 
that time (correly) attributed to the pragmatist 
William James. Holmes emphasized that (even from 
his own relatively great distance from the con- 
stitutional outlook and method of the founding fathers) 
he couldn't swallow the novelty of James's 
"uralism" dorine. 

The deeper notion behind James's eccentric doc- 
trine of "uralism" was not of course over- 
whelmingly original to James. James's was a new 
effort to re-disguise and to smuggle in the same 
shopworn, rabid-Tory underlying dorine which 
charaerized the administration of Andrew Jackson. 

The early broad social basis for Jacksonism, as 
Nancy Spannaus emphasizes in her roduion to 
The Political Economy of the American Revolution, 
the weakest large social base of the American 
Revolution, was the farmer situation. Excluding those 
mercantile and financial erests which were 
outright Tory pro-monetarists, the marginal farmer 
was the chief ernal litical (heteronomic) problem 
of our eleorate itself for as long as our eleorate 
was predominantly rural. Later, this changed. As 
American agriculture progressed, the technologically 
advanced farmer producing for market developed an 
individualized outlook approximating that of the small 
industrialist. It was the more primitive farmer, 
eking out an asocially "independent" existence 
scratching at the dirt, the meanness of his cir- 
cumstances dominating his social outlook and 
behavior, who was the embodiment of Jacksonian 
heteronomy and anti-humanist currents within larger 
seions of the eleorate. In the establishment of our 
republic, as Spannaus outlines, a strenuous edu- 
