illiterate respeing natural law, and easy prey for 
any wicked demagogue who chooses to tug them  
first this way, then that  by their foolish noses. 

In notable historical precedents  some appro- 
priate, some not  notably from Greek and Roman 
republican history, the rallying of a pre-capitalist 
pulation in behalf of a vital general erest was 



 

embodied in the form of a diatorship  a pularly- 
established diatorship. That notion of a pularly- 
established diatorship is in an imrtant sense a 
kind of historical precedent for a capitalist republic. 

A republic is a kind of lawfully ordered process by 
which a designated general eleorate periodically 
seles  and impeaches!  its diatorship. For 
modern purses, the case of the Cromwell diator- 
ship within the English Commonwealth is the model 
clinical case of reference for the principal reasons a 
pularly-constituted diatorship can go wrong. The 
Cromwell case of a failed ent shows how that ent 
must be developed to a degree beyond Cromwell's 
limited, one-sided farmer's perception, and what 
indispensable checks must be built o the weres 
and regulation of the diatorship. 

Hence, the form of the notion embedded in our 
republic, the usually misunderstood notion that ours is 
a government of law, not men. 

The ingenuous and miseducated individual per- 
ceives that slogan to signify a government by laws, 
rather than Law. The misperception leads to the 
degraded notions of sovereignty associated with 
Justice Holmes. Positive law is man-made, and 
represents a government by men. Natural law is man- 
discovered. The perception of natural law properly 
determines its appropriate praical expression as 
constitutional law. Although constitutional law is man- 
made in one respe, it is not man-made in the same 
sense as ordinary legislative forms of sitive law. 
The authority of legislative, or ordinary sitive law 
in general, is properly specific within the bounds of 
constitutional law. It has in and of itself no rinsic 
moral authority. By contrast, insofar as constitutional 
law is an efficient instrument of man-discovered 
natural law, that ostensibly man-made creation 
caes forward consciously the corresnding degree 
of moral authority from natural law. 

It is constitutional law, insofar as the constitutional 
law is aively conceptualized in respe of ent and 
content from the stand of natural law, that 
represents The Law for purses of the republican 
conception of a government of law, not men. 

Only valid discovery bearing either un the 
inappropriateness of constitutional law to natural law, 
or a valid discovery of qualitative significance con- 
cerning universal natural law, have the admissible 
moral authority to alter constitutional law. () 
The additional general problem of diatorship, 



. It is ssible on princie for man to alter lawfully natural law 
itself. However, that involves the most advanced conceptions, which 
do not invalidate, in any case, the ent of the  as we make it 
above. 



Mp;//www.d)®(Buirgi(gfe.(S®[ffli/ 







 

beyond what we have developed to this , is that 
different social classes and faions of classes have 
charaeristic self-erests which are out of 
corresndence with, or alternately in relatively 
greater agreement with the vital erests of whole 
societies. By one means or another, in one specific 
litical form or another, these broad constituent 
forces within a society, either individually or in 
combinations, establish the rule of their perceived 
self-erest as the determining influence (diator- 
ship) on licies and praices of government. That is, 
in itself f neither good nor bad. 

All modern forms of government are class diator- 
ships in that sense. 

In the United States at this moment, we are mainly 
under the executive diatorship of the monetarist 
faion associated with David Rockefeller. We ought 
to be, instead, under the diatorship of an alliance of 
industrialist, trade-union and farmer litical er- 
ests  otherwise our government cannot be in corres- 
ndence with the ent of our Constitution. 

The Soviet Union is under the diatorship of the 
Communist Party, a party sociologically based on the 
industrialist and labor strata, us an agricultural 
comnent. The fa that this Communist Party is 
made up of elements which corresnd to industrial- 
ists, labor, and farmers in the United States 
distinguishes the Soviet from the U.S. constitutional 
republic primarily only in the essential feature of 
public ownership of the principal means of produion 
and distribution. 

We shall shortly turn to examine that distinion 
more shary from the stand of law. First, we 
shall round out the discussion of diatorship. 

Avoiding the fuller discussion the subje of dic- 
tatorship subsumes, no fallacy of comsition arises if 
we now delimit our attention to the notion of diator- 
ship as apicable to democratic forms of republican 
government. 

At the one extreme, a democratic republic involves 
the rule of government by a sociologically determined 
perception of the erest of the nation as a whole. 
Relative to contrary impulses within the general 
eleorate, this social bias in governmental licy and 
related matters represents the diatorship. At the 
other extreme, we have the proteion of the in- 
dividual rights and liberties of all citizens, and within 
that area, the smaller, subsumed area of the suffrage 
rights of a defined general eleorate. Overall, the 
weres of the diatorship and the princied nature of 
the rights and liberties of the citizenry are properly 
defined by constitutional law. Within the same con- 
stitutional framework, the rights and liberties of the 
eleorate include a defined process of deliberation in 



