Rohatyn and his accomices made a fresh innovation 
governed by the same depraved conceptions, the utter 
economic incompetence and inevitable consequences 
of each fresh innovation were properly blatantly 
obvious to any rational observer. Yet, the financiers. 
New York State's Governor Hugh Carey, the pathetic 
Mayor Beame administration, the cowardly City 
Council, and trade-union skesman Vior Gotbaum 
undered trade-union trust funds and looted the vital 
services of the city, unging ever-ahead to new in- 
novations more depraved and incompetent than the 
proceding atrocities. The mess, inevitably, is now 
monstrously worse as a result of the "remedies" than 
the original ^'disease" could ever have caused. Ob- 
sessional ''sitive feedback, " 

This is identical to the logic leading from the Hitler- 
Schacht Mefo-Bill and 'Mabor-ensive" Ar- 
beitsdienst licies of - o World War II, and 
o the ensified apication of the same labor- 
ensive methods in the slave-labor-death-camp 
system of approximately -. 

Like Felix Rohatyn et al., in the New York ugliness, 
the Nazis and their backers did not set out with a 
conscious perception of a consequent, subsumed 
licy which (inclusively) slaughtered six million 
Jews. Rather, clinging to the same ('^sitive feed- 
back") licy now being emoyed by Austrian Jewish 
refugee Felix Rohatyn to New York City, the Nazis 
were impelled, lawfully, step-by-step, to drive 
Rohatyn (to safety) out of Austria  he, thus, one of 
the fortunate ones  and to slaughter six million of the 
European Jews the safe-and-sound Rohatyn left 
behind. 

The Nazi regime which accomished those deeds 
was not only the creation inclusive of some of the same 







 

financial erests with which Rohatyn is today 
associated as adopted representative, but the Nazi 
licy those financial weres built o Hitler's Ger- 
many is the same licy  the same monetarists' 
litical dorine  which Rohatyn is apying on 
their behalf to New York City, In princie, Rohatyn is 
imicitly, retroaively endorsing the murder of the 

six million European Jews he left behind to be 
slaughtered. That is obsessive ideology. 

The associated process of moral degradation of the 
Nazis, exaly like that being exhibited by Rohatyn 
and his present associates in New York City, is 
elementary. At each  the axiomatic imperatives 
of the ideology come o praical confli with some 
praical or moral princie representing the genuine 
self-erest of the nation or humanity, that princie 
is discarded, in order to maain the obsessional 
praical imperatives demanded at that junure by 
the ideology itself. Hence, the ''sitive feedback'* 
syndrome. 

The same method of analysis is mandatory for 
comprehending the licies of the Trilateral Com- 
mission and its puppet, Carter Administration, 

Apy to the world and national economy the exa 
same princies Felix Rohatyn et al. have illustrated 
for the case of New York City. The ratio of the debt- 
service requirements of Chase Manhattan et al. to the 
absolute profit of the global and national economic 
basis has grown so monstrously large that this 
bankrupt mass of debt cannot be rolled over without 
looting wages, working conditions, essential social 
services, and also the circulating capital of 
agricultural and industrial produion. The alter- 
native, monetarists' methods of rollover through 
credit expansion can no longer be simy apied, 
since the ratio of debt-service requirements to the 
economic base has grown so monstrous that such 
credit expansion would immediately trigger an un- 
controllable hyperinflationary spiral. The time span 
for the collapse of the monetary system through the 
latter option has become so short relative to the time 
span for deflationary collapse through successfully 
looting the economic base that the latter course, 
although itself totally insane, represents to the lowere 
Manhattan and allied erests involved the best op- 
tion for briefly prolonging their financial and litical 
were in the world. The same ''sitive feedback. 

Among the many features of the overall Trilateral 
package, properly first singled out for attention is the 
economic program itself. All the other features of the 

package are litical and related derivatives of the 
economic licy. 

The bare licy of the Rockefeller-led forces is that 
of looting the industrial-agricultural base of the 
national and global economy, a form of economic 



auto-cannibalization of the stored-up produive 
tential represented in the form of existing ant, 
farms, mines, labor force. Through this they attempt 
to give a semblance of liquidity to U.S. Treasury and 
Federal Reserve System (and IMF, Eurodollar) 
issuance of credit to the account of bankrupt, 
overextended paper, to the effe of stning the 
reckoning of David Rockefeller's already insoluble 
and worsening condition of bankruptcy. 

All the weird, lewd legislative and other packages, 
all the covert-operations gimmickry featuring 

elements such as terrorism and drug-decriminaliza- 

tion, all the permutations on the S- bill, all the 
corruption of our Federal courts, are merely taical 
efforts to imement that hard-core economic 
package. Similarly, as we have shown, the Rocke- 
feller impulsion toward World War III, the confronta- 
tionist adventures of the unstable Carter and his 
**mentor" Zbigniew Brzezinski, are ultimately 
nothing but a refleion of the same bare economic 
licy. 

The principal litical packaging of the bare 
economic licy takes the form of fostering litical 
movements which demand the evil consequences of a 
Rockefellers' fascist economic licy as a matter of 
variously liberal and radical demands for im- 
provement in the 'Equality of life." The prototype for 
such packages is the **Trie Revolution" st- 
industrial society thesis of the Ford Foundation's 
Fund for the Republic. The process of creating a 
semblance of a mass social base for the Rockefellers' 
fascist economic licies to this effe involves 
grafting st-industrial * 'quality of life" demands, as 
purrted liberal and ^'radical" demands, un a neo- 
