tive and through the grants and aid provided by gov- 
ernment. Wherever the need for a form of produion 
and commerce  or services  is clearly prede- 
fined  predeterminable  the basis for delegating 
that to capitalist litical forms tends to evarate. 
Historically, either government has undertaken that 
economic aivity independently, has aed as **prime 
contraor** for a jo effort of government and 
capitalist firms, or has donated the fruits of govern- 
ment produion to continued development and opera- 
tion under capitalist forms of ownership. 

Broadly, capitalist litical forms exist because 
they suited our purses, and most specifically 
because they represented the only efficient in- 
strument of the republic for accomishing those 
aspes of the tasks of freedom most direly 
associated with technological progress. As long as the 
republic is persuaded that equally efficient alter- 
native instruments are not readily available in 
praice, we shall preserve the capitalist litical 
forms as rights and liberties  rights and liberties 
circumscribed by vital national erests. 

Granted, our constitutional republic did not create 
capitalist forms de novo  they did not leap as 
original creations from the Constitution as Minervas 
from the brow of Jove. They represented an existing 
alternative, a heritage, principally, of the Tudor and 
Commonwealth revolutions. They had been developed 
to a certain extent and tested. We adopted them as 
proven instruments of national erest. Moreover, we 
fought for such institutions against Britain  we 
fought for industrial capitalism against the embodied 
anti-capitalist British dorines of Adam Smith, It was 
American working men who provided the core of the 
hard fighting in that cause. 

Conversely, although the maenance even of 
existing modes of produive technology is always in 
our immediately most vital national erest, if the 
princie of development of technology is repudiated 
by a capitalist corration, and so forth, then the 
princie of freedom has been virtually extinguished 
by such a capitalist. According to the ent of con- 
stitutional law, such a capitalist has to that extent in 
fa nullified the validity of his property rights. 



For exame, the maenance of ownership rights 
of a slumlord is properly seen as an abhorrence from 
the stand of capitalist constitutional law. Those 
others who are direly comicit in perpetuating the 
slumlord praice have similarly nullified their 
constitutionally derived rights of ownership to a 
corresnding degree. 

That is not merely a rigorous princie derived from 
constitutional law. It is an historical fa of capitalist 
development. This is a  concerning which Karl 
Marx confronted the greatest conceptual difficulties, 
because of his error in attempting to emoy early 
nineteenth century British capitalist development as a 
clinical model of reference for analysis of capitalism 
in general. The struggle between industrial capitalism 
and the opsing ground-rent erests has been 
historically the centerpiece of capitalist development. 
Corresndingly, the worst horrors incurred in the 
course of capitalist development have been causally 
correlated with industrial-capitalist retreats of ac- 
comodation to or subordination to the ground-rent 
erest. It is the rigorously derived apication of the 
ent of our Constitutional law and the suprting 
evidence of praice that the rights of ground rent are 
at most a negatively tolerated liberty within the stri 
reading of that law. 

The proper approach to defining the distinions of 
the Soviet constitution respeing litical forms of 
ownership is within the framework of the notions of 
constitutional law we have apied to the capitalist 
property forms. Only by such approaches can we 
obtain the coherence of conception necessary for 
purses of lawfully defining a community of prin- 
cie. 

The method of law for that case, as for our own, is 
the historical method as we have presented and 
illustrated it in this licy study. 

There is no other approach to consider as a ssible 
alternative. The pretense that there exists a body of 
ernational law comparable to our own con- 
stitutional law is utter rubbish. Such ernational law 
exists presently neither in fa nor imicit princie. 

Among the nations of the world, there exist to date 
only four viable original currents of constitutional 
law: The United States, France, Mexico, and the 
Soviet Union. Otherwise, the only formulated dorine 
of constitutional law available is that dorine of 
/euda a vi^ associated most prominently with the work 
of Thomas Aquinas. 

The only notable effort to establish the kernel of an 
articulated body of ernational law was the effort of 
Justice Jackson and others respeing the so-called 
Nuremberg Law. That effort had two defes. 
Jackson's method was rinsically scholastic and not 
an expression of modern constitutional law as typified 







by the charaer of ent within both the United 
States and Soviet constitutional law. The humanist 
dorines peculiar to scholasticism are the content of 
each of the determinations of indiable offenses 
adopted. That was a shortcoming, not a criping 
defe of Justice Jackson's contribution (in par- 
ticular). If the Nuremberg Code had been made an 
efficient kernel for establishing a body of ernational 
law, we might have advanced to more modern con- 
ceptions from that first step. Unfortunately, prin- 
cipally because the apication of the Law was 
delimited in apication to seleed notable and token- 
exemary cases within the scope of Nazi and Nazi 
occupation praices  thus, inclusively, letting the 
Rockefeller erests off scot-free  the Nuremberg 
Law was made a hideous travesty. 

Constitutional law exists in existing original forms, 
as we have just noted, for the cases of the United 
States (Franklin et aL), France (de Gaulle et ah), 
Mexico (Obregon et al.). and the Soviet Union (Lenin, 
Stalin). These original forms have, in two notable 
cases, been reicated in other nation's constitutions: 
the models of the United States and the Soviet Union. 
These reications are not efficient except in cases of 
socialist countries, including Yugoslavia. Most of the 
constitutions otherwise adopted by nations are 
showcase pieces pasted onto national sitive and 
customary law, constitutions which do not efficiently 
order the law as a whole, and whose shallow- 
minded, ecleic charaer renders them essentially 
worthless as instruments for the purse of 
