For this reason, substitution is litically dangerous, 
litically unviable except as a temrary expedient. 
When does the eleorate cease to be litically incom- 
petent? How long do the conditions fostering require- 
ment of ernal litical security measures persist? 

Respeing a republican diatorship by the litical 
labor movement, the princie of the Soviet republic's 
constitutional law, when, in fa, does the Soviet work- 
ing class become a litical class-for-itself? In fa, of 
course, the answere is neither all the one way or the 
other. Since the writer is not direly acquaed with 
the ernal life in the Soviet Union, he can offer only 
those conclusions which are based on crucial evidence 
externally available. Certain decisive conclusions are 
nonetheless reached with absolute certay. 

First, one does not develop an eleorate by lying to 
it persistently concerning the circumstances which 
govern its government's major elements of domestic 
and foreign licy. For exame, recently, especially 
since February of this present year, the prender- 
ance of the leading articles of note appearing in 
Pravda and Izvestia concerning the United States 
have been downright sweeping lies to the knowledge of 
the authors and editors, and also known to be lies by 
most members of the CPSU Central Committee, ac- 
cording to other information previously published in 
such leading sources as Pravda, Izvestia, and 
Krasnaya Zvezda. This is the worst case of the lying 
issued by such leading sources, but such praices on 
leading foreign and domestic licy matters are by no 
means lacking precedents. 

Why  by what reason and licies  do the rest 
of the Politburo and CPSU CC members tolerate such 
dangerous filth as the edification of the Soviet eleor- 
ate? The name of the game is called * 'party disci- 
ine." Although each faion emoys its associated 
litical apparatus down through the res of the So- 

Viet Union and Eastern Europe's institutions to worry 
away at building up a correlation of forces for its line, 
in princie the issues are fought out within the 
leadership without the conscious involvement of the 







eleorate  even as speators  until after the 
fight is settled and someone trots out to exain the 
horrors which have been covered up pending the con- 
clusion of the faional proceedings at the top. 

This sort of nonsense is not peculiar to the Soviet 
Union. We have our own lying national press institu- 
itons, and even when the truth is known to leading cir- 
cles in the USA, that truth is seldom disclosed to the 
eleorate then or later. We are not prosing a bo- 
geyman competition between our clowns and theirs. 
We are concerned with the way in which such prac- 
tices systematically impair the Soviet republic. 

This problem is not a produ of the mere fa that 
the Soviet leadership is substitutionist. If substitution 
had been the only causal element in the situation, the 
problem would have been significantly correed be- 
fore this time. The problem is that  all Soviet de- 
nials to the contrary  the litical class struggle con- 
tinues to rage quite hotly in the Soviet state and its 
leadership. The key to the temrary prominence of 
the Arbatov Dorine, the long-standing ^'realist" 
Rockefeller garbage, and the lying in the Soviet press 
are all part of the same generative problem. 

The key to the problem, the generative element, is 
that the Soviet leadership operates still on the basis of 
the Machiavellian princie of '^combination," The in- 
dustrialists and military are on the one side, and the 
Oblomovists and their allies on the other. It is the ef- 
fort to maain *'party disciine" under these cir- 
cumstances, and the licy of presenting a patched- 
up, unprincied agreement negotiated within the 
combination, representing such horse trades as the 
produ of nothing but **pure Marxist-Leninist sci- 
ence," which is the aive element behind both the ly- 
ing in the Soviet press and the litical ignorance 
fostered within the eleorate. 

Although this is the principal ernal flaw within 
the Soviet republic, it is also obvious that the basis for 
the maenance and aggravation of this unprincied 
combination within the Soviet leadership is the perpe- 
tuation of the gason-economy state of affairs. 

As an individual, as leader of the U.S. Labor Party, 
the writer takes sides morally and in suitable prai- 
cal ways concerning the course of affairs inside the So- 
viet Union. As President of the United States  or, in 
prosing the licies of a **new Federalist" Presi- 



 

dent  the duty of the U.S. President is to know which 
levers of U.S. licy to emoy, to give a properly di- 
reed evolution to the external circumstances of the 
Soviet republic affeing these and related problems. 
The President also had the duty to cause the aual na- 
ture of the ernal situation in the Soviet republic to 
be known to the U.S. eleorate and its representa- 
tives. 

Under the conditions generated by that approach, a 
*'new Federalist" President of the United States has 
the immediate prospe for establishing first steps of 
sitive agreements toward a community of princie 
with the Soviet republic. 

In such matters, and others, it must always be 
emphasized that the foreign and domestic licies of 
the United States are not properly defined in terms of 
sime resnses to things as they are. The duty of the 
Presidency is to a to shape the course of events to 
reach the conditions favorable to the imementation 
of proper licy. 

It is that princie which the new **new Federalist" 
President must follow, and which competencies must 
govern his seleion by the Congress  in the course 
of the impeachment of the olerable Tory usurper. 
Eyeing the Presidency, and engaged, increasingly 
over recent years in catalytically influencing the 
course of events from a sition of relatively maxi- 
mum disadvantage to significantly beneficial effe, 
this writer knows what can and must be done by ac- 
ing those methods at the dissal of the Presidency. 
Provided our licy conforms to the apication of 
natural law to the problems of the world at hand, the 
President of the United States has at his dissal the 
were to shape the course of global development o 
conformity with the vital erests of the United 
States. Such gains will be obtained with the enthusias- 
tic suprt and partnership of most of the world's pre- 
sently leading litical forces. We need only resume 
our constitutional government according to the ent 
