the Czarist and Kerenskiad's infantry. The Brest-Lit- 
ovsk peace and other calamities made the 
agricultural crisis acute. Without Poland, the 
economy of Great Russia's industry was surgically 
cut in two. The already war-weary industries of  
were exhausted by lack of maenance supies by 
- and the war mobilizations. Most of the best 
cadres of the soldiery and ants died exemary 
deaths of military leadership on the Red Army's 
battlefields. Within the highest ranks of the Bolsheviks 
themselves there were the Karl Radeks, the N. 
Bukharins, the Riazanovs and numerous others with 
long-standing pedigrees as Parvus sub-agents or 
otherwise involved in various ways with the Anglo- 
Dutch-headed elligence networks. 

Significantly through the influence of Karl Radek 
and others, the Communist International was reduced 
to a shambles by . The sapped Soviet republic was 
doubly isolated, mooting seriously the looming proba- 
bilities of its early extinion by combinations of in- 
ternal shortages and various external erventions. 

Through the influence of the Bukharins and others, the 
delay of vital industrial development, industrializa- 
tion which should have been begun by no later than 
-, almost ruined Soviet ernal and tential 
foreign credit, unleashing an ernal inflation  - 
creating the basis for the draconian bitterness of the 
subsequent colleivization process. From the end of 
 and beginning of , the Soviet leadership pre- 
pared for the invasion from Nazi Germany it knew to 



be inevitable, and rightly estimated would be 
launched probably with the overt or covert aid and 
insistence of the British-led Western weres. 

From the outset to the present  without further list- 
ing the principal relevant, horror-ridden s of 
background  the Soviet republic has been a gason 
economy, struggling to balance the obligations of a 
modern great were's military establishment against 
the thrice-repeated (st-, st-, st-) 
effort to build a modern industrial economy from the 
combined catastrophes of inherited backwardness 
and war-caused rubble. This economic development 
 us the prortionally monstrous burdens of the 
military on capital-goods produion  was ac- 
comished by the most stringent means to which a 
modern economy can resort: savage primitive ac- 
cumulation. 

To make matters worse, although the leading 
Bolsheviks were dedicated and increasingly praical, 
they were, after Lenin's death litical amateurs by 
Marx's or even Rosa Luxemburg's standards, and 
excepting the gifted Preobrazhensky, not a single 
known leading figure ssessed any genuinely original 
theoretical-economic competence. 

Although Soviet experience and technological and 
cultural development have created a broad, even 
impressive basis for government and industry, the 
Soviet institutions of **official Marxism-Leninism" 
are predominantly a bad joke which the CPSU has 
perpetrated un itself and credulous admirers from 
abroad. This contrast between Soviet military 
strategic excellence and the emerging world 
hegemony of the Soviets in basic physics, on the one 
side, and the litical amateurism of the majority of 
the Soviet Politburo, on the other, are present ex- 
pressions of the irony which has charaerized Soviet 
development from the beginning. This litical 
ingenuousness, aggravated by pretenses of Kremlin 
**dorinal infallibility" on those same topics, has 
caused the Soviets to pursue even otherwise corre 
and commendable efforts of ernal development 
often in the crudest litical fashion. 

Although significant circles within the Soviet leader- 
ship and the CMEA countries have moved way beyond 
the blundering Oblomovism which sils Soviet lead- 
ership perceptions overall, the dismal heritage of 

the past is to this day an imrtant  and, at this 
moment, a tentially most dangerous element in the 
situation. It is that aspe of Soviet life which the 
Atlanticists have so recklessly miscalculated in their 
wishful appraisals of the Soviet leadership. Oblomov 
will retreat and retreat, as pragmatically as Henry 
Kissinger might reasonably desire, until a threshold is 
crossed. Then, Oblomov, a Russian romanticist who 
knows only retreat and attack in the realm of litics, 







attacks, loading the attack with all the savagery of 
pent-up resentments accumulated during the 
preceding retreat. 

When a people is to be called un to make 
sacrifices to the extent of heavy burdens of primitive 
accumulation or equal weight of constras un the 
exercise of individual liberties, the critical litical 
consideration is that the resulting conflis with the 
real self-erests of those who sacrifice must not be 
pushed o an alliance with the heteronomic anti- 
social impulses formerly contained under the accep- 
tance and institutions of law. The role of the founders 
of our own nation in the condu of the American 
Revolution is exemary. The only effeive, sitive 
litical force to which government can appeal under 
such circumstances, is to make the universal erest 
a sensuous comement of the informed willful im- 
pulses for praice of those who must make the 
sacrifices. 

This princie does not admit of frauds. A republic 
must not demand sacrifices which are not in the uni- 
versal erest in fa. The lack of corresndence 
with the ^^exanation*' and the reality of the 
measures must tend to be expressed in outbreaks of 
heteronomy. Either this heteronomy is defleed 
against an adopted adversary  to divert it away 
from the government licy, as in the Nazi and other 
notorious cases  or the heteronomy must erupt 
against the government itself. Either leadership calls 
forth the "Whig impulse," by prosing licies con- 
strained by competent agreement with humanist 
princies, or what one gets is the **Tory impulse.'* 

The epitome of Soviet leadership violation of that 
princie of litics is the disgusting dorinal 
assertion, *'We have reached Socialism and are now 
on the way to Communism.*' What utter rubbish! 
What utter fraud! Unfortunately, a fault not peculiar 
to the Soviet institutions, once such proprietary im- 
becility becomes anoed with the authority and 
glosses of canonized precedent, all the forces of Hell 
must come down before the relevant piece of lunacy is 
unstuck from official licy. 

It is one thing to prose that the Soviet Union is 
constitutionally a socialist republic, and an altogether 
