capitalist dorine of alienable property-forms. 

The counterrevolutionary or feudal reaion of the 
thirteenth and fourteenth centuries was thus not 



. Criton Zoakos, "Western Civilization's Debt to the Arab 
Renaissance," delivered at the National Convention of the U.S. Labor 
Party in New York City, Dec. , ; Helga Zepp, "European-Arab 
Cooperation from Avicenna to the Nationalization of Aramco," 
delivered at the European Conference of the European Labor Party in 
Wiesbaden, West Germany, Jan. , . 



Mp;//www.d)®(Buirgi(gfe.(S®[ffli/ 







 

purely feudal, but embodied an alliance between those 
feudal forces and monetarist bankers typified by the 
dominant financial houses, the Bardi and Peruzzi. 

The Bardi, official bankers to the papacy, put 
England and France  as well as Italy and other 
feudal weres  under monstrously accelerating 
indebtedness. The catapulting debt-burdens, as in 
the process leading to the English foreign-debt 
repudiation of the fourteenth century, were main- 
tained throughout Europe through spiralling rates of 
primitive accumulation against the feudal produive 
basis. The inevitable genocidal consequences of the 
Inquisition's defeat of the Hohenstaufen and other 
humanist-influenced faions on behalf of the feudal- 
banker faion, were the developing of the conditions of 
famine and serf-lumpenization which led to the mid- 
fourteenth century Black Death. 

Out of the Black Death breakdown (wiping out one- 
third to one-half of the pulation of central Europe) 
emerged the broader influence of nominalism. To 
understand the subsequent spread of the dorine of 
nominalism from the relatively isolated elleual 
influences such as muddleheaded William of Ockham, 
one must look at fourteenth-century Europe more 
deey, and consider such phenomena as the 
* 'flagellants" and other broad evidence of the crisis- 
breakdown of belief in rationality. 

We restate and develop these and related s 
here, because it is indispensable to build up the con- 
ceptual instruments required to master the clinical- 
historiographical  immediately at hand. 

The lawfulness and deeper imications of the 
contention and eray among these three distin 
epistemological currents is demonstrated by situating 
the specific developments of Europe's thirteenth 
through sixteenth century cultural development in its 
broader, determining context, the approximate , 
years of Mediterranean-littoral and European culture 
since Thales, In that overall span of the development 
of present world culture, there are the same three 
epistemological currents refleed as dominant in- 
telleual forces throughout. The case of art, since art 
is the mode by which the people of a culture celebrate 
their sense of identity, is not only the most accessible 
form of overall, historical illustration of the , but 
is in fa an epistemologically rigorous approach to 
the questions immediately involved. 

All of the major art forms of that , years of our 
cultural heritage are analytically incomprehensible 
except as we view them as the contention and er- 
ay of three distin "moods" and epistemological 
outlooks precisely corresnding in charaeristic 
features to the Aristotelian, humanist and nominalist 
outlooks. These are, to emoy the appropriate 
classical archetypes, the allonian (Aristotelian), 
promethean (humanist) and dionysian (nominalist) 



moods. The immediate corresndence between each 
of these artistic moods and the corresnding 
epistemological outlook is formally and historically 
lawful. 

The same epistemological problem is key and 
relevant to the present crisis within the physical 
sciences. The prevailing institutionalized scientific 
view has been predominantly shifted until recently 
from the relativist thrust behind the nineteenth cen- 
tury's development of the notion of a relativistic 
physics around a **theory of funions" (e.g., Fourier, 
Gauss, Weierstrass, Riemann, Cantor, Klein, Pasteur, 
et al-), toward a reaionary notion whose faional 
sition was temrarily consolidated around the 
Rockefeller and Rothschild proteges of the 
Copenhagen school and the wretched Solvay confer- 
ence. Recent Soviet announcements have begun to 
reverse that trend globally. 

Experimental and related theoretical work of the 
nineteenth century had produced the germinal notions 
of relativism (e.g., Gauss, Weierstrass, Riemann, 
Cantor, Pasteur, et al.) , and the confrontation with the 
fundamental crisis-ridden paradox of Lagrangian and 
Maxwellian physics in the ambigious guise of both 
Boltzmann's work () and the epistemologically- 
cognate Planck definition of the quantum. 

Although Planck's discovery is pularly mis- 
represented in most educated circles as upholding 
the Copenhagen and related empiricist and sitivist 
dorines, in fa it has exaly the opsite imica- 
tion. Planck's discovery of an additional arbitrary ele- 
ment necessary to imrt to the old physics to **glue 
it together" despite contradiory evidence, the 
quantum, was a crucial-experimental proof of the 
bankruptcy of the old physics, and worse bankruptcy 
of the wretched epistemological Frankenstein- 
monster which Niels Bohr and others construed  
with a bit of thuggery against critics such as Erwin 
Schrodinger thrown in  in the effort to mobilize a 
counterrevolution (inquisition) against the relativist 
thrust within existing advanced physics. 

From the stand of microphysics, the attack on 
the crisis presented to physics by Planck's work was 
obliged to proceed toward one, and only one er- 
mediate objeive. To make short of identifying the 
, that ermediate task is identified by 
Schrodinger's and related work concerning the so- 
called psi-funion. 

This is no mere illustration of a , but, as we 
shall show, bears direly on the underlying problem 
of the scholastic-humanist-nominalist outlooks in the 
most dire, praical and rigorous way. 



