
As Spannaus emphasizes Turner's part, it was this 
same feature of American life which Theodore 
Roosevelt brought o the White House, in the form of 
his open admiration for the wretched Jacksonian 
heteronomic romanticism of Frederick Jackson 
Turner. 

James' *'uralism," the liberal's parlor parody of 
the **rugged frontier individualism" of Frederick 
Jackson Turner, of Charles A, Beard's fraudulent The 
Economic Interpretation of the Constitution, are 
elements of the same period in which monetarist in- 
terests, working chiefly through the cover of the 
Democratic Party, broke up the vulnerably in- 
dividualistic pulist-labor alliance at its or farmer 
base in the southern states, with the heteronomic 
** Jim Crow" dorine and licy. The Tory traditions 
of Martin Van Buren and Andrew Jackson were built 
un thus with Fabian guile from about the turn of the 
century, to the purse of cultivating a pular base in 
the less humanist rtions of the eleorate, for the ef- 
fort to discredit and subvert the U.S. Constitution by 
various means. The emphasis was on denying the gen- 



erative ent embodied in the Constitution, to allow 
for the insertion of a contrary, **social contra" in- 
terpretation. 

There is no credible escape from the clear constitu- 
tional fa of natural law for our Tory opnents. Both 
the scholastics and the neo-atonic humanists, and 
their continuations of the seventeenth and eighteenth 
century Enlightenment, were in agreement on the 
princie that the proper licies and self-erests of 
societies were prescribed from the stand of natu- 
ral law. Excepting the nominalist currents converging 
un British empiricism, this conception of the essen- 
tial unity of litical law and natural law in terms of a 
unifying epistemology was the hegemonic conception 
of European culture's capitalist development from the 
Tudors and litiques through approximately the 
middle of the nineteenth century. One can profess that 
the U.S. Constitution does not rest un the generative 
princies we have identified, only by either outrightly 
lying, or by resorting to the kind of lying emoyed by 
Thurman Arnold et al., by deprecating what are in 
fa the governing princie of U.S. constitutional law 
as mere folklore and myth. 

Strip constitutional law of that kind of generative 
princie, and the law immediately becomes degraded 
**by reaion formation" to the **force of sovereignty'* 
amorality of the Holmes tradition. Having emptied 
U.S. constitutional law of its essential content, as 
Holmes' method does, the emptied Constitution is left 
waiting for some scalawag to fill the void with what- 
ever litical refuse a credulous majority of the elec- 
torate might be manipulated o tolerating. 

The subversion of constitutional law epitomized by 
the succession of the Holmes and Arnold dorines was 
not original to the experience of the United States. It 
was, as we shall see, an indispensable corollary of the 
geolitical metaphysics at the basis of Atlanticist 
Dorine, which in turn was an outgrowth of British 
foreign licy developments from the eighteenth 
century onward. The '^concert" method emoyed by 
the British in fighting the Naleonic Wars and in 
establishing British hegemony over all Europe at the 
Treaty of Vienna, the '^Atlantic Community" and 
concert of regional geolitical blocs prosed by 
Roosevelt (Lippmann), are a dire expression o 
foreign licy of the same amoral social contra 
dorine. 

The sociology of heteronomy involves two distin 
categories of problems. At the top of society, the 
problem is those heteronomic institutions which en- 
force the primacy of some special (heteronomic) self- 
erest at the expense of a universal erest as 
defined in conformity with natural law. At the bottom 
of society  and often, literally the case  there are 
those social strata which are disassociated from a 



PEF=T(o)® i()X. E)EM© E^S 



sitive conneion to those aspes of produive 
development which express the society's development 
according to natural law's determination of its 
universal self-erest. 

In capitalist society, those strata which are 
sitively situated include skilled and semi-skilled 
workers, technologically advanced farmers, scientists 
and related technicians, and industrial capitalists. 
The relatively disassociated broad strata are 
variously the lumpenized and semi-lumpenized strata 
lacking a sitive sense of personal social identity in 
conneion with the produive process, non- 
technology-oriented petit-bourgeois strata, and 
enraged declasse strata of various social origins. It is 
not accidental but strily lawful that the latter strata 
represent the natural constituency of fascist 
movements. 

Hence a republic must be In effe a litical rule by 
those social strata which represent the closest 
association with the sitive universalizing aivities 
of society, through representatives who represent the 
institutionalized elleual representatives of such 
strata. 

A proper republic has inevitably many features 
which appear to lend credence to its opnents* 
description of it as constitutional ** diatorship by an 
elite." It is by constitutional prescription the chosen 
elite, predominantly skesmen for those social strata 
which identify themselves praically and most im- 
mediately with the universal form of national erest, 
who in fa best govern. They rule by using govern- 
ment and law to check the heteronomic tendencies of 
the less moral strata, and by governing in the 
universal erest of the society as a whole. However, 
they are not an elite in the heteronomic sense of a 
special erest which sets itself o opsition to the 
general erest. On this, John Milton is clear and 
corre in his form of presenting the argument. Tom 
Paine is clear to mainly the same effe, as are all the 

notable Federalists and. in the balance of his 
presidential praice, Thomas Jefferson. 

The more general and fundamental rule of law is 
that in whatever form is most appropriate to both 

natural law and the form of society, those must govern 
who are relatively the most efficiently sensible of the 
universal form of the national erest in respe to the 
nation as a part of the natural law-ordered process of 
human society. What must be governed for is the 
developing and informing of the general willful im- 
pulse for praice of those licies which serve the 
erest of the nation and humanity according to 
