
working person to the produive process. The in- 
dividualized worker has a sitive impulse (a Whig 
impulse) because of his self-identification with the 
development of improved produive and related 
problem-solving mental skills. However, his in- 
dividualization sets him o heteronomic opsition 
to profit  and thus makes him sometimes a tential 
dupe of lunatic varieties of ''socialism.'* As a 
heteronomic individual, he is unable to define the 
sitive conneion of profit to his self-erests, ex- 
cept his desire that his own immediate emoyer enjoy 
sufficient profit to keep him emoyed with the 
prospe of income and related improvements 
trickling down to him as an emoyee. 

He does not view profit in its aive funion as a 
part of the national and global absolute profit. He does 
not see direly and sitively the problem of main- 
taining and effeively realizing that profit as the way 
of effeing a universal improvement in the 
technological progress of his national and the global 
economy. That is not the entirety of his outlook as a 
human being who is a skilled or semi-skilled worker, 
but that is the heteronomic comnent of his outlook. 

It is only when the methods emoyed by Benjamin 
Franklin et al. to create the eleorate of the 
American Revolution are apied to the conscious 
litical organization of the labor movement, that 
labor looks at itself consciously as a whole labor force 
with a unified general erest in the efficient increase 
and appropriate investment of profit as a whole. Thus, 
as Franklin et al. transformed the individualized 
impulses of the eleorate o informed impulses 
concerning the determining relationship of the general 
erest for the individual erest, as the worker not 
only understands the general erest, but how it 
concretely determines the satisfaion of his individ- 
ual erest, his world outlook is educated, trans- 
formed. 

This developed perception of the universal stand- 
 as the pr/jnary basis, is a transformation in the 
individual worker which Marx identifies as the 
transformed stand of the litical class-for-itself . 

In the heteronomic case, the individual defines his 
erests primarily in terms of localized circum- 
stances. He does not think through the consequences 
of alternative aions to the effes on the general 
circumstance and, in turn, the consequences of the 
general circumstance in determining his local situa- 
tion. Thus to the extent that the worker sees his in- 
dividual relationship to an emoyer as primary^ or a 
group of trade unionists see their localized relation- 
ship as primary^ their impulses are heteronomic in 
tendency and consequence. 

In the alternate case, embodied within the notion of 
the litical class-for-itself, the worker locates the 







 

solution to his immediate-erest problems, by first 
satisfying himself as to the problems of the national 
and global economy as a whole, and extending that 
economic approach to other, related areas. Through 
such means he redefines his local problems as sub- 
sumed features of a national and global licy prob- 
lem, and informs his aions concerning the local prob- 
lems accordingly. 

Under these altered circumstances, his govern- 
ment  to the extent it more or less consciously and 
efficiently represents the general erest  ceases 
to become his oppressor, and becomes his common in- 
strument of self-rule. His government becomes the 
general instrumentality through which he accomish- 
es those generalized aions necessary to create the 
climate indispensable for solving his immediate prob- 
lems of self-erest. 

When the charaer of the Soviet republic is viewed 
by those criteria, the principal flaw stands out clearly, 
well defined. 

Obviously, the problem  the defe  is not that 
there is not what self-styled '*Trotskyists" idiotically 
define as a lack of "workers democracy" in the Soviet 
Union. Prosing to toss the franchise and so forth 
about among a heteronomically defined pulation, 
and calling that sort of nonsense a ''republic," has no 
ace in study of the Soviet Union. This is not to say 
that we do not desire to have the Soviet Union achieve 
the fullest realization of a democratic republic, but 
mere democracy per se is not the solution. 

The first fa to be acknowledged is that the leading 
strata of the Communist Party continue to substitute 
themselves for the working class as a class-for-itself. 
That is not in itself good or bad. It is not the desired 
form of a republic, but if conditions require such sub- 
stitution for the time being, the arrangement is prob- 
lematic while not abhorrent in princie. 

What is abhorrent is that aspe of substitution 
which contributes to fostering heteronomic stupidity 
within the eleorate, and thus perpetuating in that ag- 
gravated way the necessity for gason-economy sub- 
stitution. 

At the outset, under the conditions of foreign inva- 
sion and foreign-snsored civil wars, during the fol- 
lowing period of war-wrecked industries and cordon 
sanitaire, and so forth, the Bolsheviks had no option 
but to substitute themselves for a then -nonexistent 
class-for-itself. This has been aggravated by the al- 
ready-cited varieties of perpetuated and overlapping 
developments which have maained the Soviet re- 
public in the condition of a gason economy. 

The praical question is properly reduced to the 
prosition: in what significant ways, what viciously 
persisting blunders of licy and general praice, has 
the leadership of the Communist Party unnecessarily 



aggravated the conditions fostering substitution? We 
are clearly not concerned with such petty issues as 
Khrushchev's or Brezhnev's sneezing in the wrong di- 
reion at a certain turn in affairs. We are concerned 
with the efficiency of the institutions and instruments 
of a republic. It is not a matter of errors as such, but of 
licies. We are concerned with vicious errors in 
licy which obstru a process of self-improvement 
in the development of a democratic republic. 

Let it be fairly emphasized that as the case of Crom- 
well illustrates, the princie of substitution expresses 
the use of the oppressive weres of sovereignty to 
check the heteronomic impulses of a litically incom- 
petent tential eleorate  as well as other forces. 
