governing the entirety of the human species. Any one 
who does not recognize such a clear statement of 
princies in the Declaration of Independence and U.S. 
Constitution  written, predominantly, by the same 
set of authors approximately two decades apart in 
time, must be indeed an illiterate. 

Was it then corre for the American branch of 
European humanist culture to absorb the tetories 
occupied by a miserable, relatively bestial culture of 
indigenous Americans? Absolutely. Was it corre to 
absorb Texas and the areas taken in the Mexican- 
American War? Historically, yes  for the same 
reason. The only legitimate moral and related licy 
question in such affairs is how we treated the human 
beings we were obliged to bring quickly o a success- 
ful participation in our more appropriately human 
levels of culture. 

These aions of the pre- period were not only 
permissible (at least as aions overall) but impera- 
tive, because of our adversary relationship, in fa, to 



a British were determined to subvert and crush us. 
The affair of the British agent and U.S. traitor, Aaron 
Burr, in itself justifies entirely Jefferson's Louisiana 
Purchase  a  on which Lippmann's analysis is 
predominantly corre as far as it goes. We had to 
develop the United States, tetorially, as well as in 
respe of its ernal life in areas existing at any 
time. We could not tolerate the relinquishing of thos^ 
areas of development contiguous to our existing bor- 
ders by either colonial weres or by weak, unreliable, 
nominally-independent states which were inherently 
the instruments for British-coordinated aions 
against our vital erests. 

However, to the extent that hemispheric neighbors 
were truly sovereign and viable republics, or strug- 
gling against British-controlled forces to become such, 
it was our duty, as we had means of force or maneuver 
to accomish this, to defend the sovereignty of those 
republics even against faions which might temr- 
arily gain governmental were in our own nation. 

Neither the licies of the founding fathers nor our 
own vital national erests to the present day can be 
separated  as Lippmann attempts to do  from 
questions of litical economy. 

Humanism y the body of epistemological develop- 
ment and associated natural law countersed to both 
feudalist scholasticism and nominalism, is rooted in 
the scientific perception of the nature of the abso- 
lute difference which separates man from the lowere 
beasts. This humanism subsumes both industrial- 
capitalist society and socialist modes of extending the 
capitalist form of extended reproduion. Humanism 
is rooted in the princie that it is the duty of society to 
perfe itself, to bring its ideas and willful praice o 
conformity with universal law. Humanism breaks 
with scholasticism axiomatically concerning the con- 
tent of natural law. Scholasticism assumes the natural 
order to be essentially fixed respeing appropriate 
knowledge and individual and general condu. 
Hence, respeing law, scholasticism sees Roman law, 
feudal law, common law, and so forth as being proper- 
ly convergent un a common set of underlying deter- 
mining princies. Humanism defines development, 
society's progress through the realization of scientific 
discoveries mediated through the creative mental pro- 
cesses of individuals, as the kernel of natural law, and 
defines the progress of societies to higher orders of 
technology as the indispensable material comement 
of providing the cultural conditions for advancing the 
qualities of the individual. 

Although our argument for those princies is 
significantly better informed than that of the founding 
fathers, in respe to all essential conclusions for l- 
icy what we argue is exicitly stipulated in the 
Declaration of Independence and Constitution, and 



P^OF-T(o)(Q)llOT. OEM© E^^ 



I



- . . ^ J T 




President Kennedy inspeing the Berlin Wall in the course of his  *lch bin ein Berliner * adventure. 







 

conforms to the thrust of the praice of the American 
Revolution during, notably, the - period, and 
the overall outcome of the - period. 

We deny that any people are inferior as people, but 
insist that many governments and cultures are. Our 
humanist licy is to free the people from the oppres- 
sions of a backward culture so that they may fulfill the 
human tentials we defend. The nominalists (the 
leading Democrats of -) argued that slavery was 
justified on the empirical evidence that enslaved 
blacks and the cultures from which they and their an- 
cestors had been stolen were inferior. So far, the state- 
ment of fa was absolutely corre. However, the en- 
slaved blacks were modally culturally inferior be- 
cause slavery made them so. Furthermore, as the 
humanist Whig abolitionists of the Carey-Lincoln 
current properly argued, the holding of a black seion 
of the U.S. labor force in a condition of servitude was a 
source of degradation of the labor force as a whole and 
thus otherwise a vital threat to the most fundamental 
national erests of the nation. 

The notion of national erests, proper er- 
national law, and foreign licy is not admissibly 
based on the nominalist (empiricist) form of reduc- 
tionist assumption that the law properly pertains to 
formal categories of cultures, nations, and so forth. It 
is based on the Idea of Progress, understanding of the 
necessity of republican over democratic forms of 
government for the human condition to date, and the 
princied sacredness of the development of the cre- 
ative tentials of the individual, not as an abstra 
personality, but as a resitory for the tentiality 
of development to effe contributions in the universal 
erest. 

Today, the United States and the Soviet Union are 
the dominant world weres. Potentially, since both 
governments have a vital self-erest not only in 
