more o science  although that would be far better 
than what has recently prevailed. We must under- 
stand the ernal features of the process, and balance 
our science, technology, produion and capital in- 
vestment licies accordingly. 



 

We must understand  as a matter of licy  what 
the term basic scientific research signifies from the 
stand of that process. We must eliminate the con- 
siderations of narrowly defined, cost-benefit analysis 
in budgeting basic scientific research, understand 
how a totality of basic scientific research generates a 
forecastable degree of total benefit, which benefit 
cannot be pre-defined through aggregating predied 
line-by-line budgetary projeions. We cannot apy 
the cost-benefit cost-analysis methods of mass pro- 
duion to the programming of the fostering of scien- 
tific work. 

In that same conneion, we must ace the notion of 
the epistemological charaeristics of basic scientific 
work within the specifications of licy, both for 
fostering basic science and for shaping the licies of 
education to cohere with the desired objeives. 

We must, in the same vein, terminate the confusion 
which prevails in the formulation and erpretation of 
law, the confusion of basic scientific research with 
scientific research and development. Even though the 
two kinds of efforts may often be performed on the 
same premises and by the same group of persons, 
there is a fundamental epistemological distinion of 
praical emphasis between basic scientific research 
and what heretofore has been understood for U.S. 
executive and legislative praice as scientific re- 
search and development. 

The crucial licy problem refleed in that distinc- 
tion is that we must be concerned with the generation 
of discoveries respeing scientific princies, the 
transformation of the previously existing body of 
scientific knowledge, without which the apication of 
the existing body of scientific knowledge to develop- 
ment must, ultimately or sooner, stagnate for want of 
fresh inputs to science itself. Basic scientific research 
is the sitive transformation of scientific knowledge 
itself. From that origin, onwards in the process out- 
lined, the emphasis is increasingly on the apication 
of the already existing body of scientific knowledge. 

The economic objeive of this process is to increase 
the average negentropy of national and global pro- 
duion by successive waves of new technologies 
spreading out to supercede the old. Basic scientific re- 
search is the wellspring of that process, a process on 
which the successful existence of the human species 
now immediately depends. 

As we imement that process of incorrating new 
technologies o praice we are confronted by the 
fa that no matter how large the absolute profit avail- 
able, it is never sufficient. That is expressed for 
praice in these terms. If we expend capital to 
develop competing new industries simultaneously in 
several nations, that redundancy in apication of 







 

capital diminishes the supy of capital available for 
other purses. Some redundancy is necessary and 
useful, as a competitive hedge against the mis- 
direion or orer performance imicitly risked by 
putting all of technology's eggs in one basket. 

The proper balance between the two desiderata is 
tentially a theoretical nightmare to some, but from 
our national experience with the eleronics- 
aerospace development, we have learned some basic, 
tough lessons which enable us to approach the proper 
balance with reasonably good results. In brief, the ap- 
proach to the solution is to balance off desirable com- 
petitiveness in the molecular aspe of technological 
development against the blunder of redun- 
dancy  and resulting bottlenecks  in major allo- 
cations of capital resources. 

The basic licy approach has two moments; the 
first moment is the high-technology capital exrts of 
the combined OECD and CMEA countries, and the 
second moment the somewhat contrary impulses 
associated with the localized national erest of the 
nations involved. 

Respeing the final-stage exrt capabilities of the 
combined seor, we require at least two or three re- 
gionalized centers of capability, with a more numerous 
back-up in the corresnding, smaller-scale pilot-pro- 
duion phases of technological development, and a 
tendency toward homogeneity of capabilities in ex- 
perimental praice. We must work toward establish- 
ing a global scientific community in respe of basic 
scientific research. 

Respeing U.S. ernal erests, as long as any 
tential threat to national-economic security exists 

in respe of foreign relations, we must not be rinsi- 
cally vulnerable  we must be able to rapidly de- 
velop a high-technology produive capability in any 

needed direion. Hence, both for local, ernal capi- 
tal-goods market requirements not efficiently met 
through the world market, and for reasons of national 
economic security, we must keep every basic type of 
produive capability ''simmering'* within the ranks 

of professionals, the labor force and industry. 

The overall foreign economic licy toward the de- 
veloping seor as a whole is premised on a set of well- 
defined targets of industrial, agricultural, and infra- 
struural projes throughout the developing seor 
taken as a whole. 

These projes are typified by such major cases as 
three, highest priority development projes: () a Rio 
de la Plata industrial-agricultural comex in South 
America  one of the greatest and most rapidly fruit- 
ful tentials for effeing a major increment in global 
economic development; () the longer-term effort re- 
quired to transform the Sahel o a great grain belt; 



() the massive benefits to the world through a com- 
prehensive development of the Ganges-Brahmaputra 

region. These appropriately refle the emphasis on 
increasing present and future food produion within 
the developing seor as a whole  on a seor-wide 
