taught to judge people according to independent standards, and that 
every time you tried to stand up for yourself, your family attacked you. 

In other words, I will know that you are easy prey. 

I cannot create an obligation in you unless you accept that I have treated 
you justly in the past. As in all things, it is far easier to convince a weak 
person that you have treated him justly, than it is to anually treat people 
in a just and consistent manner. If I can convince you that I have treated 
you justly in the past, then you owe me trust and respe in the 
present. 



- - 


Love as Predation 


Imagine that we are brothers, and one day you awake from a coma to see 
me sitting by your bed. After some small talk, I tell you that you owe me 
$  ,, which you borrowed from me the day of your accident. I tell you 
that because I am a kind brother, and you are in the hospital, you do not 
have to pay me back the thousand dollars -  would just like you to 
remember it, so that the next time I need to borrow $  ,, you will lend 
it to me. 

You might look in the ckets of the jeans you wore the day of your 
accident, and you might look around your apartment to see if there was 
$, lying around, but there would be no real way to prove that I had 
not lent you the money. You would either have to call me a liar - an 
accusation for which you have no certain proof - or you would feel 
substantially more obligated to lend me money in the future. 

If you call me a liar, I will get angry. If you accept the obligation without 
ever finding the $,, you will feel resentful. Either way, our 
relationship is harmed - and by telling you about the $  ,,  have 
voluntarily roduced a comication and a suspicion o our 
relationship, which is scarcely loving, just or benevolent. 

This is the kind of brinksmanship and deception that goes on all the time 
in relationships - particularly in families. 

When our parents tell us that they love us, they are in fa demanding 
that we provide for them. They are basically telling us that they have lent 
us $, - even if we cannot remember it - and thus we owe them trust 
in the future, if not $, in the present! 

In other words, our parents spend an enormous amount of energy 
convincing us that they love us in order to create artificial obligations within 
us. In doing so, they take a teble risk - and force us to make an even 
more tenable choice. 



-- 


Brinks manship 

When somebody tells you that they love you, it is either a statement of 
genuine regard, based on mutual virtue, or it is an exoitive and unjust 
demand for your money, time, resources, or approval. 

There is very little in between. 

Either love is real, and a true joy, or love is false, and the most corrupt 
and cowardly form of theft that can be imagined. 

If love is real, then it inflis no unjust obligations. If love is real, then it 
is freely given without demands. If a good man gives you his love, and 
you do not reciprocate it, then he just realizes that he was mistaken, 
leams a little, and moves on. If a woman tells you that she loves you, and 
then resents any hesitation or lack of reciprocation you disay, then she 
does not love you, but is using the word love as a kind of hook, to 
entrap you o doing what she wants, to your own detriment. 

How can you ssibly know whether the love that somebody expresses 
towards you is genuine or not? 

It`s very, very sime. 

When it is genuine, you feel it. 

What happens, though, when a parent demands love from us? 

Well, we must either submit to this demand, and pretend to resnd in 
kind, or we must confront her on her manipulation - thus threatening 
the entire basis of the relationship. 

Would someone who truly loves us ever put us in this teble sition? 


Society and Religion 

The princie of infliing a good opinion in order to create an unjust 
obligation occurs at a social level, as well as at a personal level. Soldiers 
are supsed to have died proteing us, which creates an obligation 

-  - 


for us to suprt the troops. The mere a of being born in a country 
creates a lifelong obligation to pay taxes at the  of a gun, in order to 
receive services that we never direly asked for. John F. Kennedy`s 
famous quote, Ask not what your country can do for you, but rather 
what you can do for your country, is another way of saying, One of us 
is going to get screwed in this eraion, and it ain`t gonna be me! 

The same thing occurs in the realm of religion, of course, as well. Jesus 
died for your sins, God loves you, you will be punished if you do not 
obey, Hell is the destination of unbelievers etc. etc. etc. 

All of these emotional tricks are designed to create an obligation in you 
that would not exist in any reasonable universe. 

Sacrifice, in other words, is merely demand in disguise. 


Unconscious? 

All of these substantial criticisms rest on the premise that people do 
anually know what love really is, and merely counterfeit it for the sake of 
personal gain - just as any moral criticism of a counterfeiter rests on the 
premise that he anually does know what money is, and copies it for the 
sake of personal gain. 

Naturally, it is hard to imagine that those around us are constantly 
striving to infli artificial obligations on us through appeal to a 
fantastical kind of social mythology. When you think of your sweet, 
white-haired old mother, who sacrificed everything for you, what could 
it mean to condemn her for failing to be able to perfely define the 
nature and properties of love, a question that baffles even great 
philosophers? 

Well of course it would be grossly unfair to ask the average person to 
accurately define the true nature of love, just as it would be ridiculous - 
not to mention dangerous - to grab the average man on the street and 
ask him to perform your appendeomy. 



-  - 


It certainly is unfair to judge people by standards that they can scarcely 
be aware of. However, it is not at all unfair to judge people according to 
the standards that they themselves have set. I cannot alone determine at what 
price you will sell me your car - but if you yourself put the price in the 
