exoration, but archaeology. 

When we are abused as children, as Bob surely was, we desperately try to 
numb our pain by imagining that our abusers are virtuous. Deep down, 
we know the truth though, which is why our distortions cause us such 
agony in the long run. 

We can use other people to manage our anxieties as surely as we can 
use drugs and alcohol to manage our anxieties. 

The disparity between the mythologies we must invent in order to survive our 
childhoods and the reality we know to be true is the most fundamental source of our 
depression and anxiety. 

In other words, fantasy is the scar tissue of abuse. 

When Bob saw me put my head on my desk, I created anxiety in him 
because I was not aing on a premise that he believed to be a moral 




- - 


absolute: You must respe and obey those in were! His hysterical 
reaion to my innocuous doziness resulted not because he believed that 
I should obey those in were, but because, deep down, he knew that it 
was in fa immoral to obey those in were - and because he also knew that if 
someone in were demands obedience, it is because that person is not 
moral. 

In other words, he avoided the pain of his own abuse by pretending that 
he was not abused - by pretending that his abusers were moral. He did 
this by transforming the control that was inflied on him from a 
praical princie of obedience to a moral standard of perfeion. 


Justification as Prediion 

Imagine that I live in England, and for decades I have been ranting 
about immigrants who do not take the time to learn English. How can 
you come and live in a ace and never take the trouble to learn the 
language? It`s disrespeful, it`s rude, and it`s cloistered. Anybody who 
wishes to be a decent citizen must take the trouble to learn the language! 

I publish countless articles on this topic, I make public speeches on it, 
and end friendships with those who disagree with me. 

In other words, I am really committed to this idea. 

Then, imagine that I move to Sweden. I live in Sweden for a year, and 
then come back to England for a visit. 

"So, how`s Sweden? you ask. 

Great! I rey. 

And how`s your Swedish coming along? 

Oh, I haven`t learned any Swedish, why would I? 

Would that surprise you? Would you feel that I was being rather 
hycritical? Would you feel a strong desire to cross-examine me more 



-  - 


closely about my strong and openly professed belief that the inhabitants 
of a country are morally obligated to leam the language? 

If I exain the inconsistency between my beliefs and my aions by 
saying that it turns out it is very hard to leam a new language, and that it 
is not really necessary if you live within the confines of an expatriate 
cultural group - would you feel compelled to  out that this is the 
exa opsite of the sition that I have publicly and vociferously taken 
for many years? 

I imagine that you would suggest it would be appropriate for me to write 
a follow-up article, repudiating my earlier views, based on my new 
understanding. 

Would my blanket refusal to do any such thing affe your opinion of 
me? 

This is the cycle of abuse. 

When we, as children, justify the abuses of our parents in order to 
survive the situation, we are setting up moral absolutes about the right 
and proper use of were. It is moral for those who have were to hurt 
those who do not have were, in order to prote them, guide them, or 
˜toughen them up.` 

This is how we justify and survive the harm done to us. 

This is why we so often repeat and re -infli the harm done to us. 

If I were a publicly xenophobic Brit who moved to Sweden, I would be 
perfely aware of all the criticisms I would face if I did not try to learn 
Swedish. I would know that I would either have to leam Swedish - and 
learn it well - or publicly repudiate all my earlier opinions. 

Flip-flopping on princies is very humiliating, because everyone who 
proclaims a truth inevitably claims that that truth is based on reason and 
evidence. No one puts forward a truth claiming it is based on mere 
unsubstantiated opinion - because then, of course, it would not be the 
truth. 



-  - 


Thus someone who claims the truth always says that this truth is 
merely derived from reason and evidence - even those who claim faith 
as the basis for their beliefs say that faith provides evidence, and thus it 
is rational to believe truths based on faith. 

If someone who claims a truth later has to cometely reverse his 
sition, he can only credibly do so if new evidence arises. For instance, 
if it turns out that the universe is in fa wered by invisible pixies on 
treadmills, I will have to revise some of my opinions on reality - but only 
because new evidence has come to light. 

If, however, no new evidence has come to light, then clearly evidence 
cannot be believably cited as the justification for one`s earlier sition. 
What becomes clear is that one`s earlier sition was based on prejudice, 
but that reason and evidence were cited as justifications. 

This is an essential  - and very similar to the ethical and cultural 
hycrisies discussed above. 

When I cite reason and evidence as the justifications for my beliefs, I am 
affirming the were of reason and evidence. In other words, I fully 
accept and respe the primacy of reason and evidence in determining 
the truth-value of beliefs. 

If it turns out that I had no real reason or evidence for my beliefs, then I 
am engaged in the same kind of teble hycrisy peipetrated by those 
who use moral arguments for immoral ends. I am using reason and 
evidence to suprt subjeive bigotry. 

This hycrisy lies at the root of my public and private pronouncements 
regarding truth. If it comes to light that I have been using the values of 
reason and evidence to promote bigotry and prejudice, then not only 
have all my prior statements become worse than useless, but I stand 
revealed as a hycrite, a fraud and a manipulator. 

