Phase Two: Division 


 



The second phase of livestock control is to pit citizens against each other through the 
creation of dependence while appearing to foster independence. It is very difficult to 
rule human beings direly through force ” and where it can be achieved, it remains 
cripingly underproduive, as can be seen in North Korea. Human beings do not 
breed well or produce efficiently in dire captivity. 

If human beings believe that they are free, however, they will produce much more for 
their farmers. The best way to maain this illusion of freedom is to put some of the 
livestock on the payroll of the governing farmer. Those who become dependent on the 
existing hierarchy will then attack anyone who s out the violence, hycrisy and 
immorality of human ownership. 

Freedom is slavery, and slavery is freedom? 

If farmers can get the livestock to attack each other whenever one of them brings up 
the reality of their situation, they dont have to spend nearly as much effort controlling 
them direly. 

Those who become dependent un the stolen largess of the farmer will violently 
opse any questioning of the virtue of human ownership ” and the elleual and 
artistic classes, always and forever dependent un the state ” will say, to anyone who 
demands freedom from ownership: ˜You will harm the herd. 

The livestock are kept enclosed by shifting the moral resnsibility for the 
destruiveness of the system to those who demand real freedoms. 

Phase Three: Fear 

The third phase of livestock management is to invent continual external threats, so that 
the frightened livestock cling to the ˜proteion of the farmers. 

The Future? 

This system of human farming is now nearing its end. 

The teble tragedy of the present system has occurred not in spite of, but because of 
past economic freedoms. The massive increases in wealth throughout the th century 
resulted from economic freedoms ” and it is this very increase in wealth that has fed 
the size and were of the state. 

When the livestock become exnentially more produive, there is a corresnding 
increase in the number of farmers and their dependents. The growth of the state is 
always prortional to the preceding economic freedoms. Freedom creates wealth, and 
the wealth attras thieves and litical parasites, whose greed then destroys the 
economic freedoms. 

In other words, freedom metastasizes the cancer of the state. 


 



The government that starts off the smallest will always end up the largest. This is why 
there can be no viable and sustainable alternative to a truly free and peaceful society. 
A society without litical rulers, without human ownership, without the violence of 
taxation and statism. 

To be truly free is both very easy, and very hard. We avoid the horror of our 
enslavement because it is painful to see it direly. We dance around the violence of 
our dying system because we fear the attacks of our fellow livestock. But we can only 
be kept in the cages we refuse to see. 

Wake up. 

To see the farm is to leave it. 

