If you should bestow honour un your mother and father as individuals, 
and for no objeive princie, then what is really being demanded is not 
honour, but obedience towards individuals in the guise of honour as a 
princie. 

This basic logical contradiion, while comicated to discuss 
syllogistically, is something that every child instinually understands. 
When our mother demands that we respe her, do we not feel 
contempt, frustration and despair? Demanding respe is like demanding 

- - 


love, or hijacking an aircraft. It is commanding a destination, rather than 
respeing the free choices of individuals. 

We cannot imagine someone hijacking an aircraft on its way to 
Vladivostok and demanding, Take me to Vladivostok! Peoe hijack 
anes because the ane is not going where they want to go. 


Efficient Control 

If, however, through imidation, the distinion between the princie 
and the person can be blurred and buried, a far more efficient mechanism 
of control is achieved. If a child - or a citizen - can be taught to obey a 
person as if that person were a universal princie, the foundations of 
hegemonic diatorship, whether in the family, the church, the school or 
the state, are firmly established. If a child`s mind can be taught to obey 
the whims of an individual to the same degree that the child`s body obeys 
the absolutes of gravity, then near-perfe control can be established. 

Of course, this control incurs a teble cost - and a teble risk. The 
cost accrues to both the parent and the child, as is the case in all corrupt 
eraions. By using false and inconsistent princies to teach the child 
to obey a person rather than a princie, the child`s ability to extra 
princies from eraions is criped. Such children inevitably grow up 
to repeat destruive patterns in relationships, seemingly without any 
ability to learn from their mistakes. How could they leam from their 
mistakes? They have been taught as a princie to obey individuals - how 
can they then conceivably extra generalized princies from the 
behaviour of those individuals ? That would be like hoping that water will 
flow uphill. Expeing such people to extra produive princies from 
their eraions with others is like expeing a medieval monk who 
believes that the world follows the whims of the gods to discover the 
theory of relativity - or even the scientific method itself. 

For the parents, the cost is a perpetual and growing fear of the 
elligence and perceptiveness of their children, which manifests in a 
variety of ways, such as genial blankness, corrosive contempt, yawning 
indifference or fussy itability. 

 http ://w w w .freedomainradio. com 
-  - 


For our parents - and our elders in general - the modern world has 
virtually guaranteed that the gig is up. 

The antidote to false morality is a multiicity of false moralities. The 
antidote to irrational prejudice is more irrational prejudices. 

It is by being able to see the world as a whole that we can finally set 
ourselves free. 


Detonating Mythology 

If we were only ever exsed to English, we would not think of it as 
English, just as language. The need to differentiate English as a 
language only arises when we come o conta with other languages. 

Similarly, if we are only exsed to our own mythologies, we do not 
think of them as mythologies, but rather as the truth. If we only know our 
own god, then we can refer to this fiion as God - this is a universe 
away from saying a god, - or, more accurately our god. 

Deep down, each of us knows that our faith in our fragile fairy tales can 
only be sustained if we constantly steer clear of competing fairy tales. 
This tends to cripe our capacity for empathy - we must in our hearts 
ridicule the foolish beliefs of other cultures, and never take the tefying 
leap of trying to see our own culture through their eyes. 

The fear and hatred that so often mars the relations between different 
cultural groups does not arise out of ignorance, but rather out of 
knowledge. Christians feel uneasy around Muslims - and Muslims feel 
uneasy around Christians - not because they are different, but because 
they are the same. Two adulterous women who know each others` 
secrets will, if forced to sit together for lunch, have a very uncomfortable 
time - not because they know too little about each other, but rather 
because they know too much. 

The only way that mythology can sustainably dominate generation after 
generation is by pretending that it is not mythology, but reality. 



-  - 


To help clarify this, consider the following thought experiment. 

Imagine that the water in a sink has consciousness, and is sentient. Now 
imagine that I ur this water o a variety of glass containers, each of a 
different shape. The water, since it is sentient, would doubtless 
congratulate itself on its individuality. Since it would be unable to see the 
glass that surrounded it, contained it, and shaped its very form, it would 
honestly believe that its true physical shape was a mug, jar, test tube, or 
martini glass. 

The sentient water filling the test tube would look at all the funny glass 
shapes around it and be enormously amused. Do they not know how 
ridiculous they seem from the outside? Can they really imagine that that 
is their true shape? It`s madness! it would chortle, pressed up against 
the glass of its own conceptual prison. And the water in the martini glass 
would look at all the other containers - including the test tube - and say 
exaly the same thing. 

And this, really, is the state of all of the different cultures around the 
world. Each of us is ured o a clear glass container, which we believe 
represents the truth, which provides us with a shape and an identity that 
we mistake for human nature. And this can work relatively well - at 
least until we begin to catch sight of all the other glass containers 
surrounding us. 

For a time, we will endeavour to maain the illusion that only other water 
is contained in an obvious glass container - not us! However, there are 
those among us who can break free from the glass cage of culture - we 
stand outside such containers, and from our vantage , the 
differences in the sizes and shapes of the containers are praically 
irrelevant. 

The size and shape of your prison is not imrtant. The fa that you are 
in a prison is. 

The knowledge that you are in a prison does not have to be learned. It 
only has to be accepted. It is not something that you do not know. At a 




-  - 


very deep level, you are perfely aware that what you call the truth is just 
the magical physics of invisible fairy tales. 

How do I know this? 

As with every idea in this book, there is no need to take my word for 
