In the same way, although we were always told that our own countries and cultures are 
the best, we also know, as elligent adults, that every other child is told the same 
thing, and that it is utterly imssible for this to be universally true. 

Why is so much effort ured o indorinating us? Why is it so imrtant for us to 
develop this fetishistic allegiance to our local tribe, our local fantasies, our local 
priests, our local leaders? 

The ˜why is a fascinating story, and it can very well be called, ˜The Story of Our 
Enslavement. 

Why We Are Trained 

Human beings want to dominate and exoit the resources around them. At first, we 
mostly hunted, fished and ate off the land, but then something magical ” and teble ” 
happened to our minds. 

Unique among the animals, we became afraid of the idea of death, and of future loss. 

This was the start of a great tragedy, and an even greater ssibility. . . 

When we became afraid of death, of injury, and imprisonment, we became 
controllable ” and so valuable ” in a way that no other resource could ever be. 

The greatest resource for any human being to control is not a natural resource, or a 
tool, or an animal or land ” but other human beings. 

You can frighten an animal, because animals are afraid of pain in the moment, but you 
cannot frighten an animal with a loss of liberty, or with the ssibility of future torture 
or imprisonment, because animals have very little sense of tomorrow. You cannot 
make a cow fatter by punishing it with torture, or force a sheep to produce more wool 
by imidating it with ssible death. You cannot swing a sword at a tree and scream 
at it to produce more fruit, or hold a burning torch to a field and demand more wheat. 
You cannot get more eggs by menacing a hen, but you can get a man to give you his 
eggs by threatening him. 

This is the essence of the world that we live in ” and this is what we are looking at, 
when we regard a map of the world. We are not looking at countries, or cultures, or 
religions. . .we are in fa looking at farms. 

Farms holding people, owned by other people. 

The reason that so much effort was ured o propagandizing you as a child is that 
propaganda is the fertilizer of human farming - in every sense of the word. Human 
farming has been the most profitable ” and destruive ” occupation throughout 
history, and its now reaching its climax. Human society cannot be rationally 


 



understood until it is seen for what it is: a series of farms where human farmers own 
human livestock. 

Some people get confused because governments provide healthcare and water and 
education and roads, and thus imagine that there is some benevolence at work. 

Nothing could be further from the truth. All farmers provide healthcare and igation 
and training to their livestock. 

Some people get confused because we are allowed certain liberties, and thus imagine 
that our governments prote our freedoms. But all farmers ant their crops a certain 
distance apart to increase their yields ” and will allow certain animals larger stalls or 
fields if it means they will produce more meat and milk. 

In your country, your tax farm, your farmer grants you certain freedoms not because 
he cares about your liberties, but because he wants to increase his profits. 

Are you beginning to see the nature of the cage you were born o? 

The History of Human Farming 

There have been four major phases of human farming. 

Egyptian 

The first phase, used in ancient Egypt, was dire and brutal human compulsion. 
Human bodies were controlled, but the creative produivity of the human mind 
remained beyond the reach of the whip, the brand and the shackles. Slaves remained 
woefully underproduive, and required enormous resources to control. They could 
produce pyramids, but not movies or microchips. 

Roman 

The second phase was the Roman model, wherein slaves were granted some capacity 
for freedom, ingenuity and creativity, which raised their produivity. This increased 
the wealth of Rome by adding to the tax income of the Roman government. With this 
additional wealth, Rome aggressively expanded o an empire, eventually destroying 
the economic freedoms that fed its were, and collapsed. No doubt this does not seem 
entirely unfamiliar? 

Feudal 

After the collapse of Rome, the feudal model roduced the concept of ˜free range 
livestock, combined with taxation. Instead of being direly owned, peasants farmed 
land that they were allowed to retain as long as they paid off the local warlord. This 
model broke down due to the continual subdivision of produive land, and was 
destroyed during the Enclosure Movement, when land was consolidated, and hundreds 


 



of thousands of peasants were kicked off their ancestral lands, because new farming 
techniques made larger farms more produive using fewere people. 

The increased produivity of the late Middle Ages created the excess food required 
for the expansion of towns and cities, which in turn gave rise to the modern 
Democratic model of human ownership. 

Democratic 

As disaced peasants flooded o the cities, huge stocks of cheap human capital 
became available to the rising industrialists ” and the ruling class of human farmers 
quickly realized that they could make more money by letting their livestock choose 
their own occupations. 

Under the Democratic model, dire slave ownership has been reaced by the Mafia 
model. The Mafia rarely owns businesses direly, but rather sends thugs around once 
a month to steal from the business ˜owners. You are now allowed to choose your own 
occupation, which raises your produivity ” and thus the taxes you can pay to your 
masters. 

Your few freedoms are preserved because they are profitable to your owners. You are 
more produive when you feel free, and since voting allows you to feel free, you are 
welcome to it ” as long as you only vote on who your master is, not on whether you 
should have a master at all. 

The great challenge of the Democratic model is that increases in wealth and freedom 
threaten the control and were of the farmers. The ruling classes initially profit from a 
relatively free market in capital and labor, but as their livestock become more used to 
their freedoms and growing wealth, they begin to question why they need rulers at all. 
Ah well. Nobody ever said that human farming was easy. Keeping the tax livestock 
securely in the comunds of the ruling classes has been a three-phase process. 

Phase One: Indorination 

The first phase is to indorinate the young through government ˜education. As the 
wealth of democratic countries grows, government schools are universally inflied on 
children in order to control the thoughts and souls of their future livestock. All 
children bond with their educators. As women became liberated from the constras 
of housework due to developments in, and the availability of, labor saving devices, 
government-paid elleuals encouraged them to enter the taxable marketace. With 
both parents working outside the home, governments can then take over the early 
education and indorination of children. Within less than a generation, taxes have 
increased to the  where two parents working take home less money than one 
parent working in the past. 

