usually had to accept an increase in pain in order to become healthier. 

An infeed tooth had to be pulled out. Nowadays, we sometimes have 
to go through the pain of chemotherapy in order to treat cancer. 

This is the challenge of pain - we do not like it, but often have to accept 
a temrary increase of it in order to become healthier. 

If I break my leg, it really hurts - that`s why I stop moving it. After my 
leg has healed, to regain full strength and mobility, I have to endure the 
pain of physiotherapy. 

Injuries can also make us stronger. If I survive a heart attack, I may 
choose to lose weight, eat better, exercise and so on - I may in fa be 
healthier than if I had never had a heart attack. Similarly, if I break my 
leg, my leg can end up stronger, as a result of the exercise required to 
restore strength and mobility. Losing a tooth can generate a desire for 
better oral hygiene. 

There are several key differences between physical pain and 
psychological pain, however, which you really need to understand if you 
want to become healthier and happier in the long run. 

The first and most imrtant difference is that psychological pain can be 
transferred from one person to another. If my tooth hurts, I cannot transfer my 
toothache to you - but quite the opsite is true for psychological pain, 
at least in the short run. 

If I feel anxiety about what you are doing, I can temrarily reduce that 
anxiety by forcing you to change your behaviour, just as I can 
temrarily reduce the pain of a toothache by taking painkillers - the 
difference being that when I take painkillers, you do not feel my 
toothache. 



-  - 


The transfer of psychological pain almost always occurs in a hierarchical 
relationship, such as parent-child, boss-emoyee, a 
dominant/submissive maage and so on. Helessness and dependence 

- real for children, fantasized for adults - are required to be on the 
receiving end of this kind of parasitical emotional exoitation. 

This is the main reason why hegemonic or hierarchical were relations 
exist. We do not throw our garbage o a dump because the dump just 
happens to be there - the dump only exists because we need to throw our 
garbage somewhere. In the same way, we do not exoit people because 
they`re heless; we make them heless in order to exoit them. 

Bob did not end up abusing children because he had were as a teacher 

- he sought were as a teacher in order to abuse children. 

Powere does not create corruption; the desire to corrupt creates were. 

When we are in an agony of psychological distress, it is utterly 
counteruitive to want to feel more of that agony - just as it is 
counteruitive to want to pull out a tooth that already hurts, or start 
chemotherapy when you do not feel sick. 

Yet that is precisely what is required, if we wish to become healthy. 

If I choose not to go to physiotherapy after my broken leg heals, I am 
the only one who has to live with the resulting weakness and lack of 
mobility. If I choose to manage my anxiety by attacking the heless, 
however, I gain temrary relief from my discomfort only by infliing 
my distress on others. 

And this is how the entire system reproduces itself. 

In essence, by attempting to humiliate me so horrendously, Bob was 
attempting to infe me with the virus of abuse. Because he was not 
mature or wise enough to take ownership for his own emotions, he 
inevitably believed that I was the source of his anxiety. Since I was 
infliing anxiety un him, I was aing in a hostile manner, just as 




-  - 


if I were injeing him with a ison - and thus his attack on me was a 
twisted form of self-defence. 

Furthermore, by infliing his humiliation on me, Bob was demanding 
that I have empathy for his feelings - but if empathy is a value, why 
would he not have empathy for my exhaustion? 

Without a doubt, Bob had been ignored and repeatedly humiliated as a 
child, and forced to comy with the irrational whims of those who held 
were over him. The natural pattern-making habits of his brain thus 
created a universal commandment: You must obey those in were! - 
or, more accurately: Disobeying those in were will cause you to be 
attacked and humiliated. 

There are three major comnents to the psychological agony that 
results from the establishment of this princie. 

The first is the shame and embarrassment that results from being 
humiliated. 

The second is the horror of being trapped in the were of those who a 
abusively. 

The third is the rage that results from being told that such abuse is 
anually virtuous - This is for your own good! 

When we are abused as children, we are put o a teble predicament, 
because we are utterly dependent on our abusers. A form of the 
Stockholm syndrome sets in, and we force ourselves to respe 
those who abuse us. This is an entirely sensible survival strategy, because 
the horror of knowing that we will be under the abusive control of our 
parents for years to come would be too great for us to bear. Also, since 
we are punished for not showing respe, it is easier just to respe 
them rather than continually have to pretend to - which they will 
doubtless see through, and punish. 

Furthermore, since abuse is always cloaked with self-righteous moral 
justifications (It is morally wrong to disobey me!), we also experience 



-  - 


an existential horror, because we know that our parents are using moral 
terms - and our own desire for goodness - to humiliate, control and 
bully us. In other words, they use goodness in the service of evil, which is 
the worst corruption of all. 

Thus we are inevitably led to invert rational moral standards - bullying 
the heless inevitably becomes virtue. 


Absolutes 

We can choose not to eat, but we cannot erase our body`s need for food. 
We can choose to jump off a cliff, but we cannot choose to defy gravity. 

We can pretend that lies are true, and that vices are virtues, but we 
cannot turn lies o truth, or vices o virtues. 

We cannot erase the truth within ourselves; we can only suppress and 
distort it. 

Fundamentally, philosophy is not invention, but excavation; not 
