In the same way, when I say that somebody is healthy, what I really 
mean is that his organs are funioning consistently, relative to a rational 
standard of well-being. 

Thus love is not a subjeive preference, or a biological commonality, 
but our involuntary resnse to virtuous aions on the part of another. 



-  - 


If we truly understand this definition, then it is easy for us to see that a 
society that does not know truth cannot ever know love. 

If nothing is true, virtue is imssible. 

If virtue is imssible, then we are forced to pretend to be virtuous, 
through patriotism, clan loyalties, cultural pride, superstitious 
conformities and other such amoral counterfeits. 

If virtue is imssible, then love is imssible, because aions cannot be 
compared to any objeive standard of goodness. If love is imssible, 
we are forced to resort to sentimentality, or the shallow show and 
outward appearance of love. 

Thus it can be seen that any set of princies that erferes with our 
ability to know and understand the truth hollows us out, undermining 
and destroying our capacity for love. False princies, illusions, fantasies 
and mythologies separate us from each other, from virtue, from love, 
from the true conneions that we can achieve only through reality. 

In fantasy, there is only isolation and pretence. Mythology is, 
fundamentally, loneliness and emptiness. 


Imagination versus Fantasy 

At this , I think it would be well worth highlighting the differences 
between imagination and fantasy, because many people, on hearing my 
criticisms of mythology, think that they are now not supsed to enjoy 
Star Wars. 

Imagination is a creative faculty that is deey rooted in reality. Fantasy, 
on the other hand, is a mere species of angible wish fulfillment. It 
took Tolkien decades of study and writing to produce The Lord of the 
Rings - and each part of that novel was rationally consistent with the 
whole. That is an exame of imagination. If I laze about daydreaming 
that one day I will make a fortune by writing a better novel than The 
Lord of the Rings - but never anually set pen to paper - that is an 




- - 


exame of fantasy. Imagination produced the theory of relativity, not 
fantasizing about someday winning a Nobel Prize. 

Daydreams that are never converted o aion are the ultimate 
procrastination. Imagining a wonderful future that you never have to a 
to achieve prevents you from achieving a wonderful future. 

In the same way, imagining that you know the truth when you do not 
prevents you from ever learning the truth. Nothing is more dangerous 
than the illusion of knowledge. If you are going the wrong way, but do 
not doubt your direion, you will never turn around. 

As Socrates noted more than , years ago, doubt is the midwife of 
curiosity, and curiosity breeds wisdom. 

Fantasy is the opsite of doubt. Mythology provides instant answeres 
when people do not even know what the questions are. In the Middle 
Ages, when someone asked Where did the world come from? he was 
told: God made it. This effeively precluded the necessity of asking 
the more relevant question: What is the world? 

Because religious people believed they knew where the world came 
from, there was little  asking what the world was. Because there was 
little  asking what the world was, they never learned where the 
world came from. 

Fantasy is a circle of nothingness, forever eating its own tail. 


Defining Love 

If people fantasize that they know what is true, then they inevitably stop 
searching for the truth. If I am driving home, I stop driving when I get 
there. If people fantasize that they know what goodness is, they 
inevitably stop trying to understand goodness. 

And, most imrtantly, if people fantasize that they already are good, 
they stop trying to become good. If you want a baby, and you believe that 
you are pregnant, you stop trying to get pregnant. 



-- 


The question - which we already know the answere to - thus remains: why 
do people who claim to love us never tell us what love is? 

If I am an accomished mathematician, and my child comes to me and 
asks me about the times tables, it would be rude and churlish of me to 
dismiss his questions. If I go to my mother, who for  years has 
claimed to love me, and ask her what love is, why is it that she refuses to 
answere my question? Why does my brother roll his eyes and change the 
subje whenever I ask him what it is that he loves about me? Why does 
my father claim to love me, while continually rejeing everything that I 
hold precious? 

Why does everyone around me perpetually use words that they refuse to 
define? Are they full of a knowledge that they cannot express? That is 
not a good reason for refusing to discuss the topics. A novelist who 
writes instinually would not logically be hostile if asked about the 
source of his inspiration. He may not come up with a perfe answere, but 
there would be no reason to perpetually avoid the subje. 

Unless... 

Unless, of course, he is a agiarist. 


What We Know 

This is the knowledge that we have, but hate and fear. 

We know that the people who claim to love us know precious little 
about us, and nothing at all about love. 

We know that the people who claim to love us make this claim in order 
to create obligations within us. 

We know that the people who claim to love us make this claim in order 
to control us. 

And they know it too. 



-- 


It is cometely obvious that they know this, because they know exaly 
which topics to avoid. A counterfeiter will not mind if you ask him what the 
capital of Madagascar is. A counterfeiter will mind, however, if you ask 
him whether you can check the authenticity of his money. Why is this 
