children are the patients. Parents claim the authority to tell their children 
what to do for the same reason that doors claim the authority to tell 
their patients what to do - the superior knowledge of the former, and 
the relative ignorance of the latter. 

If you are unwell, and put yourself in the care of a door, and follow his 
instruions, but find that you do not get better - but in fa seem to get 
worse - it would be wise to sit down with that door and review his 
abilities - particularly if you cannot change physicians for some reason. 


-  - 


Since following his instruions is making you worse, you must ask: 

Why should I follow your instruions? 

It would be logical to begin by asking the door to confirm his aual 
credentials. Then, you might continue by asking what his definition of 
health is, to make sure that you were both on the same page. Then, you 
would continue to drill down to more specific questions about the nature 
of your illness, the nature of his knowledge of the human body, and his 
understanding of your ailments and the methodology by which he came 
up with your cure. 

This is the conversation that you must have with your parents regarding 
the nature of virtue and their knowledge of it. Your parents were the 
moral doors of your being while you were growing up - if, as an adult, 
you are happy and healthy, full of joy and engaged in deep and 
meaningful relationships, it is still worthwhile to examine the knowledge 
of your parents, since you may have children in time, and will yourself 
become a door to them. 

If, however, you are not happy and fulfilled as an adult, then it is essential 
that you examine your parents` ethical knowledge. If your health regimen 
has been established by a quack who has no idea what he is doing, you 
will never be healthy as long as you follow his instruions, since one can 
never randomly ave at the truth. 

If a madman passes himself off as a door, when a patient asks for his 
credentials, he will smile, spread his hands, and say, Well of course I 
don`t have any! His openness about his lack of knowledge and 
credentials establishes his relative innocence. 

However, when the patient asks for a door`s credentials, if the door 
evades the question, or becomes hostile, or dismissive, then clearly the 
door is fully aware of what he is doing at some level. A man who 
commits a murder in a lice station may claim insanity; a man who 
murders in secret and then hides the body has the capacity for 
rationality, if not virtue, and thus cannot claim to be mad. 



-  - 


The fa that your parents will do almost anything to avoid the question 
What is goodness? is the most revealing piece of knowledge that you 
can ssess. It is the fa that blows the cage of culture wide open. It is 
the hofying knowledge that will set you free. 

You will not just benefit from examining your parents. You can also sit 
down with your priest, and examine him with regards to the nature of 
the existence of God (this is a useful conversation to have with religious 
parents as well). If you are persistent, and do your research in advance, 
you will very quickly discover that your priest also has no certain 
knowledge about the existence of God - and will become very 
uncomfortable and/or aggressive if you persist, which you should. 

Is it wrong for a priest to say that he only believes in God because he 
has a feeling? In terms of truth, not exaly - in terms of egrity, 
absolutely. 

The fundamental problem is not that the priest claims the emotional 
irrationality of faith as his justification for his belief in God, but rather 
that the existence of God was presented to you as an objeive fa, and also that you 
were not allowed the same criteria for knowledge. " 

These two facets of the falsehoods you were told as a child are essential 
to your liberation as an adult. 


Fiion as Fas 

When you were a child, you did not have the ability to objeively 
validate the commandments of those who had were over you. Your 
susceptibility was a great temptation to those who would rather be 
believed than be right. All were tends to corrupt, and the were that 
parents have over their children is the greatest were in the world. 

A child is biologically predissed to trust and obey his parents - this 
has great utility, insofar as parents will often tell their children not to eat 
isonous bees, pull hot frying pans off the stove, or run around all 



-  - 


day outside without sunscreen on. The requirements of survival tend to 
discourage endless trial and error. 

When parents instru their children, they can either present that 
instruion as conditional, or absolute. Conditional instruions - do not 
hit your brother except in self-defence - tend to lead to endless 
additional questions, and quickly reveal the parents` lack of knowledge. 
As the child continues to ask what exaly defines self-defence, whether 
pre-emptive strikes are allowable, whether teasing can be considered 
aggression and so on, the fuzzy areas innate to all systems of ethics 
quickly come o view. 

As these fuzzy areas become clearer, parents fear once more the loss of 
moral authority. However, the fa that certain areas of ethics are harder 
to define than others does not mean that ethics as a whole is a purely 
subjeive disciine. In biology, the classification of very similar species 
tends to be fuzzy as well - at least before the discovery of DNA - but 
that does not mean that biology is a purely subjeive science. Water can 
never be perfely pure, but that does not mean that bottled water is 
indistinguishable from seawater. 

Due to their desire for sime and absolute moral commandments, 
parents spend enormous amounts of energy continually herding their 
children away from the cliff edges of ethical comexities. They deoy 
a wide variety of distraive and abusive taics to achieve this end - and 
all these taics are designed to convince the child that his parents 
ssess absolute knowledge of ethical matters. 

However, as children grow - particularly o the teenage years - a 
certain danger begins to arise. The children, formerly comiant (at least 
from the teble twos through the latency period) begin to suspe 
that their parents` knowledge is little more than a form of hycritical 
bullying. They begin to see the true conformity of their parents with 
regards to culture, and really begin to understand that what was 
presented to them as objeive fa was in reality subjeive opinion. 



-  - 


This causes great confusion and resentment, because teenagers 
instinually grasp the true corruption of their parents. 

A counterfeiter necessarily respes the value of real money, since he 
does not spend his time and energies creating exa reicas of 
Monoly banknotes. The counterfeiter wishes to accurately reproduce 
real money because he knows that real money has value - he wishes his 
reproduion to be as accurate as ssible because he knows that his 
fake money does not have value. 
