On Truth: The Tyranny of Illusion, by Stefan Molyneux. 

want to read this book. This book will mess up your life, as you 
know it. This book will change every single one of your 
relationships - most imrtantly, your relationship with yourself. This 
book will change your life even if you never imement a single one of 
the prosals it contains. This book will change you even if you disagree 
with every single idea it puts forward. Even if you put it down right now, 
this book will have changed your life, because now you know that you 
are afraid of change. 

This book is radioaive and painful - it is only incidentally the kind of 
radiation and pain that will cure you. 


Relationships 

There are really only three kinds of relationships in the world. The first 
kind is the one we all dream of- joyous, mutually beneficial, deep, 
meaningful, fun, a real easure to have and to hold. 

This kind of relationship is extraordinarily rare. If this kind of 
relationship were an animal, it would not even be on the endangered list. 
It would be by many considered extin. 

The second kind of relationship is mutually beneficial, but not joyous, 
deep, or meaningful. This is the kind of relationship you have with your 
grocer, your banker, and perhaps your boss. It is voluntary, defined by 
an imicit or exicit contra, and can usually be broken or allowed to 
lapse without guilt, regret or remorse. 

This kind of relationship is not uncommon, but also not very imrtant. 
We do not lose our lives, our happiness or our very souls in the pits of 
these kinds of relationships. They are, as the saying goes, dry 
calculations of mutual utility. We are not obligated to go to the 
deathbeds of our bankers; our grocers do not force us to attend church 
when we do not believe; we rarely get o fights with our bosses about 
whether or not we should baptize our children. 
 

No, it is the third kind of relationship that we are most concerned with 
in our lives. It is the third kind of relationship that so often tortures us. 

It is the third kind of relationship that undermines our joy, egrity and 
independence. 

The first kind of relationship does not involve obligation, but easure. 
There is no need for guilt or manipulation, bullying or control, demands, 
tears or passive-aggression. We do not need obligation to draw us to that 
which gives us easure, any more than a child needs to be cajoled o 
eating his candy. 

The second kind of relationship does involve obligation, but it is 
voluntarily chosen, for mutual advantage. We pay our mortgage; the 
bank gives us a house. The relationship is contraual, and thus does not 
need guilt or manipulation. 

It is the third kind of relationship that this book will focus on. 

It is the third kind of relationship that is eating us alive. 


The Third Kind 

The third kind of relationship has three main comnents. The first is 
that it is not chosen; the second is that it involves obligations, and the 
third is that it is considered moral. 

The first and most imrtant aspe of these kinds of relationships is 
that they are not entered o voluntarily. You are born o them. You 
do not choose your parents. You do not choose your siblings. You do 
not choose your extended family. You do not choose your country. You 
do not choose your culture. You do not choose your government. You 
do not choose your religion. You do not choose your school. You do 
not choose your teachers. 

Sadly, when you are a child, the list is nearly endless. 

You are born o this world without choice, o a familial, social, 
educational, litical and geographical environment that is merely 



accidental. And for the rest of your life, everyone will try to convince 
you that you are resnsible for this accident. 

Your parents decided to have a child - you were in no way involved in 
the choice, since you did not as yet exist when the decision was made. 
Even if you were conceived by accident, or adopted, your parents 
decided to keep you. 

Thus your parents` relationship with you when you were a child was 
essentially contraual, in the same way that when you buy a dog, you`re 
obligated to feed it. Naturally, it is preferable - and certainly ssible - 
for your relationship with your parents to be loving, mutually enjoyable, 
respeful and great fun all around. 

But as I said before, this kind of relationship is, sadly, all too rare. 

Entire generations of children have grown up with the idea that the a 
of being born creates an obligation. 

This is entirely false, and one of the most destruive myths of mankind. 

First, I will tell you what is true. Then I will tell you why it is true. Then I 
will tell you how to change. 


What Is True 

It is true that your parents chose to have you. It is true that by making 
that choice, your parents assumed a voluntary obligation towards you. 
That obligation consisted of two main parts: the first was physical, the 
second was moral. 

The physical part of that obligation was clothing, food, medical 
attention, shelter and so on - the base physical requirements. I am not 
going to spend much time on that in this book, since the vast majority of 
parents succeed in providing food and shelter for their children - and 
those who fail in this regard are so obviously deficient that a 
philosophical book is scarcely required to illuminate their shortcomings. 





The moral obligations that your parents assumed by having you were 
twofold. The first part is more or less understood in society, and consists 
of all the standard virtues such as educating you, keeping you safe, 
refraining from physical or emotional abuse and so on. 

The second part of your parents` moral obligation towards you is much 
more subtle and corrosive. This is the realm of egrity, and it is a great 
challenge for societies throughout the world. 


Integrity 

Integrity can be defined as consistency between reality, ideas and 
behaviour. Consistency with reality is not telling a child that daddy is 
sick when he is in fa drunk. Consistency with behaviour is not 
slapping a child for hitting another child. The value of this kind of 
egrity is also well understood by many, even if imperfely praiced, 
and we will not deal with it much here either. 

It is consistency with ideas that causes the most problems for families - 
and the most long-term suffering for children throughout their lives. 

When you were a child, you were told over and over that certain aions 
were either good or bad. Telling the truth was good; stealing was bad. 
