without a DRO. 


Page  of  


Feb , ::PM MST 


http://archive.lewrockwell.com/orig/molyneux.html 

But let's say that only the murderous husband - anning to kill his wife - opted out of his DRO system 
without telling her. Well, the first thing that his wife's DRO system would do is inform her of her husband's 
aion - and the ill ent it may represent - and help relocate her if desired. If she decided against 
relocation, her DRO would promptly drop her, since by deciding to live in close proximity with a rogue man, 
she was exsing herself to an untenable amount of danger (and so the DRO to a high risk for financial 
loss!). Now both the husband and wife have chosen to live without DROs, in a state of nature, and thus 
face all the insurmountable problems of getting food, shelter, money and so on. 

Now let's look at something slightly more comicated - stalking. A woman becomes obsessed with a man, 
and starts calling him at all hours and following him around. Perhaps boils a bunny or two. Well, if the man 
has bought insurance against stalking, his DRO leaps o aion. It calls the woman's DRO, which says: 
stop stalking this man or we'll drop you. And how does her DRO know whether she has really given up her 
stalking? The man stops rerting it. And if there is a dispute, she just wears an ankle bracelet for a while 
to make sure. And remember - since there is no public property, she can be ordered off any property such 
as sidewalks, streets and parks. 

(And if the man has not bought insurance against stalking, no problem - it will just be more expensive to 
buy with a ˜pre-existing condition'!) 

Although they may seem unfamiliar to you, DROs are not a new concept - they are as ancient as 
civilization itself, but have been shouldered aside by the constant escalation of State were over the last 
century or so. In the past, desired social behaviour was punished through ostracism, and risks ameliorated 
through voluntary ˜friendly societies'. A man who left his wife and children - or a woman who got pregnant 
out of wedlock - was no longer welcome in decent society. DROs take these concepts one step further, by 
making all the information formerly known by the local community available to the world as whole, just as 
credit rerts do. There are really no limits to the benefits that DROs can confer un a free society - 
insurance could be created for such things as: 

¢ a man's wife giving birth to a child that is not his own 

¢ a daughter getting pregnant out of wedlock 

¢ fertility problems for a maed coue 

¢ ...and much more. 

All of the above insurance licies would require DROs to take aive steps to prevent such behaviours - 
the mind boggles at all the preventative steps that could be taken! The imrtant thing to remember is that 
all such contras are voluntary, and so do not violate the moral absolute of non-violence. 

So in conclusion - how does the stateless society deal with violent criminals? Brilliantly! In a stateless 
society, there are fewere criminals, more prevention, greater sanions - and instant forewarning of those 
aiming at a life of crime by their withdrawal from the DRO system. More incentives to work, fewere 
incentives for a life of crime, no ace to hide for rogues, and general social rejeion of those who decide 
to operate outside of the civilized worlds of contra, mutual proteion and general security. And remember 
- States in the th century caused more than   million deaths - are we really that woed about 
hold-ups and jewelry thefts in the face of those kinds of numbers? 

There is no system that will reace faulty men with perfe angels, but the stateless society, by rewarding 
goodness and punishing evil, will at least ensure that all devils are visible - instead of cloaking them in the 
current deadly fog of were, litics and propaganda. 

