
Similarly, parents present their opinions as fas because they know that 
objeive fas have more were and validity than mere opinion. A 
door who fakes his own credentials does so because he knows 
credentials have the were to create credibility. 

Recognizing the were of truth - and using that were to reinforce lies 
- is abominably corrupt. A man who presents his opinions as fas does 
so because he recognizes the value of fas. Using the credibility of 
truth to make falsehoods more ausible simultaneously affirms and 
denies the value of honesty and egrity. It is a fundamental logical 
contradiion in theory, and almost unbearably hycritical in praice. 

Thus it always happens that when grown children begin to examine their 
elders, they rapidly discover that those elders do not in fa know what 
they claimed to know - but knew enough about the value of the truth to 
present their subjeive opinions as objeive knowledge. This 
hycritical crime far outstrips the abuses of mere counterfeiting, or the 
faking of credentials, because adults can prote themselves against false 
currency and fake diomas. 

Children have no such defences. 


Do As I Say, Not As I Do. . . 

The second major hycrisy involved in presenting subjeive opinion as 
absolute fa is that parents reserve this were only for themselves - and 
self-righteously punish children for doing exaly the same thing. 



-  - 


Take the question of going to church. Religious parents tell their 
children that they must go to church. When the children ask why, they 
are told, Because God exists, and He loves you, or other such 
nonsense. In other words, parents command their children with 
reference to objeive absolutes. Children are absolutely not allowed to 
say, I don`t want to go to church because I don`t feel like it. 

Fast-forward a decade or so. The child - now a teenager - sits down 
with his parents and asks: Why do you believe in God? 

If he is persistent and knowledgeable, he will quickly corner his parents 
o admitting that they believe in God because of faith. In other 
words, they have no proof that God exists, but believe in God because 
they feel like it - since no matter how emotionally compelling faith is, it 
remains in essence a feeling that contradis reason and evidence. 

However, when that teenager was a child, he was never allowed to make 
decisions because he just felt like it. He was not allowed to stay home 
from church because he didn`t feel like going. He was always sent to 
school despite his preference for staying home at times. His feelings did 
not create truth, or establish objeively valid criteria for aion. 

When he used exaly the same methodology that his parents used, he was called 
disobedient, wrong, sinful, wilful, immoral, stubborn and a thousand 
other pejoratives. For his parents, aing on the primacy of feeling is 
praised as an absolute and objeive virtue. For him, aing on the 
primacy of feeling is condemned as an absolute and objeive vice. 

Conformity 

As the child grows up, his tendency to want to merge with the herd is 
criticized as an immoral weakness. Any susceptibility to fashion trends, 
linguistic tics, prized ssessions, general sexual habits or any other form 
of groupthink is opsed by his parents on supsedly objeive and 
moral grounds. 



-  - 


Again - generally in the teenage years - the child begins to realize that 
his parents do not anually opse groupthink or conformity on princie, 
but only attack competing conformities. If a son begins to run with a wild 
gang, his parents will criticize him on the grounds of conformity, but it is 
not conformity that they obje to, but conformity with a gang they 
disapprove of, rather than with a group they approve of. 

And it gets even worse than that. 

The reason that the parents dislike the child`s new gang is because the 
parents fear disapproval from their own gang. If the son of religious 
parents starts hanging out with a group of atheists, his parents will 
criticize him for his mindless conformity, and less rebellion - but 
only because they fear being attacked, criticized or undermined by their 
own religious peers. In other words, they effeively tell their son: You 
should not be susceptible to the disapproval of your peers, because we 
are susceptible to the disapproval of our peers. 


Is Ignorance Hycrisy? 

The argument is often made that parents are not aware of all the 
comexities of their own hycrisies, and thus are not morally 
resnsible for their inconsistencies. 

Fortunately, there is no need for us to rely on mere theory to establish 
the truth of this prosition. 

If I tell you to take Highway  to get to your destination, and it turns 
out that this takes you in the exa opsite direion, what would be a 
rational resnse if I were truly ignorant of the fa that I was giving you 
really bad direions? 

Well, I would first insist that they were the corre direions, since I 
genuinely believe that they are. However, when you sat me down with a 
map and ed out exaly why my direions were so bad, I would see 
the truth, alogize profusely, and openly promise never to give out bad 



- - 


direions again - and buy a whole bunch of maps to boot, and spend 
some significant amount of time studying them. 

However, if I got angry the moment that you brought up that I had sent 
you in the wrong direion, and refused to look at any maps, and refused 
to admit that I was wrong, and kept changing the subje, and kept 
distraing you with emotional tricks, and got more and more upset, and 
refused to tell you how I came up with my direions - and ended up 
storming out of the room, you may be unsure of many things, but you 
would not be unsure of one thing at least. 

You would no longer imagine that I was ever erested in giving good 
direions. 

In the realm of the parent-child relationship, this realization comes as a 
profound and teble shock. This realization lands like a nuclear blast 
over a shantytown, radiating out in waves of destruion, smashing down 
the assumptions you have about all of your existing relationships. 

The moment you realize that your parents, priests, teachers, liticians - 
your elders in general - only used morality to control you, to subjugate 
you - as a tool of abuse - your life will never be the same again. 

The tefying fa that your elders knew the were of virtue, but used 
that were to control, corrupt, bully and exoit you, reveals the genuine 
sadism that lies at the core of culture - it reveals the awful cult in 
culture. 

A door who fakes his credentials is bad enough - how would any sane 
person judge a door who studies the human body not to heal it, but to 
more effeively cause pain? 
