because he conforms to objeive standards of goodness. You either like 
a car because it is a Buick, or Buicks are good cars because they get 
excellent mileage. 

If someone is good because he was bom in America, then clearly he 
cannot judge a man bom in Saudi Arabia as deficient in any way, either 
morally or culturally. The essence of aristocracy - the eternal ague of 
mankind - is the belief that we are born o superiority; that our 
excellence is somehow innate. However, if an American is superior 
to a Saudi, then that superiority is not earned. If Bob were born in Saudi 
Arabia rather than America, he would be an inferior Muslim rather 
than a superior Christian or American. Thus Bob`s superiority - or 
lack thereof - has nothing to do with his personal choices, but is rather 
defined by the accidents of geography and birth. Either Bob claims to be 
better due to geography, which is imssible - or due to his own 
personal virtue, in which case geography has nothing to do with it. 

Both Americans and Muslims are simy reproducing what they are told 
- what is inflied on them through emotional punishments when they 
are children - and calling it morality. This is exaly the same as a child 
who is force-fed, who then calls being overweight moral, while the 
child next door is underfed, and then calls being skinny moral. Srts 
fans are the same way - the closest franchise is just somehow the best. 

Basically, culture is the compulsion to call whatever surrounds you 
moral. If you live in the mountains, it is moral to live in the 
mountains. If you were taught to swim, then swimming is moral. If you 
were not taught to swim, then swimming is immoral. If you were taught 
to cover your legs, then baring your legs is immodest. If you were 
taught to uncover your legs, then covering them up is prudish. If you 



-  - 


were taught to fold the flag a certain way, then folding the flag any other 
way is disrespeful. 

When I was six, I was sent to an English boarding school. One of the 
rules there was that I was had to wear garters around my socks to keep 
them up, especially in church. I was told in no uncertain terms that if I 
entered the church without my garters on, I was being disrespeful to 
God. This didn`t make much sense to me; I argued that God made my 
legs, and men made garters, and I was sure that God would appreciate 
looking at his own creation rather than something that men made. 

Naturally, my objeions were also framed as immoral talkback - I was 
being disrespeful to the headmaster. 

I am sure you get the idea. 

Everything that surrounds you is framed in terms of ethics, because 
framing things in terms of ethics works. If you can get a child to believe 
that something is right or wrong, you control that child`s mind, his body, 
his allegiance, his very being. Moral arguments have a were that is 
unmatched in any other form of human eraion. In terms of social 
control, moral arguments are the ultimate WMDs. 


Susceptibility 

As children, we are highly susceptible to moral arguments because we so 
desperately want to be good, and because we know that morality is 
synonymous with praise, while immorality is synonymous with 
punishment. When our parents, priests and teachers tell us that 
something is good, what they are really saying is: You will not be 
punished for this - and you may even be rewarded! Conversely, when 
we are told that something is bad, what we are really being told is that 
we will be punished for doing - or even contemating - whatever it is. 

We are not punished for being bad. Being bad is invented so that we 
may be justly punished. 



- - 


Those in authority are continually driven to hide their perpetual use of 
were over their viims. Our teachers do not like to openly tell us that 
they will hurt us if we disobey them, because that is too naked a disay 
of abusive were. 

It is also a highly inefficient form of control. 

If your teacher were to say, If you lie to me, I will punish you - and 
just left it at that, then lying would always be more or less a calculated 
risk - and being punished for lying would have no more moral 
significance than being fouled while aying basketball. If a teacher is 
facing a class of  students, each of whom is calculating whether or not 
he can get away with a lie, then clearly, as more of them lie, each lie 
becomes that much harder to catch, just as it is harder to figure out 
exaly who is talking when  children are chatting rather than just two. 

Furthermore, if a parent openly uses brute force to compel comiance 
from a child, then the pattern-making centers in our brains will 
immediately extra a princie out of that eraion. Within our minds, 
every decision and eraion is involuntarily extralated o a 
princie. If our parents compel our comiance with brute force, then 
the princie that we extra from that eraion is: Whoever has the 
were should use it abusively to control everyone else. Or: Whoever 
has the most were should infli his will on whoever has the least 
were. 

Due to the natural decay of organic life, this is a rather dangerous 
princie for parents to establish. If we think of a single mother raising 
two boys, we can easily see that creating a princie called brute force 
rules - while perhaps having a certain praical utility when they are 
young - will scarcely serve her well when her boys hit their teenage 
years, and become physically far stronger than she is. Even fathers will 
reach dotage and physical weakness relative to their sons, and thus will 
scarcely benefit from apying the princie of whoever has the most 
were should forcefully subjugate whoever has the least were. 



-- 


Thus the use of force must be forever shrouded in the fog of ethics. 
This is a very tricky business logically, because what is required is a 
simultaneous appeal to both a princie, and a person - which is direly 
contradiory. 


The Contradiory Appeal 

When your father says, Honour thy father and thy mother, he is 
invoking both a princie and a person. The princie is that all mothers and 
fathers are honourable, and so deserving of respe. The person that he is 
invoking is himself and your mother specifically - thy mother and father. 

Logically, this makes no sense. 

Saying, Honour thy father and thy mother, is like saying, Honour all 
the women who are my wife. If I must honour all women, then I will 
automatically honour your wife, since she is a woman. If I must honour 
your wife, then there is no  saying that I must honour her as a 
woman, because that would involve honouring all women again. It` s one 
or the other. 

If you must honour the category father and mother, then you must 
respe all mothers and fathers equally. Showing preference for your own 
parents would be unjust. 

If you must show preference for your own mother and father, then the 
category of mother and father is irrelevant. It must be for some 
other reason, then, that you should honour these particular individuals. 

