authority in the eyes of his child, but he will also be setting his child up 
for endless conflis with everyone else in his society. 

In other words, if everyone else lies to their children, what are the costs 
- social, romantic, economic and so on - of telling your children the 
truth? 

My neighbour has four lovely children - the other day, his son came and 
showed me a drawing he`d made, a decent representation of Jesus Christ 
sitting on a rock and praying to the heavens. In all innocence, he asked 
me what I thought of the piure. Naturally, I knew that his father had 
told him that Jesus Christ was a real and living man-god who came back 
from the dead, floated up to heaven, and will free him of sin if he 
telepathically communicates his love to this ghost. This is no more or 
less hofying than any other cult of guilt and control. 

But - what could I say to this child? Could I say that this was a very 
good drawing of a fiional charaer? Could I tell him that it was an 
excellent representation of a fairy tale? Could I see the pain and surprise 
in his eyes? Could I imagine the conversation that he would later have 
with his father, asking why the nice man next door told him that Jesus 
Christ was a fiional charaer? Could I imagine the coldness that would 
then descend un the cordial relations between our two houses? Could 
I imagine his father telling all of his children to stay away from the nice 
man next door, who wants to take God away from them? Could I 
stomach the chilled looks that I would receive every time I saw his 
family for the next few decades..? 

I did take the path of least resistance, but did not lie to the child. I told 
him that I thought the piure was well drawn, and asked him what he 
thought about it. 

Telling the truth is not an easy thing. 


We can very easily see how parents in other cultures simy repeat 
cultural norms to their children as if those cultural norms were objeive 
truth. Japanese parents teach their children obedience and filial piety; 
Catholic parents teach their children to drink the blood of their god; 
Muslim parents teach their children that a man who maed a six-year- 
old girl - and consummated that maage when she was nine - is the 
paragon of moral virtue; Western parents teach their children that 
democracy is the highest ideal; North Korean parents teach their 
children that the diator who rules their lives is a sort of secular deity 
who loves them. 

The list goes on and on. Virtually every parent in the world believes that 
she is teaching her child the truth, when she is merely infliing what 
may be litely called cultural mythologies on her child. 

We lie to our children, all the while telling them that lying is wrong. 

We command our children to think for themselves, all the while 
repeating the most prejudicial absurdities as if they were objeive fas. 

We tell our children to be good, but we have no idea what goodness 
really is. 

We tell our children that conformity is wrong (If everyone jumped off 
the Empire State building, would you jump too?) but at the same time 
we are comete slaves to the historical inertia of prior prejudices. 


Too Harsh? 

I have often been accused of being too harsh on parents. Parents do 
the best they can under difficult circumstances; you cannot judge the 
praical instruions of parents according to some abstra and absolute 
philosophical standard. My parents were not philosophers - they were 
simy telling me the truth that they believed, that they thought was 
accurate. 



-  - 


The wonderful thing about apying philosophical concepts to our own 
lives is that theories are very easy to test. Discussing a philosophical 
theory about the causes of the decline of the Roman Empire is a largely 
theoretical exercise, since we cannot go back in time and test it. 

Theories about our families, however, are very easy to test, assuming that 
we have access to the relevant family members. 

It is my firm belief that most human beings are absolutely brilliant. I 
have come to this conclusion after decades of studying philosophy and 
having the most amazing conversations with countless people. I am now 
certain that parents know exaly what they are doing - and a relatively 
sime test can prove this to the satisfaion of any rational person. 


A Praical Exercise 

Sit down with your parents and ask them what the capital of Madagascar 
is - or some other piece of trivia that they are unlikely to know. They 
will very likely smile, shake their heads and say, I don`t know. They 
will not avoid the question. They will be more than happy to help you 
look it up. It will be a trivial fa-finding eraion. 

After you have established what the capital of Madagascar is, ask them: 
What is goodness? 

I absolutely guarantee you that there will be an instant chill in the room 
- there will be an enormous amount of tension, and your parents - and 
probably you - will feel a very strong desire to change the subje, or 
drop the question. 

Why is that? Why is it that when you ask your parents to exain what 
goodness is, the tension in the room spikes dramatically? 

Well, for the same reason that Socrates was roduced to a grim libation 
called hemlock. 

There is terror in the face of the question What is goodness? because 
authority figures claim the right to tell us what to do based on their 



-  - 


superior knowledge. If we decide to learn karate, we submit ourselves to 
the judgment and instruion of somebody who is an expert in karate. If 
we become ill, we submit our judgment to a door, an expert in the 
field. In other words, when we lack knowledge, we defer to those who 
claim greater knowledge. 

Our parents claimed the right to instru us on good and bad based on 
their great knowledge of ethics, not based on their were as parents. Our 
fathers did not say to us: Obey me or I will beat you. Although that 
teble sentence might have come out of their mouths at some , 
the basis of their ethics was that we owed them obedience as a just debt, 
and thus could be punished for failing to provide it. Honour thy father 
and thy mother is a stae of moral instruion the world over, both 
religious and secular. However, the honour that we are supsed to 
bestow un our parents must be based un their superior knowledge 
and praice of virtue - otherwise the word honour would make no 
sense. If we were thrown in jail, we would obey the prison guards 
because they held were over us, not because we honoured them. If a 
mugger presses a knife to our ribs, we hand him our wallet - obey his 
wishes - not because we honour him, but because he has the were to 
harm us. 

By using the word honour, parents are claiming that we owe them 
allegiance due to their superior knowledge and praice of virtue. 

Currently, the foundational ethic of the family - the entire basis for 
the authority of adults - is that parents know right from wrong, and 
children do not. Metaphorically, the parents are the doors, and the 
