gun ownership in the hands of a small, litical elite and their minions. 

The whole  of the system is to bribe you with the leftovers of what they have stolen 
from you in the first ace. 

Anybody who tries to change society without examining the family is trying to push a 
shadow without moving a statue. 

Do Libertarians care about the or? Well, we're not ladening them down with debt, 
we're not sending them off to God damned wars, we're not creating a permanent 
underclass, we're not trapping them in shitty schools where they graduate unable to 
read, WE DO CARE ABOUT THE POOR, and that's why we want the State out of their 
way!! 

There is no such thing as gun control. There is only centralizing gun ownership o the 
hands of a small, litical elite and their minions. 

The war on drugs is really the war on people who buy drugs from people who don't 
lobby the government. 

The least Anararchic person in that conversation is the person saying 'you can't be an 
anarchist if you believe in god.' Because that's not an argument, it's just a statement. 
Why would somebody accept that? Because they either bow to your authority or they 
are afraid of your aggression. That's threatening to be another kind of ruler. Does that 
make any sense? 

Government is a gun that shoots money at your enemy and blows up in your face. 
Mental anguish always results from the avoidance of legitimate suffering. 

Deep conneion is the antidote to madness. 

Trust is everything. If I didn't have trust, there would be no downloads, no show, and no 
business. I'd like to live in a world where immigration is just called moving. 



(To the haters )You are not extinguishing the bright lights of mankind, your're simy 
burying yourself in an unmarked grave. 

Imagining that you are deep and comex, but others are sime, is one of the primary 
signs of malignant selfishness. 

The moment I realised that my history was an excuse for nothing, was the moment I 
was freed from my history. The great danger of history is that we use it as an excuse 
and remain trapped in it. I cannot blame my history for anything, and therefore I have to 
have high standards for myself. 

If the sound of happy children is grating on your ears, I don't think it's the children who 
need to be adjusted. 

Social anxiety results from being around people who are resolutely opsed to who you 
are. Anger is the immune system of the soul. 

To conne is to dissolve the imaginary pyramids of artificial privilege. 


