anything. You can easily discover your deep understanding of this fa 
with a few sime experiments. 

As I have mentioned before, you can sit down with your parents and ask 
them about goodness. You can sit down with your friends and tell them 
that you are afraid that you are living in a fiion that is sapping your joy 
and independence. You can go to a mosque and ask if you can observe. 
You can put yourself in someone else`s glass container and see how 
you feel. 

Try it. Close your eyes for a moment and imagine sitting down with your 
parents to ask them about goodness, or having a drink with your friends 
and talking about social mythologies. Do you feel nervous? Do you feel a 
vague and uneasy fluttering in your stomach at the very thought of such 
honesty and curiosity? 

Why? Why do you feel afraid? Why have you never asked such 
questions? Who told you that such questions were not allowed? Were 
you ever punished for asking these questions in the past? Is there any law 
against asking such questions? 

What will happen when you ask such questions? 

You already know the answere. That is why you are afraid. 

It is not cowardice that makes you afraid. It is wisdom that makes you 
afraid. 

Because you have every reason to be afraid. 



- - 


Mythological Love 

Our whole lives, we are surrounded by people who claim to love us. Our 
parents perpetually claim to be motivated by what is best for us. Our 
teachers eternally proclaim that their sole motivation is to help us learn. 
Our priests voice concern for our eternal souls, and extended family 
members endlessly announce their devotion to the clan. 

When people claim to love us, it is not unreasonable to expe that they 
know us. If you tell me that you love Thailand, but it turns out that you 
have never been there, and know very little about it, then it is hard for 
me to believe that you really love it. If I say that I love opera, but I never 
listen to opera - well, you get the general idea! 

If I say that I love you, but I know little about your real thoughts and 
feelings, and have no idea what your true values are - or perhaps even 
what your favourite books, authors or movies are - then it should 
logically be very hard for you to believe me. 

This is certainly the case in my family. My mother, brother and father 
made extravagant claims about their love for me. However, when I 
finally sat down and asked each of them to recount a few fas about me 
- some of my preferences and values - I got a perfe trid of 
thousand yard stares. 

So, I thought, if people who know almost nothing about me claim to love me, then 
either they are lying, or I do net understand love at all. 

I will not go o details about my theories of love here, other than to say 
that, in my view, love is our involuntary resnse to virtue, just as well- 
being is our involuntary resnse to a healthy lifestyle. (Our affeion for 
our babies is more attachment than mature love, since it is shared 
throughout the animal kingdom.) 

Virtue is a comicated subje, but I am sure we can agree that virtue 
must involve some basics that are commonly understood, such as 
courage, egrity, benevolence, empathy, wisdom and so on. 



-  - 


If this is the case, it cannot be ssible to love people that we know very 
little about. If love requires virtue, then we cannot love perfe strangers, 
because we know nothing about their virtues. Love depends both on 
another person`s virtue, and our knowledge of it - and it grows in 
prortion to that virtue and knowledge, if we are virtuous ourselves. 

Throughout my childhood, whenever I expressed a personal thought, 
desire, wish, preference or feeling, I was generally met with eye rolling, 
incomprehension, avoidance or, all too often, outright scorn. These 
various rejeion taics were cometely co-joined with expressions of 
love and devotion. When I started getting o philosophy - through the 
works of Ayn Rand originally - my growing love of wisdom was 
dismissed out of hand as some sort of psychological dysfunion. 

Since my family knew precious little about my virtues - and what they 
did know they disliked - then we could not all be virtuous. If they were 
virtuous, and disliked my values, then my values could not be virtuous. If 
I was virtuous, and they disliked my values, then they could not be 
virtuous. 

And so I set about trying to create an ethical map of my family. 

It was the most frightening thing I have ever done. The amount of 
emotional resistance that I felt towards the idea of trying to rationally 
and morally understand my family was staggering - it literally felt as if I 
were spring direly off a cliff. 

Why was it so tefying? 

Well, because I knew that they were lying. I knew that they were lying 
about loving me, and I knew that, by claiming to be confused about 
whether they loved me, I was lying as well - and to myself, which is the 
worst of all falsehoods. 




-  - 


Love: The Word versus the Deed 


Saying the word success is far easier than anually achieving success. 
Mouthing the word love is far easier than anually loving someone for 
the right reasons - and being loved for the right reasons. 

If we do not have any standards for being loved, then laziness and 
indifference will inevitably result. If I have a job where I work from 
home, and no one ever checks up on me, and I never have to produce 
anything, and I get paid no matter what, and I cannot get fired, how long 
will it be before my work ethic decays? Days? Weeks? Certainly not 
months. 

One of the most imrtant questions to ask in any examination of the 
truth is compared to what? For instance, if I say I love you, imicit in 
that statement is a preference for you over others. In other words, 
compared to others, I prefer you. We prefer honesty compared to 
falsehood, satiation to hunger, warmth to cold and so on. 

It is not logically valid to equate the word love with family. The 
word family is a mere description of a biological commonality - it 
makes no more sense to equate love with family than it does to 
equate love with mammal. Thus the word love must mean a 
preference compared to - what? 

It is imssible to have any standards for love if we do not have any 
standards for truth. Since being honest is better than lying, and courage 
is better than cowardice, and truth is better than falsehood, we cannot 
have honesty and courage unless we are standing for something that is 
true. Thus when we say that we love someone, what we really mean is 
that his aions are consistent, compared to a rational standard of virtue. 
