Startled - and hurt - you cry out. The man looks up. 

What`s the matter? he asks. 

I just ran o this invisible wall which gave me a hell of a shock! you 
cry. 

He frowns. I didn`t see anything. 

You blink. Really? You`ve never heard or seen or felt this invisible 
baer? 

He shakes his head slowly. What invisible baer? 

The one that surrounds you - the one that keeps you penned in this 
little  foot square! 



-- 


What little  foot square? he demands. There`s no little  foot 
square! I can go wherever the hell I want! 

No you can`t! 

Who the hell are you to tell me where I can and cannot go? I decide 
that! 

I`m not telling you where you can and cannot go - I`m just telling you 
what you are anually doing! 

What on earth are you talking about? 

Well. I`ve been watching you for the past few hours, and you`re 
standing in the middle of this great big meadow, and yet all you do is 
pace back and forth  feet. 

I can go anywhere I damn well ease! the man repeats angrily. 

You say that, but all you do is pace around and around in a little  foot 
square! If you can go anywhere you ease, why don`t you just try taking 
one extra step? 

I have no idea what you`re talking about, he growls. Now get the hell 
off my damn property! 

Wait -  can show you! You reach down and pick up some grass. You 
throw it towards the man. A few feet away from his face, the blades of 
grass burst o flame and evarate. You do this several times, proving 
definitively that there is in fa an invisible force field that surrounds 
him, roughly  feet by  feet. 

Do you see? you ask eagerly. Do you see that you are in an invisible 
cage? 

Get the hell off my property, you madman! he cries, shaking with rage. 

But you must know that you are in an invisible cage, you cry out. You 
must know that, because you never try to go outside these walls. You 



-- 


must have at one time tried to break free of this cage, and were burned 
by the eleric shock, which is why you never take more than a few steps 
before turning around! Don`t you see ? 

He pulls out a gun, screams that he has a princie of shooting 
trespassers, and, quite sensibly, you run away. 

This is the great paradox of attempting to teach people what they already 
know. Everybody claims comete freedom, but paces back and forth, 
trapped in a little square. Everyone is surrounded by the invisible cages 
of culture and mythology, and denies it cometely. The evidence of 
these cages is very clear, because people always turn back just before 
they hit them. But then they deny that these cages exist. 

Everybody as as if they are perfely free, and perfely enslaved at the 
same time. Nobody admits to being in a prison, but everyone shuffles 
around in an invisible x cell. 

In the same way, everyone tells you that they are free, but in fa 
everyone is trapped in little tiny cells of allowable conversation. 
Everybody tells you they love you, but strenuously avoids talking about 
what love is, or what about you they love. 

Everyone tells you to be good, but they have no idea what goodness is - 
and will savage you for even having the temerity to ask the question. 

Everybody talks about the truth, but the real truth is that nobody can talk 
about the truth - what it is, how it is defined, how it is verified, and its 
value. 


Resnsibility 

If the man in the meadow were put o his cage when he was a toddler, 
he would have discovered the limits of his confinement - painfully - 
when he was very young. It is entirely conceivable that he would end up 
just avoiding his invisible prison bars, to retain his illusion of freedom, 




-  - 


and repress the pain of imprisonment. If you cannot escape your prison, 
then you might as well imagine that you`re free. 

The man is not resnsible for being put in the cage when he was a 
toddler, and he is not resnsible for his resulting repression, and he is 
not resnsible for not testing the bars of his cage, but instead turning 
away before he touches them. 

There are two things, however, that he is resnsible for. 

The first thing that he is resnsible for denying is clear and tangible 
evidence that contradis his belief. There are two primary pieces of 
evidence: the grass that bursts o flame, and the fa that although he 
says he is free, he never takes more than a few steps in any direion 
before turning around. 

The second thing that he is resnsible for is shutting down the 
conversation when it makes him uncomfortable. 

The essence of wisdom is learning the value of staying in the 
conversation, even when it makes you uncomfortable. 

Especially when it makes you uncomfortable. 


Falsehood and the Conversation 

The most imrtant thing in life is not to lie to other people - honesty is 
the most fundamental virtue. Now, just about every time a philosopher 
brings up the virtue of honesty, a blizzard of questions blocks his 
progress - questions designed to find the fuzzy areas at the limits of 
ethical behaviour, such as Is it okay to lie if someone holds a gun to 
your head and demands to know where your wife is so that he can kill 
her? 

This is all very eresting, but absolutely irrelevant to the world as it is. 

In the world as it is, we are so far from being able to tell the truth to 
each other that focusing on the fuzzy areas of praical honesty is like 
