Caging the Devils: The Stateless Society and Violent Crime by Stefan 
Molyneux lewrockwell.com 


After Lew was kind enough to publish The Stateless Society, I received many emails asking the same 
question: how can violent criminals be dealt with in the absence of a centralized government ? 

This is a challenging question, which can be answered in three parts. The first is to examine how such 
criminals are dealt with at present; the second is to divide violent crimes o crimes of motive and crimes 
of passion, and the third is to show how a stateless society would deal with both categories of crime far 
better than any existing system. 

Thus the first question is: how are violent criminals dealt with at present? The honest answere, to any 
unbiased observer is surely: they are encouraged. 

A basic fa of life is that people resnd to incentives. The better that crime pays, the more people will 
become criminals. Certain well-known habits - drugs, gambling, prostitution in particular - are non-violent 
in nature, but highly desired by certain segments of the pulation. If these non-violent behaviours are 
criminalized, the profit gained by providing these services rises. Illegality destroys all stabilizing social 
forces (contras, open aivity, knowledge sharing and mediation), and so violence becomes the norm for 
dispute resolution. 

Furthermore, wherever a legal situation exists where most criminals make more money than the lice, the 
lice are simy bribed o comiance. Thus by increasing the profits of non-violent aivities, the State 
ensures the corruption of the lice and judicial system - thus making it both safer and more profitable to 
operate outside the law! It can take dozens of arrests to anually face trial - and many trials to gain 
conviions. Policemen now spend about a third of their time filling out paperwork - and % of their time 
chasing non-violent criminals. Entire seions of certain cities are run by gangs of thugs, and the jails are 
overflowing with harmless low-level peons sent to jail as make-work for the judicial system - thus 
constantly increasing law-enforcement budgets. Peaceful citizens are legally disarmed through gun control 
laws. In this manner, the modern State literally creates, protes and profits from violent criminals. 

Thus the standard to compare the stateless society's resnse to violent crime is not some perfe world 
where thugs are effeively dealt with, but rather the current mess where violence is both encouraged and 
proteed. 

Before we turn to how a stateless society deals with crime, however, it is essential to remember that the 
stateless society automatically eliminates the greatest violence faced by almost all of us - the State that 
threatens us with guns if we don't hand over our money - and our lives, should it decide to declare war. 
Thus it cannot be said that the existing system is one which minimizes violence. Quite the contrary - the 
honest pulation is violently enslaved by the State, and the dishonest provided with cash incentives and 
proteion. 

State violence - in its many forms - has been growing in Western societies over the past fifty years, as 
regulation, tariffs and taxation have risen exnentially. National debts are an obvious form of 
ergenerational theft. Suprt of foreign governments also increases violence, since these governments 
use subsidies to buy arms and further terrorize their own pulations. The arms market is also funded and 
controlled by governments. The list of State crimes can go on and on, but one last gulag is worth 
mentioning - all the millions of or souls kidnapped and held hostage in prisons for non-violent ˜crimes'.  

Since existing States terrorize, enslave and incarcerate literally billions of citizens, it is hard to understand 
how they can be seen as effeively working ˜against' violence in any form. 

So, how does the stateless society deal with violence? First, it is imrtant to differentiate the use of force 
o crimes of motive and crimes of passion. Crimes of motive are open to correion through changing 
incentives; any system which reduces the profits of property crimes - while increasing the profits of honest 
labor - will reduce these crimes. In the last part of this essay, we will see how the stateless society 
achieves this better than any other option. 

Crimes of motive can be diminished by making crime a low-profit aivity relative to working for a living. 
Crime entails labour, and if most people could make more money working honestly for the same amount of 
labour, there will be far fewere criminals. 

Those who have read my exanation of dispute resolution organizations (DROs) know that stateless 
societies flourish through the creation of voluntary contras between erested parties, and that all 
property is private. How does this affe violent crime? 

Well, let's look at ˜break and enter'. If I own a house, I will probably take out insurance against theft. 
Obviously, my insurance company benefits most from preventing theft, and so will encourage me to get an 
alarm system and so on, just as occurs now. 

This situation is more or less analogous to what happens now - with the not-inconsequential adjustment 
that, since DROs handle licing as well as restitution, their motive for preventing theft or rendering stolen 
property useless is higher than it is now. As such, much more investment in prevention would be 
worthwhile, such as creating ˜voice aivated' apiances which only work for their owners. 

However, the stateless society goes much, much further in preventing crime - specifically, by identifying 
those who are going to become criminals. In this situation, the stateless society is far more effeive than 
any State system. 

In a stateless society, contras with DROs are required to maain any sort of economic life - without 
DRO representation, citizens are unable to get a job, hire emoyees, rent a car, buy a house or send their 
children to school. Any DRO will naturally ensure that its contras include penalties for violent crimes - so 
if you steal a car, your DRO has the right to use force against you to get the car back - and probably 
retrieve financial penalties to boot. 

How does this work in praice? Let's take a test case. Say that you wake up one morning and decide to 
become a thief. Well, the first thing you have to do is cancel your coverage with your DRO, so that your 
DRO cannot a against you when you steal. DROs would have clauses allowing you to cancel your 
coverage, just as insurance companies have now. Thus you would have to notify your DRO that you were 
dropping coverage. No problem, you're off their list. 

However, DROs as a whole really need to keep track of people who have opted out of the entire DRO 
system, since those people have clearly signaled their ention to go rogue, to live off the grid, and commit 
crimes. Thus if you cancel your DRO insurance, your name goes o a database available to all DROs. If 
you sign up with another DRO, no problem, your name is taken out. However, if you do not sign up with any 
other DRO, red flags p up all over the system. 

What happens then? Remember - there is no public property in the stateless society. If you've gone rogue, 
where are you going to go? You can't take a bus - bus companies won't take rogues, because their DRO 

will require that they take only DRO-covered passengers, in case of injury or altercation. Want to fill up on 
gas? No luck, for the same reason. You can try hitchhiking, of course, which might work, but what happens 
when you get to your destination and try and rent a hotel room? No DRO card, no luck. Want to sleep in the 
park? Parks are privately owned, so keep moving. Getting hungry? No groceries, no restaurants - no food! 
What are you going to do? 

Obviously, those without DRO representation are going to find it very hard to get around or find anything to 
eat. But let's go even further and imagine that, as a rogue, you are somehow able to survive long enough to 
start trying to steal from people's houses. 

Well, the first thing that DROs are going to do is give a reward to anyone who sts you and rerts your 
sition (in fa, there will be companies which specialize in just this sort of service). As you walk down a 
street on your way to rob a house, someone sees you and calls you in. The DRO immediately notifies the 
street owner (remember, no public property!) who boots you off his street. Are you going to resist the street 
owner? His DRO will fully suprt his right to use force to prote his property or life. 

So you have to get off the street. Where do you go? All the local street owners have been notified of your 
presence, and refuse you entrance. You can't go anywhere without trespassing. You are a pariah. No one 
will help you, or give you food, or shelter you - because if they do, their DRO will boot them or raise their 
rates, and their name will be entered o a database of people who help rogues. There is literally no ace 
to turn. 

So, really, what incentive is there to turn to a life of crime? Working for a living - and being proteed by a 
DRO - pays really well. Going off the grid and becoming a rogue pits the entire weight of the combined 
DRO system against you - and, even if you do manage to survive their scrutiny and steal something, it has 
probably been voice-encoded or proteed in some other manner against unauthorized re-use. But let's 
supse that you somehow bypass all of that, and do manage to steal, where are you going to sell your 
stolen goods? You're not proteed by a DRO, so who will buy from you, knowing they have no recourse if 
something goes wrong? And besides, anyone who eras with you will get a substantial reward for 
rerting your location - and, if they deal with you, will be dropped from the DRO system. 

Will there be underground markets? No - where would they operate? Peoe need a ace to live, cars to 
rent, clothes to buy, groceries to eat. No DRO means no participation in economic life. 

Thus it is fair to say that any stateless society will do a far better job of proteing its citizens against crimes 
of motive - what, then, about crimes of passion ? 

Crimes of passion are harder to prevent - but also present far less of a threat to those outside of the circle 
in which they occur. 

So, let's say a man kills his wife. They are both covered by DROs, of course, and their DRO contras 
would include specific prohibitions against murder. Thus the man would be subje to all the sanions 
involved in his contra - probably forced labour until a certain financial penalty was paid off, since DROs 
would be resnsible for paying financial penalties to any next of kin. 

Fine, you say, but what if either the man or woman was not covered by a DRO? Well, where would they 
live? No one would rent them an apartment. If they own their house free and clear, who would sell them 
food? Or gas? Who would emoy them? What bank would accept their money? The penalties for opting 
out of the DRO system are almost infinite, and it is safe to say that it would be next to imssible to survive 
