
A fraud is still better than a sadist. 

What can we say, then, about parents and other authority figures who 
know all there is to know about the were and effeiveness of using 
moral arguments to control the aions and thoughts of children - who 



-  - 


respe the were of virtue - and then use that were to destroy any 
capacity for moral egrity in their children? 

In movies, terrorists almost invariably kidnap the wife or child of the 
hero in order to enforce his comiance with their wishes. His virtues - 
love and loyalty - are thus turned o the service of evil. The better he 
is, the worse he must a. The more he loves virtue, the more he is 
controlled by evil. 

And thus do the best become the worst. 

And thus are children raised. 

And this was your instruion. 


Reluance 

We instinively shy away from confronting the moral void at the core of 
our relationships - and, fundamentally, the moral void at the core of our 
relationship with ourselves. 

There is a sime and teble reason for our reluance to confront this 
emptiness. 

Societies are generally built un mythologies - in fa, a society can be 
accurately defined as a group of people who all share the same 
mythology. 

I use the term mythology here because I want to ease you o the idea 
of social fiions, and the degree to which they distort your relationship 
to yourself and others - and thus your relationship to reality. 

There are two major disciines, which help us dispel the corrosive 
cobwebs of social fiions and reach through them to grasp reality. The 
first is theoretical; the second is praical. 

The first disciine is logic, which is the process of organizing our 
thoughts in a systematic and non-contradiory manner. The second is 



- - 


science, which is the testing of logical theories against empirical 
observations. The union of these two disciines is philosophy, which is in 
its fundamentals the testing of theories of knowledge against both logic 
and empirical observation. 

Logic will tell you that two us two equals four; science will verify that 
acing two rocks next to two other rocks will result in an aggregation of 
four rocks. 

But it is philosophy that tells us that logic us empirical testability are both 
key requirements to the establishment of the truth. It is philosophy that 
specifically rejes the primacy of faith, or the primacy of emotion, or the 
primacy of authority, or the primacy of age, or the primacy of 
preference, or the primacy of biology - or any of the other foolish and 
exoitive mechanisms that human beings have used as substitutes for 
logic and evidence in order to infli truth on the heless. 

Philosophy is the opsite of mythology. Or, more accurately, truth is the 
opsite of falsehood. 

We are, all of us, deey aware of the deficiencies of our beliefs. The 
basic knowledge that our beliefs are mere prejudices, inflied on us by 
parents and teachers, is a fa that, deep down, we are all perfely aware 
of. The amount of energy that we all put o pretending otherwise is 
staggering, and debilitating. There is a reason that depression is one of 
the most prevalent forms of illness. 

The contradiion at the core of social mythology is that these cultural 
falsehoods are always presented as objeive and absolute truths. 

Americans, for instance, are famously proud of their country, and the 
beliefs that they have inherited from the Enlightenment philosophers 
and the Founding Fathers. This is a very strange notion when you 
examine it. 

The average American just happened to be born in America - it is a 
mere accident, not something earned. The average American takes pride 
in his cultural heritage, which he did not invent, and which was taught to 



-  - 


him by others, who also did not invent it. Believing that you are virtuous 
because you were bom in a particular country is like believing that you 
are an excellent businessman because you inherited a lot of money, or 
that you are a good person because you happen to be tall. 

The average American has no idea of the philosophical premises 
underpinning the ideal of a constitutionally limited government. The 
average American enthusiastically suprts a government that is 
hundreds of times more oppressive and brutal than the British 
government from which his ancestors fought to free themselves. The 
average American enthusiastically celebrates Independence Day, despite 
the fa that, when his country was founded, slavery was proteed, and 
basic rights for women and children were denied. 

In other words, the average American blindly praises his own culture and 
history because he is taught to praise it, not because he has any rational 
understanding of its aual merits and deficiencies. 

This is not to say that America is not a better country than, for instance, 
Syria. It is, and I am glad not to be living in Syria. However, the 
methodology for transmitting value from parent to child remains the 
same in both countries. The genuine values in America arose from 
rational thought and breaking with tradition, not from blind allegiance to 
dirt and cloth. 

The average American considers himself superior to the average Muslim, 
because he believes to some degree in the separation of church and state, 
suprts limited democracy and the rights of women, and respes 
certain aspes of the free market. He believes that these are good values 
to hold, and criticizes Muslims for not holding the same values. 

The sad fa is that while specific beliefs vary from culture to culture, the 
methodology of belief in all cultures is identical. The sime fa is that if 
the average American had been bom to Muslim parents in Syria, he 
would be exaly the same as the average Syrian Muslim. He would be no more 
likely to value the separation of church and state than the average 
Western woman born in Manhattan would be likely to wear a burka. 



-  - 


Patriotism is the hijacking of the achievements of others - usually 
ancestors - and taking ego gratification in them as if they were one`s 
own. This involves a curious distortion of logic that is blindingly obvious 
when seen. 

Either someone is a good person because he was born in America, or 
