the one topic that he will try to avoid at all costs? 

Because he knows that his currency is fake. 

And he also knows that if you find that out, he can no longer use it to rob 
you blind. 


Obligations 

If I own a store, and take counterfeit money from a con man, but do not 
know that it is counterfeit, then I am obligated to hand over what he has 
bought. 

In the same way, if I believe that I am loved - even when I am not loved 
-  am to a degree honour-bound to return that love. If my mother says 
that she loves me, and she is virtuous, then she must love me because I 
am virtuous. Since she is herself virtuous, then I owe her love as a 
matter of justice, just as I owe trust to someone who consistently 
behaves in a trustworthy manner. 

Thus when somebody tries to convince you that they love you, they`re 
anually attempting to create an obligation in you. If I try to convince you that I 
am a trustworthy person, it is because I want all the benefits of being 
treated as if I were a trustworthy person. If I am in fa a trustworthy 
person, then I must understand the nature of trust - at least at some 
level - and thus I must know that it cannot be demanded, but must be 
earned. Since earning trust is harder than just demanding trust, I must know 
the real value of trust, otherwise I would not have taken the trouble to 
earn it through consistent behaviour - I would have just demanded it 
and skipped all the hard stuff! 




-  - 


If you demand trust, you are demanding the unearned, which indicates 
that you do not believe you can earn it. Thus anyone who demands trust 
is automatically untrustworthy. 

Why do people demand trust? 

To rob others. 

If I want to borrow money from you, and I demand that you trust me, 
it`s because I am not trustworthy, and will be unlikely to pay you back. 

In other words, I want to steal your money, and put you in my were. 

It`s the same with love. 


Love and Virtue 

If I am virtuous, then virtuous people will regard me with at least 
respe, if not love. Corrupt or evil people may regard me with a certain 
respe, but they will certainly not love me. 

Thus being virtuous and refusing to demand love from anyone is the 
best way to find other virtuous people. If you are virtuous and 
undemanding, then other virtuous people will naturally gravitate towards 
you. Virtue that does not imse itself on others is like a magnet for 
goodness, and repels corruption. 

The praical result of true virtue is fundamental self-proteion. 

If my stockbroker consistently gets me % return on my investments, is 
there any amount of money that I will not give him, other than what I 
need to live? Of course not! Because I know I will always get back more 
than I give. 

It`s the same with real love. 

If I am virtuous, then I will inevitably feel sitively inclined towards 
other virtuous people - and the more virtuous they are, the more I will 
love them. My energy, time and resources will be at their dissal, 

-- 


because I know that I will not be exoited, and that they will reciprocate 
my generosity. 

If you and I have lent money to each other over the years, and have 
always paid each other back, then the next time you come to me for a 
loan, it would be unjust for me to tell you that I will not lend you 
anything because I do not think you will pay me back. Your continued 
and peipetual honesty towards me in financial matters has created an 
obligation in me towards you. This does not mean that I must lend you 
money whenever you ask for it, but I cannot justly claim as my reason 
for not lending you money a belief that you will not pay me back. 

In the same way, if you have been my wife for  years, and I have never 
been unfaithful, if a woman calls and then hangs up, it would be unjust 
for you to immediately accuse me of infidelity. 

A central taic for creating artificial and unjust obligations in others is to 
demand their sitive opinion, without being willing to earn it. The most 
effeive way to do this is to offer a sitive opinion, which has not been 
earned - to claim to love others. 

If, over the past  years, I have rarely paid back any money I have 
borrowed from you, it is perfely reasonable to refuse me an additional 
loan. I may then get angry, and call you unfair, and demand that you 
treat me as if I were trustworthy, but it would scarcely be virtuous for you 
to comy with my wishes. Indeed, it would be dishonest and unjust for 
you to ignore my untrustworthiness, because you would be aing as if 
there was no difference between someone who pays back loans, and 
someone who does not. 

When we a in a virtuous manner towards others, we are creating a 
reservoir of goodwill that we can draw un, just as when we put our 
savings o a bank. A man can a imperfely and still be loved, just as 
a man can eat an occasional candy bar and still be healthy, but there is a 
general requirement for consistency in any disciine. I could probably 
hit a home run in a major-league ballpark once every thousand pitches, 
but that would scarcely make me a professional baseball ayer! 



-- 


If I a in a trustworthy manner, I do not have to ask you to trust me - 
and in fa, I would be very unwise to do so. Either you will trust me 
voluntarily, which means that you respe honourable and consistent 
behaviour, and justly resnd to those who do good, or you will not trust 
me voluntarily, which means that you do not resnd in a just manner to 
trustworthy behaviour, and thus cannot be trusted yourself. 

If, on the other hand, I come up to you and demand that you trust me, I 
am engaged in a comex calculation of counterfeiting and under. 

The first thing I am trying to do is establish whether or not you know 
anything about trust. The second thing is to figure out your level of 
confidence and self-esteem. The third thing is figure out if you know 
anything about egrity. 

An attacker will always try to find the weakest chink in your armour. If I 
demand trust from you, and you agree to provide it - without any prior 
evidence - then I know that you do not know anything about trust. 
Similarly, if you do not require that your trust be earned, then I know 
that you lack confidence and self-esteem. If you are willing to treat me as 
if I were trustworthy when I am not trustworthy, then it is clear to me 
you know very little about egrity. 

This tells me all I need to know about your history. This tells me that 
you were never treated with respe as a child, and that you were never 
