window, it is not unreasonable for me to expe you to honour it. 

Thus when people use the word love, they are putting the price in the 
window. Love of course is considered to be a feeling of high regard for 
someone, and is either based un the virtues or charaeristics of the 
loved person, or it is not. If love is not based on the charaeristics of 
the loved person, then it must be based on the willwere of the person 
who loves him or her. 

If love is based on the willwere of the person who is doing the 
loving, then it must be considered virtuous to love so altruistically. If it 
is not virtuous to love so altruistically, then there is nothing beneficial or 
sitive in the eraion, since neither the person loving nor the person 
being loved ssesses any sitive charaeristics. We might as well 
define obsessive stalking as love. 

If it is good for Person A to love Person B despite Person B`s lack of 
lovable qualities, then this good aion is either a universal princie, 
or a merely personal preference. If I say that ice cream is good, I do 
not mean that ice cream as with virtue, courage and egrity. If I say 
that a particular aion is good, then it must be good for more than 
one person, if it is to rise above merely personal preference. However, if 
it is good to love someone who has no lovable qualities, then an 
instant paradox is created. 

If I have no lovable qualities, then I do not ssess goodness, since 
goodness is a lovable quality. If it is good to love someone despite an 
absence of lovable qualities, then by definition I am incapable of loving 
someone, since I lack goodness. In this way, two opsing moral rules 
are created, which cannot be valid. Person A does good by loving 
Person B, who is incapable of goodness. Person B can then only enable 
Person A`s goodness by receiving without giving - thus what is good 
for Person A is not good for Person B. 



- - 


Again, though this can be comicated to examine syllogistically, it is an 
argument that adult children of a co-dependent parent have 
continuously. If I see my mother perpetually sacrificing everything for 
my father, I will continually ask her that if sacrificing everything for your 
suse is good, then why does my father not sacrifice everything for her? 
Why is such sacrifice only ever good for her! Why does my father get off 
scot-free? 

It cannot be considered good to love someone who lacks lovable 
qualities. Love, then, is a form of payment for virtue. 

I must confess that I understood this at the age of , when I was a very 
shallow young man. In school, word got around that I was going to ask a 
girl to a dance. My criteria, sadly, was solely based on physical 
attraiveness. When my classmates cornered me and pestered me to 
reveal whom I was going to ask out, I finally mentioned the girl`s name, 
and was greeted with rather shocked silence. This girl, while admittedly 
attraive, was considered rather coarse and unelligent. 

Why would you ask her? a friend demanded. 

Uh, because of her. . . personality, I stammered, convincing no one. 

Why was it that, even at such a tender age, I felt the need to invent virtue 
as the basis for my desire? Would it have been wrong to say, She`s 
kinda purdy! and be satisfied with that? 

And the looks in the faces of the people around me were very 
eresting. It was not so much that they knew that I was lying - that 
much was obvious. It is more that they knew why I was lying - and they 
anually had some sympathy for that, I think. 

They knew that I was lying because it is easier to make up good 
reasons for wanting the wrong thing than to anually want the right 
thing. 

And this lesson we have been well taught by our teachers - but I will get 
o that later. 



-- 


When I was about , stole some money from my brother to buy a 
book. He suspeed me of the theft, and spent a good deal of time and 
energy cross-examining me as to where I`d gotten the money to afford 
the book. He never could prove that I stole the money, and I 
stonewalled and evaded with fairly decent ability. 

There are three things that I remember very strongly from that long 
afternoon. 

 . I was not troubled fundamentally about stealing, but only 
woed about getting caught. 

. If someone had asked me if stealing were wrong, I would have 
said yes - and mean it. 

. I was not woed about that blatant contradiion. 

In other words, I knew that stealing was wrong, but that knowledge was 
a mere abstraion, like knowing how many moons Jupiter has, or the 
name of the drummer for Led Zeppelin. I believed that stealing was 
wrong - but what that really meant was that I knew that I would get 
punished if I did not say that stealing was wrong. So I said it aloud, like a 
magical spell that wards off punishment, like any pagan. 

It was similar to how I would chant out my times tables, before I had 
any real understanding of arithmetic. The sentence was not Yes, I know 
that stealing is wrong, but I wanted a book! It was even less related than 
that: Stealing is wrong, and I wanted a book. Just two fas, a princie 
and a desire, not even orbiting one another. . . 

So did I know that stealing is wrong? Sure, I think I did, but for me, 
wrong just meant, disapproved of. By this time, I had lived in a 
number of different countries and classes, and I knew that wrong was 
not objeive, because disapproved of` varied so enormously from 
ace to ace. And obviously I myself approved of` taking the money 
from my brother, because I did it. So there was my little approval, and 
lots of other people`s disapproval, and I thought: well, if other people get 



- - 


to disapprove of things that I prefer, then surely I have the right to approve of things 
that they do not prefer. 

Logical, you may say. Amoral, but logical. And I would have to agree. 

But the imrtant issue is that I knew the rules, then I broke the rules by 
apying them to myself, and so I just made up new rules. This is, I 
believe, far more common than is generally admitted. 

And so we come to the fundamental question: how resnsible are we in the 
face of our own hycrisies? 


The Open Cage. . . 

I`d like you to imagine a man standing in the middle of a large meadow. 
You spend some time watching this man, and it doesn`t take you very 
long to notice that he paces back and forth in a small square, about  
feet on either side. That`s all. Just  feet. 

After a few hours of watching him do this, you walk up to him. When 
you reach forward to shake his hand, however, your fingers are burned 
by a strong elerical shock from an invisible baer. 

