When I sat down with my mother, about eight years ago, a very similar 
eraion occurred, just as you would expe. And, just as you would 
expe, she was much more efficient than my brother, because she 
taught him. 

The fundamental conversation went this way: 

I said: Mom, I feel that you don`t listen to me. 

My mother reied: Don`t be silly - of course I listen to you! 

Do you really need any help figuring out the blatant contradiion in this 
eraion? 

I doubt it. 


Exoitation 

If I am sick, and I need you to donate a kidney to me, I have four 
general choices: 

 . I can tell you that I would like you to donate a kidney to me, 
with no expeation that you must do so. 




- - 


. I can decide not to ask you for a kidney. 

. I can tell you that I really need you to donate a kidney, and you 
should do it because I want you to. 

. I can tell you that it is immoral to refuse to donate a kidney to 
me, and thus you are ethically obligated to give me your kidney, 
just as you are ethically obligated to pay back a loan. 

In the first case, I am simy expressing my true and honest desire for 
your kidney. I am not manipulating you. I am not bullying you. I am 
telling you what I want. My request is not a demand - and my request, 
fundamentally, is not for your kidney, but for you to understand that I 
would like your kidney. 

This is a crucial difference, which is so easily overlooked. Saying, I 
would like your kidney, is not saying, Give me your kidney! Saying, I 
would like to be an astronaut, is not saying, Make me an astronaut! 

Either I am free to express my thoughts and feelings to you, or I am not. 
If I am free to do so, then of course I must be free to express what I 
would prefer you to do, if that is what I think. 

If you erpret my preferences as commandments that you must comy 
with, then you will naturally prefer that I never express a preference. If 
you hate the taste of ice cream, but every time I said, I like ice cream, 
you had to eat a bowl, you would obviously prefer that I not say I like 
ice cream anymore. Because my desires enslave you, you must enslave 
my desires. 

The best and most teble way to enslave another human being is to 
erpret his desires as commandments. If, every time I express my 
preferences, you erpret them as commandments, then you must 
inevitably be led to controlling, minimizing, ignoring or attacking my 
preferences. 

In other words, if my desires are commandments, then my preferences 
are attacks un you. 



-- 


And the only antidote to this is curiosity. 


Curiosity 

The opsite of tyranny is curiosity. The opsite of ignorance is 
curiosity. The opsite of manipulation is curiosity. 

The opsite of immaturity is curiosity, because to be curious is to be 
wise. 

What is the most logical and mature resnse to the statement: I would 
like you to give me your kidney.? 

Is it: 

a. Sure, here you go -  even iced it for you. 

b. [blank stare] 

c. Don`t ask me, it makes me uncomfortable. 

d. How about those Mets? 

e. I told you not to ay rugby, you never listen to me, I can`t 
believe you would have the balls to ask me, how selfish and 
manipulative can you get?` 

f. Tell me more. 

If we really understand the nature of the statement, which is I have a 
feeling called ˜I would prefer for you to give me your kidney`, then 
together we can examine the nature of that feeling. If I am standing at a 
bus stop, and a woman next to me says, Feels like rain, it would be 
quite logical for me to ask, if I was curious, What does that feel like? 
Arguing about whether rain was imminent or not would be illogical, 
because the woman did not say, It`s about to rain. What she said was, 
Feels like rain, which is quite different. It is a statement of an inner 
experience, not an outward prediion, command or expeation. 



-  - 


If I say to you, I dreamt about an elephant last night, could you 
logically disagree with me? You might not be particularly erested in 
my dream, but it would make precious little sense to dispute my 
statement. Either I am telling the truth, or I am not. If I am telling the 
truth, there is nothing to argue about - if I am not, there`s still nothing 
to argue about, because you will never have one single shred of evidence 
that I am lying. 

Thus when I say to you, I would like you to give me your kidney, it`s 
the first three words that are imrtant, not the last four. But everyone 
focuses on the last four, considers them a bullying demand, and thus 
must spend the rest of their mortal existence managing and controlling 
the first three. 

Statements of preference are just statements of inner experience, and if we 
care about the person who is expressing them, we will be curious about 
her inner experience. 

Thus, to extralate to something slightly more generic than kidneys, if 
you are doing something that bothers me, I have four general choices: 

. I can tell you that I am bothered by what you`re doing, with no 
expeation that you must change your behaviour. 

. I can leave the situation. 

. I can tell you that what you`re doing bothers me, and that you 
should stop it because it bothers me. 

. I can tell you that what you`re doing is immoral, and you should 
