stop it because it`s wrong. 

Of course, if people in general were mature and wise, they would mostly 
choose what was behind door number one - occasionally, they would 
leave through door number two for a brief period if they were upset, but 
they would never open doors three and four. 

However, the world is neither wise nor mature, and so children quickly 
learn that when adults are upset or anxious, it is the children`s behaviour 

-- 


that must always change. If my mother is anxious about me dating, the 
solution is for me not to date. If my father will be embarrassed by my 
absence from church, I must go to church. If my mother will feel 
embarrassed if I do not kiss my smelly old grandmother, it`s pucker time! 
If my mother will feel mortified if I snatch a toy from another child, the 
solution is for me to ay nicely. (Of course I really should not snatch 
toys; the problem is that my mother is not curious why I do so, but 
merely controls the symptoms, instead of working to understand the 
cause.) 


Attack 

When I was  or so, I took a summer school course, desperate to get 
out of the mental gulag of public school as quickly as humanly ssible. 

I had a brittle and belligerent male teacher, who demanded that we show 
up on the dot at : am, but then would have us sit and read a textbook 
for the first - minutes of the class. He also showed really boring 
documentaries, ske in a monotone, and was cometely obsessed with 
JFK assassination conspiracy theories. 

Occasionally, I would get very sleepy, and I would put my head down on 
my desk for a few minutes. I never fell asleep, but it certainly could have 
looked that way. 

After a coue of weeks of classes, I got up to do a presentation on 
slavery. Just before I began, this teacher held up his hand and ordered 
everyone to put their heads down on their desk. 

All the other children were pretty confused, as you can imagine - as was 
I. After a few minutes of bullying and ordering, all the children in the 
room put their heads down on their desks. My face was very pale, and I 
was alarmed, to say the least. 

When everyone`s head was down, the teacher turned and literally 
screamed at me: Do you see how it feels? Do you see how it feels when 
you`re trying to teach people something, and they put their heads down 



-- 


on their desks? DO YOU SEE HOW IT FEELS? THAT`S RUDE! 
DON`T DO THAT! His veins were literally bulging out of his neck. 

And then, of course, he demanded that I deliver my presentation. 

What was going on here? 

The amazing thing about people who abuse children, is that they really 
have no idea how the children anually see them. I knew that he had all 
the were, but it really was a very sad speacle, and I got a very strong 
impression of a futile, self-loathing and pathetic life. Perhaps they 
imagine that bullying children makes them look strong, but the degree of 
contempt that I felt - and feel - towards those who bully the heless is 
almost beyond words, and I do not think that I am alone in that. When 
we think of the radioaive contempt that teenagers often have towards 
their parents and other authority figures, I think it`s fairly easy to see that 
bullying children does not generate respe - any more than beating your 
wife generates love. 

Let`s call this teacher Bob, since I have no idea what his name is, after all 
these years. Clearly, Bob did not feel like a very good teacher, because a 
good teacher would regard an exhausted student with curiosity. I could 
be tired because I cannot sleep, or have problems at home, or have a 
hormonal imbalance, or some other reason that has precious little to do 
with his teaching ability - or I could be tired because he is a boring 
teacher. 

If Bob shows no curiosity as to why I am tired, then he will never know 
why. If I am sick, or stressed (and I was working three jobs at this  
in my childhood), he might be able to help me in some way - or at least, 
he will have established that it is not because he is a boring teacher. 

If he finds out that I am tired because he is a boring teacher, then 
obviously that can be painful, but I have absolutely no doubt that Bob 
would prefer to be an exciting teacher than a boring one. If he had 
invested the time to try and figure out - with me - why I was tired, then 
he might have been able to learn how to become a more exciting 



-  - 


teacher, which would have been in line with his own values, and so made 
him happier. 

The truth of the matter, of course, as we have seen above, is that, deep 
down, Bob was absolutely convinced that he was a teble teacher. 

When I put my head down on my desk, it confirmed his worst fears, 
which he violently rejeed. 

When we understand the were of mythology, it is clear how little Bob 
understood about what I was doing, and what I was communicating. 

When I put my head down on my desk, I was not saying, Bob, you are 
a teble teacher. I was not saying, I am putting my head down on my 
desk to defy your authority. I was not saying, I am putting my head 
down on my desk because I am a rude and selfish individual who cares 
nothing for anyone else`s feelings. 

When I put my head down on my desk, I was only saying: lam tired. 

Everything else was just mythology - paranoid and vicious fairy tales. 

Everything else was Bob`s invention, and he invented everything else in 
order to strenuously avoid being curious. 

Why? Why was he so tefied of curiosity? 

It`s sime. 

The reason that we are not curious is that we already know the answeres, 
and we do not like them. 


Wisdom and Pain 

Pain is our body` s way of telling us what we need to deal with, of helping 
us prioritize our aions relative to health. Our body does not rert on 
organs that are funioning well, but the moment that a tooth gets 
infeed, we know all about it! 



- - 


In other words, pain tells us what we need to do. If our tooth hurts, we 
need to go to a dentist. Pain informs us of the problems we need to 
solve. 

If we think of our life before anaesthetics, it`s easy to understand that we 
