All my credibility is shot. All my prior statements become exames not 
of empirical truth, but of rank hycrisy. 



-  - 


Not good. 

This is exaly what happens when we maain our childhood 
justifications for our parents` abuses o adulthood. 

If we believe that the abuse of were is moral, we will inevitably be led 
to abuse were. If I go to Sweden, but do not leam Swedish, then I will 
have to lie and prevaricate, or pretend that I have learned Swedish, or am 
about to learn Swedish and so on. Or, I will have to enter the magical 
land of this is just somehow different , which will inevitably require that I 
substitute aggression for consistency when questioned. 

We reicate what we praise. Our justifications guide our lives as surely 
as train tracks guide a train. The lies we believe today are the lives we will 
live tomorrow. 

The teacher who humiliated me did so because he believed that that`s 
what those in were must do. 

Almost everyone, when faced with the choice of hycrisy or abuse, 
chooses abuse. 


Sadism as Salvation 

If I go to a door because I have made myself sick by smoking, and the 
door prescribes a treatment that causes me pain, my door is not 
cruel, but helpful. The door does not seek me out and hurt me because 
he is sadistic, but rather I must seek out the door for a cure because I 
have hurt myself by smoking. I should not resent the door for the pain 
of his cure, but rather thank him for his ability to help me. The door is 
not resnsible for my pain. I am. 

A child born in a prison will almost inevitably say: I don`t obey the 
prison guards because they are sadists with truncheons, but rather 
because the prison guards are morally virtuous, and trying to help me. 

There is a teble cost to this belief, as there is to all fantasies. 




-  - 


If my prison guards hit me with truncheons, I must obey them. If I 
accept that I obey them because they hit me with truncheons, I feel 
tebly humiliated and heless, but retain an accurate assessment of the 
situation. On the other hand, I can choose to reduce my humiliation by 
imagining not that I comy because I am hit, but rather that  am hit 
because I disobey . It is not my noncomiance with the guard`s whims that 
gets me beaten, but rather my noncomiance with moral virtues. The 
guards do not beat me because they are sadistic - I am beaten because I 
am evil. The guards are not resnsible for beating me - I am 
resnsible for being beaten. The guards are not trying to humiliate me; 
they are trying to help me, to make me a better person, just as the door 
is trying to help me by making me healthy again. 

Do you see how the agony of moral corruption can be transferred from 
one person to another? 

If my parents beat me not because they are bad, but rather because I am 
bad, I can retain some sense of honour and control within an abusive 
and hopeless situation. 

If, however, I retain this fantasy after I become an adult - after I gain 
were over others - then my survival strategy will become exoitive 
destruion. The equation of abuse with virtue that formerly allowed me 
to survive now corrupts me. I have become what I originally feared and 
despised. 

Thus, when my aions conflied with Bob`s belief that it was virtuous 
to obey those in were, I created great anxiety in him, and triggered his 
defences, by triggering all his memories of being abused. 

I was creating a choice where he believed there was only an absolute. I 
was also aing in an immoral manner, and he had been taught as a 
child that it is moral to attack someone who is aing in an immoral 
manner. 

Thus, to defend his fantasies about his parents` virtue, to ward off the 
growing anxiety and horror he felt about the lies he had to invent to 
survive his own abuse, to crush the freedom that I ssessed and which 

-  - 


he did not, to legitimize a false moral absolute - and, fundamentally, to 
both re-create his parents` abuse, and to be the bad person his parents 
claimed him to be - all in order to justify their abuse - he attacked me. 

If I had never understood this, I would very likely have become Bob, 
and passed along my own abuse. 

If I had taken Bob`s abuse personally, I would have absorbed an agony 
that I would have inevitably inflied on others, most likely children. 

But Bob`s abuse had no more to do with me than my sleepiness had to 
do with Bob. 

He lashed out at me because he knew the truth deep down, but could 
not accept it. 

He tried to humiliate me because, in his own mind, one of us had to be 
humiliated - and I started it! 

He did evil in order to prote the virtue of evil. 

And it is time for us - all of us, around the world - to stop. 


How To Change 

I was originally anning for this book to be longer, but as I reached this 
 in the text, I began to feel a growing anxiety, which was hard for 
me to understand. I thought it might be because I had started this book 
without a an, and was losing my way. As my wife and I reread the 
book, though, it was clear that it flowed quite well. 

Last night, we went for a walk, and discussed the content and form of 
this book. In just over  months, I have produced over  dcasts, 
so it`s not as if I am anywhere close to running out of things to talk about! 

However, when you have been immersed in a disciine for a quarter- 
century, it can be hard to remember what it`s like starting out. I am now 
quite sure that my anxiety stems from a concern that a longer book 



- - 


would be too hard to digest. When you want to eat a dessert, five pies 
are not better than one pie. 

We will surely speak again, but I think that we have sken enough for 
now. 

The ideas in this book will change your life if you think about them, and 
a un them. The purse of philosophy is not thought, but aion - 
just as the puise of medicine is not treatment, but health. 

