


- - 


asking a man who stumbles o an emergency room clutching his own 
severed arm if he needs a manicure. Or, to take another medical analogy, 
I view philosophers as essential doors in the middle of a teble 
ague. All around us, people are writhing and dying, and we must work 
as hard as we can to save as many people as we can - with the full 
knowledge that very few people will make it. Most modern philosophers, 
however, are sitting in the midst of all this suffering, and debating what 
the best course of aion should be if a patient presents with a heart 
attack, diabetes, and a hangnail, and is struck by lightning while being 
examined. 

My resnse to that is: when we have reached a world that is so healthy 
that the once-a-century problems are the most imrtant things that we 
can deal with, we shall scarcely need philosophy at all! 

Thus let us roll up our sleeves, and try to deal with the ague that is 
devouring us now, and leave the improbable problems to a future happier 
time. 

The reason that the man in the invisible cage above is to blame for his 
aions is that he was lying to you. 

When you began to  the truth out to him, he felt uncomfortable. At 
first, he seemed genuinely baffled - whether that was a ruse or not, we 
cannot tell. Then, as the evidence began to mount up, both logically and 
empirically, he began to get hostile. 

Was he lying? Of course he was. 

He was lying because he did not tell you that he was feeling 
uncomfortable, but rather began jabbering about trespassing, cursing, 
and ended up pulling out a gun. 

Was this honest? No. Was this man aware that he was feeling 
increasingly uncomfortable? Of course. Did he honestly express his 
discomfort? No. He evaded his own discomfort by attacking you. 



-  - 


As an exame, when I sat down with my brother, after I had decided to 
stop seeing my mother, he presented to me the following argument: 

Stef, you should see mother because if you don`t see her, then she is 
exercising control over your choices. If you allow the fa that you 
dislike her to control your aions, she has won, and you have lost an 
essential freedom. 

So, I reied, if I understand you correly, you are saying that I 
should see people that I like because I like them, and I should see people 
that I dislike because otherwise they will have were over me. In other 
words, there is no one that I should ever refuse to see. 

As usual, he rolled his eyes and shrugged. 

But let me tell you what bothers me about this family, I continued. I 
strongly feel that I am never allowed to have any real preferences. I 
mean, I am allowed to have preferences in my own way, but nobody 
ever respes those preferences and changes their aions. You would 
prefer that I see mother, and so you are trying to get me to change my 
aions based on your preferences. However, at the same time, you tell 
me that my preferences are meaningless, in terms of whom I see. But 
how can your preferences require a change in my aions, but my 
preferences should require no changes in my aions? 

Sadly, inevitably, the conversation was over at that . 

It was clear to me even at the time that my brother was ensely 
uncomfortable with my questions. He telegraphed all the usual signals - 
pursed lips, eye rolling, tight shrugs and endless frowns. I felt a very 
strong resistance as I oughed on, and I asked my brother if he felt 
uncomfortable. He said that he did not. 

This was, of course, the key moment in our eraion. If he had been 
honest with me, and told me that he felt uncomfortable, we could have 
talked about his discomfort, and the ways in which that discomfort 
might have been affeing his sition. 




-  - 


By telling me that I was doing something wrong, when what was anually 
happening was that my choices were causing him discomfort, my brother 
was lying to me. He was, essentially, trying to manage his own 
discomfort by infliing moral commandments un me. He tried to 
appeal to my self-erest based on a vague higher standard, and when 
that failed, he disapproved of my resistance. My decision not to see 
our mother anymore created great anxiety in him, because it opened up 
the ssibility of choice, where before there had only been an absolute. 

This was an essential aspe of our eraion. I think that I will have 
had a long life if I live to be a hundred years old. If, however, if turns out 
that technology can now allow us to live to be  years old, a hundred 
years will no longer seem like such a long life. Where there is no 
ssibility of reaching  years of age, we do not feel anxious if we fail 
to reach it. If there is no ssibility of not seeing your own mother, then 
we feel far less anxious if we continue to see her, even if, deep down, we 
do not want to. 

However, the moment that somebody says: I am no longer going to see 
my mother, this creates great anxiety within us, because a ssibility 
now exists that deep down we really want which formerly we thought was 
imssible. 

When I made my decision, my brother had two choices about how to 
best manage his anxiety. He could examine that anxiety and try to 
understand its source - or, he could attempt to reduce his anxiety by 
manipulating me o seeing our mother again. 

When choice enters o our lives, where formerly we felt there were only 
absolutes, we feel anxiety, because deep down we know that that choice 
always existed, but we have been told that it was wrong to think about 
that choice. Emotionally, this leads us back to our early traumas, through 
which culture was inflied un us - and thus to a deep and bitter 
criticism of our parents and teachers - bringing us right up against the 
invisible eleric fence of mythological punishment. 

We really, really do not ever want to go there. 



-  - 


If somebody breaks out of prison, you can either try to break out of 
prison yourself, or you can help the guards get him back o prison. The 
tipping  of the decision is what you decide to do with your own 
anxiety. If you decide to deal with your anxiety as an ernal state, related 
to your core beliefs, your history, your false allegiances to false virtues, 
then you will be catapulted through the entire cavalcade of growth that is 
the inevitable result of deciding to stop using others to manage your 
emotions. 

It is a sad reality that, for most people, their prison doesn`t feel like a 
prison until somebody tries to break out of it. The conclusion they leap 
to is that the person who has broken out of prison is the one who 
anually turned it o a prison - by the very a of breaking out of it! It`s 
madness, of course, but all too common. 

