Hitting your brother was bad; helping your grandmother was good. 
Being on time was good; failing to comete chores was bad. 

Imicit in all these instruions - moral instruions - was the premise 
that your parents knew what was right and what was wrong; what was 
good, and what was bad. 

Do you think that was really true? Do you think that your parents knew 
what was right and wrong when you were a child? 

When we tell a child that something is wrong - not just incorre, but 
morally wrong - there are really only two ssibilities. The first is that we 
anually know what is right and wrong in general, and we are apying our 
universal knowledge of right and wrong to a specific aion committed 
by the child. 

 http ://w w w .freedomainradio. com 
-  - 


This is how it is always rtrayed to the child. It is almost always the 
most dangerous lie in the world. 

The second ssibility is that we are telling our child that his aions are 
wrong for a variety of reasons that have nothing to do with morality 
whatsoever. 

For instance, we might tell a child that stealing is wrong because: 

. We are embarrassed at our child`s aions. 

. We are afraid of being judged a or parent. 

. We are afraid that our child`s theft will be discovered. 

. We are simy repeating what was told to us. 

. We enjoy humiliating our child. 

. Correing our child on ethics makes us feel morally superior. 

. We want our child to avoid behaviour that we were punished for 
as children. 

... and so on 

Assuming they are not tefied, most children, on first receiving moral 
instruions, will generally resnd by asking "why? Why is stealing 
wrong? Why is lying wrong? Why is bullying wrong? Why is hitting 
wrong? 

These are all perfely valid questions, akin to asking why the sky is blue. 
The problem arises in the fa that parents have no rational answeres, but 
endlessly pretend that they do. 

When a child asks us why something is wrong, we are put in a teble 
bind. If we say that we do not know why lying is universally wrong, we 
believe we will lose our moral authority in the eyes of our children. If we 
say that we do know why lying is wrong, then we retain our moral 
authority, but only by lying to our children. 


Since the fall of religion, we have lost our way in terms of ethics. As an 
atheist, I do not mourn the loss of the illusions of gods and devils, but I 
am alarmed at the fa that we have not yet admitted that the fall of 
religion has not provided us an objeive and rational moral compass. By 
failing to admit to the fa that we do not know what we are doing 
ethically, we are perpetrating a grave moral error on our children. 

Basically, we are lying to them about being good. 

We tell them that certain things they do are right or wrong - yet we do 
not tell them that we do not know why those things are right or wrong. If 
our child asks us why lying is wrong, we can say that it causes people 
pain - but so does dentistry - or we can say you don`t like it when 
someone lies to you - which would be an incentive to not get caught, 
not to refrain from lying - and so on. Every answere we come up with 
leads to more questions and inconsistencies. What do we do then? 

Why, then, we must bully them. 

This does not mean hitting them or yelling at them - though sadly all too 
often this is the case - because as parents we have a near-infinity of 
passive-aggressive taics such as sighing, aing exasperated, changing 
the subje, offering them a cookie, taking them for a walk, claiming to 
be too busy, distraing or rejeing them in a million and one ways. 

These kinds of innocent questions about morality represent a kind of 
horror for parents. As parents, we must retain our moral authority over 
our children - but as citizens of modernity, we have no rational basis for 
that moral authority. Thus we are forced to lie to our children about 
being good, and about our knowledge of goodness, which transforms 
virtue from a rational disciine o a fearful fairy tale. 

In the past, when religious mythology was dominant, when children 
asked Where does the world come from? parents could rey that God 
made it. Despite the superstitious ignorance of those who even now 
make the same claim, most modern parents provide the scientific and 
rational exanation of where the world came from, or at least send their 
children to the Web, an encyclopaedia, or the library. 




There was a time, though, when the question of where the world came 
from was very difficult to answere. When religious exanations were 
becoming less and less credible, but scientific exanations had not 
become cometely established, parents had to say - if they wanted to 
speak with egrity - I don`t know where the world came from. 

By openly expressing their lack of certay, parents not only aed with 
honesty and egrity, but also stimulated their children to pursue a truth 
that was admittedly absent from their world. 

Alas, we suffer similar difficulties today, but about a far more imrtant 
topic. The religious basis for ethics has fallen away from us, and we lack 
any credible or accepted theory to reace it. For a time, patriotism and 
allegiance to culture had some were to convince children that their 
elders knew something objeive about ethics, but as government and 
military corruption have become increasingly evident, allegiance to a 
country, a state or a military ethos has become an increasingly fragile 
basis for ethical absolutes. Even our cherished theories about the virtues 
of democracy have come under increasing pressure, as gargantuan 
governments continue to separate themselves from the wishes of their 
citizens and a in a virtual state of nature. 

Religious exanations of virtue have failed not just because we no 
longer believe in God, but also because it is now cometely self-evident 
that when most people refer to truth, they are really refeng to culture. 


Culture 

Think about a father in a Muslim country. When his child asks him: 
Daddy, what is goodness? he will generally answere: To obey Allah, 
and obey His Prophet. Why is that his answere? Is it because he has had 
dire experience with the Prophet, wrote the holy books himself, and 
has a deep understanding of morality dire from the original creator? If 
he had grown up alone on a desert island, would his answere be the same? 

Of course not. He is merely repeating what was told to him as a child. 



However, there is much more to it than that. 


This Muslim father knows that his child is going to have to survive - and 
hopefully flourish - in a Muslim society. If he tells his child that he does 
not know what is right and wrong, not only will he lose his moral 
